                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          COORDINATED WORK SCHEDULES AND THE GENDER WAGE GAP

                                         German Cubas
                                         Chinhui Juhn
                                          Pedro Silos

                                       Working Paper 26548
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26548


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




We thank Julio Garin, Gueorgui Kambourov, Matthias Doepke, Michele Tertilt, and Ryan
Michaels, as well as seminar participants at CAFRAL-Reserve Bank of India, Cal State-Fullerton,
Drexel, Fudan University, Disparities in the Labor Market-FED Board, Iecon-FCEA, LACEA-
LAMES, Midwest Macro, NASMES, SED, SOLE, Universidad Católica de Uruguay, University
of Georgia, Universidad de Montevideo, Families and the Macroeconomy-Mannheim, Rutgers,
LSE, U.S. Census Bureau, Seoul National University, University of Oklahoma, CMSG
(Montreal) 2019, INSPER, and FGV-EESP. Saumya Rana provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by German Cubas, Chinhui Juhn, and Pedro Silos. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Coordinated Work Schedules and the Gender Wage Gap
German Cubas, Chinhui Juhn, and Pedro Silos
NBER Working Paper No. 26548
December 2019
JEL No. E24,J2,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

Using U.S. time diary data we construct occupation-level measures of coordinated work
schedules based on the concentration of hours worked during peak hours of the day. A higher
degree of coordination is associated with higher wages but also a larger gender wage gap. In the
data women with children allocate more time to household care and are penalized by missing
work during peak hours. An equilibrium model with these key elements generates a gender wage
gap of 6.6 percent or approximately 30 percent of the wage gap observed among married men and
women with children. If the need for coordination is equalized across occupations and set to a
relatively low value (i.e. Health care support), the gender gap would fall by more than half to 2.7
percent.

German Cubas                                     Pedro Silos
Department of Economics                          1301 Cecil B Moore Ave
University of Houston                            879 Ritter Hall Annex
Houston, TX 77004                                Temple University, Economics (004-00)
germancubas@gmail.com                            Philadelphia, PA 19122
                                                 pedrosilos@gmail.com
Chinhui Juhn
Department of Economics
University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-5882
and NBER
cjuhn@uh.edu
1    Introduction

    Balancing work and family is a challenge in modern societies. Household pro-

duction not only limits the total number of hours that can be devoted to market

work, it may also conflict with when hours can be supplied. For example, as long

as parents cannot perfectly substitute child care responsibilities across different

hours of the day, there will be temporal restrictions on when parents can supply

labor.

    From the perspective of the employer, when work happens may be important if

there is joint production and firms need to coordinate workers. The need for co-

ordination may be task and occupation-specific. The nature of production in some

occupations may require workers to be at work at the same time to perform a joint

task. In other occupations, workers may be assigned tasks which can largely be

performed on their own and precisely when that work is completed is less impor-

tant. The need for coordination raises productivity of hours supplied when others

are present. To the extent that women have more household care responsibilities

than men, and therefore have greater difficulty committing to be present at any

particular hour, this mechanism generates a gender wage gap. In this paper we

study the timing of labor supply and its interaction with household care needs

during the day. Compared to the extensive literature on labor supply along the

quantity dimension, this is an under-explored area. We fill this gap by making

empirical, theoretical, and quantitative contributions.

    Using the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), we document novel facts re-

garding the timing of work for men and women. We find that parents perform

household care (child care plus adult care) throughout the day­ even during peak

hours­ suggesting that parents are indeed unable to postpone household pro-

                                         2
duction to non-work times. Comparing men and women, even among full-time

workers, women provide more household care and work less throughout the day

relative to their male counterparts. The gap in hours is small but our point is that

even small gaps can generate productivity losses depending on the timing.

   We also employ the ATUS to measure coordinated work schedules at the occu-

pation level. For each occupation, we record at what time of the day individuals

report being at work. We associate more bunching (work schedules concentrated

at particular times) with stronger coordination needs, because bunching implies

that individuals are at work at the same time. We find that the degree of bunch-

ing of work hours varies across occupations and, consistent with the notion of

coordination, our measure is positively correlated with other occupational charac-

teristics such as "face to face discussions," "developing and building teams," and

"establishing and maintaining interpersonal relationships" reported in the O*NET

database.

   We then use individual level data from the Current Population Survey (CPS)

to study the relationship between wages and our occupational level measure of

coordination. We find that our measure of coordination commands a wage pre-

mium: a one standard deviation higher ratio leads to approximately 12 percent

higher wages. In addition, it generates a gender wage gap: women who work in

coordinated occupations are paid a higher wage but relatively less than men (by

about 6 percent). Interestingly, we find that married men with full-time working

spouses (who presumably have greater household care responsibilities) also expe-

rience an earnings penalty in high coordination occupations relative to men with

non-working spouses.

   Motivated by these facts, we develop a theory of occupational choice and time


                                         3
allocation during the day to household care and market work. In the model a gen-

der wage gap is generated by the interaction of three key elements. First, women

assign a higher value to household care­ an assumption which we justify as a re-

flection of current social norms. Since household care activities performed at dif-

ferent times are less than perfect substitutes, women end up allocating more time

to household care when everyone else is working, which is costly. This penalty

rises with the occupational coordination needs so women are less likely to select

into occupations with higher coordination needs.

   We parameterize the model with the data used in the empirical analysis. We

restrict the sample to married men and women with children who are full-time

workers. The model generates a gender wage gap of 6.6 percent (approximately

30 percent of the observed gender gap). To understand the extent to which occu-

pational differences in coordination are responsible for the observed gender gap

we conduct a counterfactual exercise where coordination needs are equal across

all occupations and set to the level of "Healthcare Support"­ an occupation with

a relatively low level of coordination. In this case, the overall gender wage gap in

the model falls by more than a half to 2.7%. The gender wage gap within occu-

pations decreases by 65% to 2.2%. In another counterfactual, we equate the value

that men and women place on household care. We can think of this experiment

as a way to evaluate changes in social norms that drive a reduction in the gender

gap in household care responsibilities. As a result, the gender wage gap within

occupations decreases by 50% to 3.1%. Finally, we focus our study on the effects

of the ability to substitute household care during the day. Our baseline calibration

points to an economy in which household care activities are fairly substitutable but

imperfectly so. They may reflect parenting styles or just constraints on the time


                                         4
of the day in which some activities take place (for example meetings with school

teachers). We thus analyze a counterfactual economy in which women can now

more easily distribute the household care to off-peak times so they do not incur a

productivity loss. As a result, the gender wage gap within occupations decreases

by 27% to 4.5%.

   A large literature in macroeconomics and labor economics relates family ar-

rangements and the labor supply of its family members. Important contributions

are Doepke and Tertilt (2016), Bick and Fuchs-Schündeln (2018) and Albanesi and

Olivetti (2009). Our paper is also closely connected to the literature which exam-

ines the role of frictions on workers` labor supply responses. These frictions could

arise from fixed wage-hours packages offered by employers which result in non-

linear payment schedules. Important contributions are Prescott, Rogerson, and

Wallenius (2009), Rogerson and Wallenius (2009) as well as Rosen (1976), Blundell,

Brewer, and Francesconi (2008), Altonji and Paxson (1988) and Altonji and Paxson

(1992). Recent papers have emphasized the role of coordination as the driving force

behind non-convex budget sets. The wage-hours combinations available to work-

ers may be sparse due to the needs for coordination. This need may arise at the

firm level or even at a more aggregate, economy-wide level. For example, Guner,

Kaya, and Sánchez-Marcos (2014) study how the Spanish work schedule with long

lunch breaks affects parental time allocation. Other recent papers study the labor

supply responses to changes in, for instance, taxes or other economic conditions.

They find stark differences between responses with non-linear payment schedules

and those predicted by linear payment schedules and an absence of coordination.

Examples include Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and Pistaferri (2011), Rogerson (2011),

and Labanca and Pozzoli (2018). We contribute to this literature by exploring how


                                         5
coordination requirements influence labor supply as well as another important

margin ­ occupational choice. Instead of examining labor supply responses to tax

changes, we examine how these hours requirements driven by coordination needs

conflict with the demands of household production and consequently lead to the

gender wage gap.1

   Our work is also closely related to the literature which relates occupation-

specific characteristics to the gender wage gap. Goldin (2014) argues that much

of the remaining gender wage gap can be explained by the lack of flexible work

arrangements. Along these lines, a number of papers have shown that the gender

gap is particularly large in jobs which demand long hours (Erosa, Fuster, Kam-

bourov, and Rogerson (2017), Gicheva (2013) Cha and Weeden (2014), Cortes and

Pan (2016b), Cortes and Pan (2016a), Duchini and Effenterre (2017) and Wasserman

(2019)).2 Compared to these studies, our focus is on flexible timing, rather than

the flexibility to set the number of hours. We show that while the demand for long

hours and our measure of coordination are positively correlated, the correlation is

far from perfect and both contribute to the gender wage gap.3

   A recent paper, Mas and Pallais (2017), elicit workers' willingness to pay for

flexible schedules using a field experiment. These authors find that while the

average willingness to pay for flexibility is low, there is also a long right tail in the
   1 Our occupational choice model integrates the timing of work with the timing of household care
in a unified framework where family responsibilities play a key role. This feature differentiates
our work from previous work which study the timing and synchronization of works schedules.
Examples of these studies are Hamermesh (1999) and Cardoso, Hamermesh, and Varejao (2012),
Weiss (1996) and Eden (2017).
   2 The requirement for long hours has been also associated with less flexible work schedules.

Thus our work also relates to Wiswall and Zafar (2017), Goldin and Katz (2011), and Flabbi and
Moro (2012).
   3 A recent paper by Denning, Jacob, Lefgren, and vom Lehn (2019) finds that the positive rela-

tionship between hours worked and earnings is virtually absent within occupations and it is only
observed across occupations. This finding suggests that the hours gap between men and women
cannot account for the within-occupation gender wage gap if this hours penalty is applied. In our
paper we show that differences in the within-occupation gender wage gap can be large even when
the gender hours gap is small.


                                                6
willing to pay distribution suggesting compensating differential for inflexibility

still could be large at the margin.4 Another recent paper, Chen, Chevalier, Rossi,

and Oehlsen (2019), estimates the value of flexibility among drivers of the ride-

sharing platform Uber. Drivers have almost total flexibility when to supply labor,

to the point of being able to react on an hourly basis to unexpected shocks to their

reservation wage. The authors estimate the surplus from that flexibility to be large,

and hence their results are roughly in line with our findings.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data, the tempo-

ral patterns of work and household care in the ATUS, as well as our measure of

hours bunching which proxies for coordination requirements. Section 3 reports

our reduced form regression results using individual level CPS data. Section 4

presents the model. Section 5 illustrates the model mechanics with simple ex-

amples. Section 6 describes the calibration and our counterfactual experiments.

Section 7 concludes.




2     Time Allocation by Gender, and Coordinated Work

      Schedules

2.1     Data

We base our analysis on the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). One

respondent per household is drawn from the Current Population Survey samples

and the interviews are conducted 2 to 5 months after the last CPS interview. Time
    4 They also find that workers particularly dislike working evening and weekend shifts which at
first appears to be counter to our story. Occupations which require evening and weekend shifts
(such as security guards) may appear to be flexible in terms of our bunching measure but this may
just be a reflection of a 24 hour production cycle. To address this issue, we rerun our regressions
omitting occupations in which 12 percent or more workers report working evening and night shifts.
We find our results are robust to omitting these occupations.

                                                7
diary information over the previous day is recorded and respondents report their

activities and starting and ending times. There are 17 aggregate activities and we

focus on two activities, "work and work-related activities" and "caring for and

helping household members". For each individual we calculate minutes spent on

these activities for each hour of the day using information on starting and ending

times. We restrict our sample to adults who are 18 to 65 years old. Our main

sample of time-diary respondents consists of 106,620 observations. The full-time

worker sample consists of 66,023 observations. To construct the ratio of hours

worked in the 8 to 5 time interval at the occupation level we include only full-

time workers who worked a minimum of 35 hours in their main job, consisting

of 62,811 observations. For the regression analysis where we explore the impact

of occupation-level 8to5ratio on wages, we include all individuals in the CPS, in-

cluding those who are not time-use survey respondents. For this the sample sizes

are considerably larger, with the sample consisting of 263,313 individuals who are

full-time workers aged 18 to 65 with non-missing weekly wages. Since the time

use surveys are conducted 3 months after the main CPS interviews we use vari-

ables such as age and work status that are collected at the time of the time use

survey whenever possible. Some of the information, however, such as education,

is available only in the main CPS data.



2.2   Timing of Work and Household Care

In this section we describe patterns of time use over the course of a single day

for full-time workers by gender, marital status and parental status. These patterns

show how time allocated to market work is constrained by the demands of family

time and how those constraints differ for men and women. Figure 1 explores when


                                          8
work happens. The figure graphs the average number of minutes worked by one-

hour time bins for full-time workers. The figure shows that most (74 percent) work

occurs during the 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. interval with a break between 12 p.m. to 1 p.m.

Even among full-time workers, average minutes worked per hour is well below

60 which may reflect the fact that we are averaging over all 7 days of the week

including weekends. Figure 2 graphs the average number of minutes worked by

marital and parental status. The top panel shows work for married individuals,

men and women, with at least one own child in the household, who work full-

time. The bottom panel shows work for singles with no children. Even among

full-time workers, women work less than men, with the gap being largest among

those married with children. Table 1 further explores the gender differences in

work for this group. The table shows that women work approximately 0.9 hours

less on weekdays and 0.7 hours less on weekends. Column (5) controls for usual

weekly hours worked reported in the activity summary file. Column (6) only

includes workers who reported usual weekly hours less than 50. Both of these

restrictions reduce the gap in hours worked but even among full-time workers who

work less than 50 hours, married women with children work almost 0.5 hours less

on weekdays relative to their male counterparts. However, the "missing hours"

among women occur throughout the day and does not appear to have, at least

among full-time workers, a notable temporal pattern.

    Figure 3 graphs the temporal pattern of household care among full time work-

ers who are married with children and singles without children.5 The differences

in the temporal pattern of work and household care, however, are notable. Both

women and men with children report household care with noticeable bumps up
   5 Household  care includes active child care and elder care where respondents report these activi-
ties as the primary activity. We do not include passive child care where it is reported as a secondary
activity.

                                                  9
in the early morning and evening hours. The temporal pattern of care for full-time

workers with children is negatively related to the temporal pattern of work, with

the fewest minutes devoted to care activities during the 8 to 5 interval. However,

even during the 8 to 5 interval, household care does not fall to zero. Table 2 shows

that among married men and women with children, women engage in nearly 0.5

hours more household care during weekdays and 0.3 hours more on weekends.

Different controls reduce the gap but the table shows that women significantly

allocate more time to household care than men.



2.3   Differences in Household Care by Work Status and Spouse`s

      Work Status

In this section, we provide further detail regarding differences in hours of child

care provided by mothers and fathers. First we examine detailed care categories

adopting a method introduced by Stewart (2010). Stewart (2010) defines three

broad categories of child care: "routine", "enriching care", and "other." Included

in routine care is physical care and looking after children. "Enriching care" in-

cludes activities such as reading to children and playing sports with children.

"Other" includes more nebulous activities such as "organizing and planning for

household children," "attending children's events," and "picking up and dropping

off children." Table A.1 provides the full list of activities included in each of the

three broad categories.

   Table 3 compares the hours of each type of care performed by non-working

married mothers, full-time married mothers, full-time single mothers, and full-

time married fathers, respectively. The top panel reports hours during weekdays

while the bottom panel reports hours during weekends. The table also separates

                                         10
out households where at least one child is under the age of six (school age). Look-

ing at hours of routine care in families with young children, we see (not surpris-

ingly) that non-working mothers provide the most care, 1.4 hours, while full-time

married mothers and full-time single mothers provide 1.0 and 0.8 hours respec-

tively. Full-time married fathers provide considerably less, 0.4 hours. What is

surprising is that non-working and full-time working mothers provide the same

amount of care in the "other" category ­ all three groups provide 0.4 hours on a

typical weekday. There are differences when we examine households with only

older children but main point is that the child care provided by non-working and

full-time working mothers is not as different as one might have thought, especially

when it comes to the non-routine care categories. This type of child care does not

constitute a lot of hours but the table shows that certain activities cannot be easily

outsourced.

   We also make comparisons across married fathers. Even though the overall

hours of household care is low among fathers, it may be the case that fathers with

working spouses differ from those with non-working spouses. We examine this

question in the next set of tables. Table 4 compares work hours of married fathers

by work status of the spouse. The table format is similar to Table 1 and examines

work during the diary day among those who report being full-time workers. In-

stead of showing differences in the female-male gap, however, Table 4 shows the

gap relative to fathers with non-working spouses. Fathers with part-time working

spouses report 0.12 fewer hours of work on a weekday (not statistically signifi-

cant) relative to fathers with non-working spouses whereas fathers with full-time

working spouses report 0.25 fewer hours of work on a weekday (statistically sig-

nificant). Table 5 compares gaps in hours of household care among fathers with


                                         11
working and non-working spouses. The table shows that while fathers with part-

time working spouses are on par with fathers with non-working spouses, fathers

with full-time working spouses perform somewhere between 0.07 to 0.12 more

hours of household care on a typical weekday relative to fathers with non-working

spouses.

   To summarize, we showed that married women with children who are full-

time workers report fewer hours of work in the time diary data relative to their

male counterparts­ a phenomenon we call "missing hours." The "missing hours"

occur throughout the day and is distinct from women being less likely to work

long hours. Correspondingly, married women with children also perform more

household care than men. The extra household care is unlikely to be routine child

care since we are considering full-time working women. Instead, the extra hours

are likely to consist of a catch-all "other" category which includes such activities

as organizing and planning, driving children, attending doctor's appointments

and children`s activities. These activities add up to a small number of hours but

are likely to entail costly work interruptions. Interestingly, when we separate out

married fathers by the work status of their spouses, we find a similar pattern of

"missing hours" and increased household care among men with full-time working

spouses compared to men with non-working spouses. While we focus on the

gender wage gap, we hypothesize that the pattern we describe here is likely to

hold for all parents who have the main household care responsibilites.



2.4   Measure of Coordinated Work Schedules

Building on the previous section, we construct our measure of coordinated work

schedules for different occupations. Call the time intervals between 12 a.m. and


                                        12
8 a.m., between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. and, between 5 p.m. and 12 a.m. A, B and C,

respectively. Aij , Bij , and Cij then refer to the sum of minutes worked by individual

i in occupation j in those respective intervals. We sum over individuals to get

occupation-level equivalents where wi refers to the survey weight of the individual.


                             Nj                     Nj                Nj
                      Aj =    wi Aij , Bj =  wi Bij , Cj =  wi Cij
                             i =1               i =1                  i =1


   Our measure of coordinated work schedules at the occupation level is the ratio

of minutes worked in the 8 to 5 interval relative to total minutes worked.


                                                          Bj
                                    ratio8to5 j =                 .
                                                    A j + Bj + Cj


   We include only full-time workers in calculating this ratio. A higher ratio indi-

cates that a greater amount of work in the occupation occurs during the standard

8 to 5 work day. We also standardize this measure by subtracting the mean and di-

viding by the standard deviation. We view a higher ratio as indicating the need for

greater coordination, with more hours worked concentrated during peak hours.

   Tables 6 and 7 report the occupation level ratios for 93 different occupation cat-

egories sorted from low to high ratios. Table 6 examines occupations that require

less education, specifically those where the share of workers with a college de-

gree is less than 0.4. Table 7 examines occupations with more educated workers.6

We highlight some well-known occupations in Figure 4. Among occupations with

relatively educated workers, "Lawyers, law clerks" and "Financial Analyst" have

standardized ratios of 0.824 and 1.03, respectively. "Computer/software related"

occupations have a standardized ratio of 0.759 and "Writers, authors, and new me-
  6 We  mapped detailed 2002 Census occupation codes to detailed Standard Occupation Classifi-
cation (SOC) codes and aggregated to 93 SOC categories.

                                                13
dia" have a relatively low ratio of 0.485. "Physicians, therapists, nurses, dentists"

have the lowest ratios at -0.274. In occupations with relatively less educated work-

ers "Nursing, Psychiatric, and Home Health Aides" has a very low ratio of -1.638.

"Cashiers, clerks, retail persons" has a ratio of -0.133. Occupations with relatively

high ratios include "First-Line Supervisors of Retail , non retail Sales Workers"

(0.534) and "Computer Operators" (0.964), and "Secretaries and Administrative

Assistants" (1.434).

   Columns 1 and 2 of the table also report the number of workers and the number

of full-time workers in each occupation. As can be seen from the numbers reported

in these columns, some occupations have only a few observations, raising concerns

of sampling noise. In our regressions relating wages to our coordination measure,

we keep only occupations with at least 100 full-time workers and end up with 76

occupations.7

   How is our measure related to other occupational characteristics? Table 8 re-

ports correlations of our measure of coordinated work schedules, ratio8to5, with

other occupational characteristics reported in the O*NET data base.8 The table

shows that our measure points to the need for coordination with others in the

workplace. Our measure is positively correlated with "developing and building

teams," "establishing and maintaining interpersonal relationships," and "face to

face discussions." On the other hand, it is negatively correlated with "assisting

and caring for others."

   One can view our measure as a rather arbitrary way to think about the concen-
  7 We  have also run regressions including occupations with at least 100 full-time workers who
report at least one work episode during the diary day, and found very similar results.
   8 We use the same method as Goldin (2014). O*NET reports scores on the importance of occu-

pational characteristics for detailed SOC occupations. We downloaded these data from the O*NET
database on November 22, 2017. We aggregate the indexes to our 93 occupations by taking a
weighted average where the weights are the total number of full-time workers who are 18-65 in
each detailed SOC occupation.


                                              14
tration of working hours during a day as the peak hours are fixed to be between 8

and 5. As an alternative one could think of how concentrated the hours are during

the day without pre-establishing the times of the day. In the following we provide

an alternative measure of concentration based on the Herfindahl index.

   Let workk
           j be the total weighted time spent working in each day of the week-

hour time bin k in occupation j,


                                             Nj
                               workk
                                   j   =     workijk .wi
                                            i =1

   where i denotes individual in occupation j and wi denotes the weight of indi-

vidual i.



   Let sharek
            j be the fraction of the total time spent in each occupation in each time

bin and each day.


                                                     workk
                                                         j
                                   sharek
                                        j   =
                                                 k workk
                                                       j

   Our concentration index measure is the Herfindahl index defined as:



                                   cr j =   (sharek
                                                  j)
                                                     2

                                            k

   The bottom row of Table 8 shows that our coordination measure, ratio8to5,

and the Concentration Index measure are highly positively correlated, with the

rank correlation equaling 0.75. The table also reports the rank correlation of our

measure and the measure of "Male Overwork" used by Cortes and Pan (2016b).

"Male Overwork" is defined as the fraction of male workers in the occupation

who report working more than 50 hours per week. The correlation between these

                                                15
two measures is 0.16, indicating that while our measure is positively related to the

demand for long hours, it is by no means perfectly correlated. Thus, our measure

captures another important aspect of hours requirements on the job such as the

requirement to be present when others are present.




3     Coordinated Work Schedules and the Gender Wage

      Gap

In this section we analyze how our measure of coordinated work schedules is

priced in the labor market, and how it impacts the gender wage gap. Specifically,

we estimate the following regression at the individual level:




    lnWi =  0 +  1  f emalei +  2 ratio8to5 j +  3 f emalei  ratio8to5 j +  4 Xi +  i

                                                                                    (1)


where lnWi is the log of individual weekly earnings, f emalei is the female dummy,

ratio8to5 j is the ratio of hours worked in the 8 to 5 interval which varies at the

occupation level j, Xi are other observable characteristics including a dummies

for race and education and a quartic function in age. We also control for (log)

hours worked last week so that the coefficients we report reflect gaps in the hourly

wage. Our sample includes only full-time workers.  1 measures the impact of the

female dummy,  2 measures the impact of working in occupations with a more

concentrated work day, and  3 captures how being female interacts with working

in these occupations.

     Table 9 reports the results of the regression. The top panel reports the results

                                           16
for all full-time workers. Column (1) presents the baseline results. Women earn on

average 22 percent less than men. Individuals in occupations with higher ratio8to5

earn higher wages, with a one standard deviation higher ratio leading to approxi-

mately 12 percent higher wages. The interaction term indicates that women suffer

about a 5 percent higher penalty in these occupations. In column (2) we control for

occupation-level education which reduces the size of the wage premium associ-

ated with these occupations and also the female-specific penalty. In column (3) we

also control for the fraction of male workers in the occupation who report working

more than 50 hours per week­ the measure of "overwork" used by Cortes and Pan

(2016b). The coefficient on the concentration measure is still significant although

the female-specific penalty is no longer significant.

   The bottom two panels report results separately by marital and parental status.

Panel B reports results for single men and women. Notably the interaction terms

are all insignificant pointing to the fact that there is no penalty for women asso-

ciated with coordinated work schedules. Panel C reports results for married men

and women with children. The female interaction terms are larger and significant

which suggests that the results pooling over all workers reported in the top panel

were largely due to the married with children group.

   These regressions indicate that workers in occupations where most adhere to a

standard 8 to 5 schedule are paid a higher wage. However, the gender gap in these

occupations is larger. This pattern is particularly pronounced when we restrict

our sample to married men and women with children, strongly suggesting that

conflicts related to work and family time play an important role.

   One objection to our interpretation of the results is that employers may be prac-

ticing statistical discrimination against married women with children and the level


                                         17
of discrimination is particularly severe in occupations with coordinated schedules.

This alternative interpretation, while closely related, suggests that it is not neces-

sarily the temporal constraints that women face due to household care responsibil-

ities that are at play. To further investigate this alternative explanation, we examine

different groups of married men (with children) who are full-time workers, differ-

entiated by the work status of their wives. We already saw in Tables 4 and 5 that

fathers with full-time working spouses had similar patterns of "missing hours"

and increased household care relative to fathers with non-working spouses. In

Table 10 we investigate whether these constraints imposed by care responsibilities

translate into wage penalties. Table 10 reports the results of a regression in a simi-

lar format as Table 9 but we now make comparisons among men only. The sample

includes all married men with children matched to a spouse in the CPS data. The

variables "Wife PT" and "Wife FT" are indicators equal to 1 if the wife works part-

time or the wife works full-time respectively. The omitted category is "Wife Not

Working." The coefficients indicate that married men with full-time working wives

earn approximately 5 percent less than married men with non-working wives indi-

cating either selection or specialization effects. The coefficients of interest however

are the interaction terms which indicate that a one standard deviation higher ratio

leads to a 4 percent higher penalty for men with part-time working wives, and a

5-6 percent penalty for men with full-time working wives. Table 10 shows that the

phenomenon is not unique to comparisons between men and women but is more

general and applies where there is balancing between work and household care.

It's possible that the direction of causality is the opposite­ that spouses with less

earning power engage in more household care. Regardless, our argument is that

there is a systematic wage penalty associated with doing household care related to


                                          18
our coordination measure. While we focus on the gender wage gap in our paper,

the important message here is that the work-family conflict we identify is more

widely applicable to all parents with care responsibilities.

   In the appendix, we conduct various robustness exercises in support of our

main results. Table A.2 examines results separately for college and non-college

workers. Among married men and women with children, the extra wage penalty

associated with coordinated schedules for women is larger for college-educated

women. However, there is still a similar pattern even among non-college women.

One concern with our measure is whether it is confounded with the prevalence of

evening and night shifts. Nurses, for example, work shifts and are at work during

all hours of the day and the occupation would have low coordination requirements

according to our measure. However, this may just be reflecting a 24-hour produc-

tion cycle. To address this issue, in Table A.3 we delete occupations in which 12

percent or more workers report working evening and night shifts based on the 2004

Work Schedule Supplement. This cutoff results in deleting the top quartile of occu-

pations based on this measure which leaves us with 55 occupations. As Table A.3

shows, our results are robust to omitting these occupations. Aside from evening

and night shifts, our measure is also strongly negatively correlated with the frac-

tion of workers who work other types of shifts such as "rotating shifts," "split

shifts," "irregular schedule," and "other shifts." Occupations with shift work ap-

pear to have low coordination needs and may reflect the fact that while workers

may work with others in a shift, it is easy to substitute one worker for another

in most cases. Table A.4 in the appendix also reports regression results using our

alternative measure of concentrated hours based on the Herfindahl Index. These

results are qualitatively very similar.


                                          19
    To complement our reduced-form analysis, in what follows we build a model

with the essential elements suggested by our empirical work and conduct counter-

factual exercises.




4        The Model

Environment     The economy is populated by a continuum of male and female

workers of equal masses which sum to 1. Everyone lives for one period and values

consumption of a market good, denoted by c, and a home good denoted by h. Peo-

ple rank bundles of the two goods according to a Cobb-Douglas utility function:


                                                  s         s
                               u ( c , h ) = ( c )  ( h )1-  ,                    (2)


where s represents the weight of market goods in utility for gender s with s =

f , m.

    Two aspects of the preferences are worth noting. First, males and females differ

in the relative value they give to the home good. This asymmetry should not be

taken literally as a fundamental difference in preferences. It is a convenient way

to capture observed differences in hours of household care between males and

females. This difference may reflect social norms, differences in bargaining power,

discrimination, etc., but an explicit modeling of these features is outside the scope

of the paper. A second and related aspect is that the decision unit is the individual

and not the household. The reason for doing so is data limitations. Specifically,

observations in the ATUS are at the individual level, and there is no information

on spousal time allocation.

    Workers have one unit of time, a fraction of which can be supplied in a labor


                                            20
market that features J occupations and which are labeled using the integer j. Occu-

pations are mutually exclusive; workers can only work in one occupation. Workers

receive a wage w j per unit of time they supply in occupation j. Earnings from the

supply of labor is how workers finance purchases of the market good c.

    Prior to choosing an occupation, each individual draws a vector of taste pa-

rameters for occupations, i , from gender-specific distributions F ( j,s ). Thus, each

individual i is represented by the vector



                                      i = i,1 , . . . , i, J



.

    Each element of the vector, i, j , represents the taste for occupation j and are

independent across occupations.

    Time is divided into two sub-periods of equal length. We label the first period

as "prime" (or 1), and the second period as "home" (or 2). We associate the first

period in the model with the 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. period in the data.9 Workers

do not exclusively choose how to split their unit of time between working in the

market and home care; they also choose how much to allocate to either activity

during each sub-period. We denote by hi and l i , respectively, the home care and

work choices in sub-period t. Since the total time used must add up to one, the

following identity must hold:


                                             i
                                   hij,1 + l j       i        i
                                               ,1 + h j,2 + l j,2 = 1.                          (3)



    Since either sub-period represents half of total time, the following must also be
    9 Thatour prime period starts at the beginning of the "day", as opposed to the middle (as in the
data) is an innocuous assumption. It is convenient and nothing of substance changes if we assume
that the prime period starts in the middle of the day.
                                                  21
true:



                                                       i
                                             hij,t + l j ,t = 0.5,                              (4)


   for each sub-period t.

   The empirical evidence in Section 2 shows that the distribution of working

hours during the day is not uniform. Workers bunch hours at particular times of

the day and the degree of bunching is higher in certain occupations. This evidence,

coupled with data from O*NET (see Table 8), suggests that in some occupations

the need to coordinate workers' schedules is stronger. For example, some occu-

pations rely more on team production where workers' tasks are complementary,

while in others individuals work mostly on their own. This difference in the pro-

duction technology translates into a friction on an individual's supply of labor. If

an individual's tasks are complementary with others' in the same occupation, not

supplying labor when others do has a productivity penalty. For example, missing

a team project meeting has a productivity penalty. This penalty is likely to differ

across occupations. Returning to our model, while we do not explicitly model the

production technologies that lead to coordination needs, we assume that not sup-

plying labor during prime time has a penalty. More specifically, a reduced form

way of capturing the importance of coordinating workers' schedules is given by a

reduction in the effective hours of work when labor is not supplied during prime

time:



           i
          lj = l ji,1 + l ji,2 - (0.5 - l ji,1 ) j   with      j => 0   for   j = 1, ..., J .   (5)


   The parameter  j drives the penalty for not supplying labor during prime time

in occupation j.
                                                     22
    This specification allows for large productivity losses in some occupations when

a worker postpones working time to the second period ("home"). The penalty is

large in occupations with a low  j , while in those with a high  j the loss is mini-

mal. The maximum amount of time any worker (male of female) can work in the

prime period is 0.5. For a given amount of work, supplying more home care time

during period 1 leads to a lower productivity per hour. The extent of the produc-

tivity loss is occupation- but not gender-specific. Although  is exogenous, and

thus our model is silent about the source of these differences, one interpretation is

that workers coordinate because productivity rises when everyone is present. By

convention, this coordination takes place during the period we call prime time.

    The production of home goods employs hours both within prime and home

time according to a Cobb-Douglas technology:


                                                               1
                                     i        i          i     
                                    h =    ( h1 )   + ( h2 )       ,                            (6)


    where  is the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between

the supply of home care time across the two time periods. If  <1, home care in

different periods are imperfect substitutes.

    On the production side, there is a set of J intermediate goods producers indexed

by j. We associate the production of an intermediate good with an occupation.

Each produces an amount X j of the intermediate good. Production employs a

linear technology in effective units of labor Nj ; that is, X j = A j Nj , where A j is a

total factor productivity parameter.10 Markets are competitive and the producer

faces prices for her good p j and wages w j .
  10 The role of the total factor productivity parameters is only to help deliver the empirical dis-
tribution of earnings across occupations. Replicating that distribution is necessary to obtain a
plausible gender wage gap.


                                                23
   The producer of intermediate good j solves the following maximization prob-

lem:

                                      max p j X j - Nj w j                                                 (7)
                                        Nj


subject to the available technology X j = A j Nj . The solution to the problem is p j =

w j . Intermediate goods producers sell to a final goods producer. The technology

for producing a certain amount Y of the final good from a vector of quantities of

intermediate services X1 , . . . , X J is described by,


                                                   J
                                                  
                                                             j
                                       Y=                   Xj     .                                       (8)
                                                  j =1


with  jJ=1  j = 1 (Cobb-Douglas).

   The final good producer solves the following maximization problem:


                                             J                         J
                                                                 -  pj Xj .
                                                            j
                               max                     Xj                                                  (9)
                            { X1 ,...,X J } j=1                    j =1



   Note that in equilibrium X j = A j Nj and p j = w j / A j , so that this maximization
                                                                                                    J
problem implicitly defines labor demand functions                          Nj = Njd (w j , N- j )
                                                                                                    j =1



Individual's Decision Problem          The amount of effective labor supplied by a worker

of gender s in occupation j is l js . Effective labor is compensated at a rate w j per

unit.

   The value of occupation j for an individual of gender s is:




                                                       24
                              s
                        Vjs ( j ) =  js              max
                                                    s ,l s , h s , h s
                                                                         {u(cs , hs )}           (10)
                                             c s ,l j ,1 j,2 j,1 j,2

                                                                                     s.t.        (11)

                                                                             cs = l js w j       (12)

                                                                   hs       s
                                                                    j,2 + l j,2 = 0.5            (13)

                                               hs       s      s        s
                                                j,1 + l j,1 + h j,2 + l j,2 = 1                  (14)

                   l js = l js,1 + l js,2 - (0.5 - l js,1 ) j            with    j  0            (15)
                                                                                         1
                                                hs       s           s  
                                                 j = (( h j,1 ) + ( h j,2 ) )                    (16)



   Each individual chooses from the set of J occupations the one that yields the

highest utility.



                                  js = argmax W1
                                               s
                                                 , . . . , WJs                                   (17)


where W s for an individual i of gender s is defined as
          j




                                          Wjs = Vjs |i .                                         (18)


   The occupational choice determines an endogenous distribution of male and

female workers across occupations. Let µs
                                        j denote the mass of gender s workers
                                     f                                                       f
in occupation j, then  jJ=1 (µ j + µm                            m
                                    j ) = 1. Define µ j = µ j + µ j as the size of

occupation j.


Aggregation and Equilibrium               Given wages, individuals solve the optimization
                                                      J
problem yielding value functions Vjs                         .
                                                      j =1

   For an occupation j, its population satisfies µs          s    s
                                                  j = Prob (Wj > W- j ) where we
                                                      25
                   s to be equal to W s , . . . , W s , W s , . . . , W s .
define the vector W- j               1             j -1  j +1          J

      For occupation j, the total labor input is defined as,




                                                                        f
                   µm
                    j                                               µj        f           f               f
            Nj =        (l jm
                            ,1   + l jm
                                      ,2   - (0.5 - l jm   j
                                                       ,1 ) ) +             (l j,1 + l j,2 - (0.5 - l j,1 ) j ).   (19)
                   µj                                               µj


      In addition, in equilibrium:


                                                            j -1
                                                                   
                                                      j                       - j
                                           w j =  j A j Nj                  X- j      .                            (20)
                                                                   -j

      Given individual's occupational and hours choices our model predicts ratio8to5's

for working hours for each occupation which we denote as ratio8to5 j . Following

the definition of these indicators presented above, its model counterpart is given

by:


                                                                                  f           f
                                                 µm
                                                  j        l jm
                                                              ,1             µj           l j,1
                          ratio8to5 j =                                 +                         .                (21)
                                                 µ j (l jm      m
                                                         ,1 + l j,2 )        µ j (l f + l f )
                                                                                   j,1   j,2

                                                                                                      f
where µ j is the fraction of workers in occupation j, and µm
                                                           j and µ j are the fraction

of males and females in occupation j, respectively.

      Before we take this model to the data and examine the role of coordination

frictions in accounting for the gender gap, we illustrate the model's mechanisms

using a simpler version than the one described above.




5      Model Mechanics in a Simple Case

We restrict attention to an economy with only two occupations. We provide a

numerical example choosing illustrative values of the parameters to uncover the

                                                             26
main mechanisms. We analyze three environments which differ in the degree of

heterogeneity among workers, detailed below. There is a set of parameters that are

common across these economies. Earnings in each occupation represent an equal

share in final aggregate income, i.e 1 = 2 = 0.5. The parameters that govern the

productivity penalty due to the coordination of workers are 1 = 0.8 and 2 = 2.8.

In other words, in occupation 1 coordination is much more important. Table 11

summarizes the results of each of the experiments that are described below.


Economy 1: Homogeneous Agents without Gender Differences            This economy

features a mass of size 1 of workers who have the same weight for market con-

sumption: m =  f = 0.8. The parameter driving the elasticity of substitution

between home care time at the two time periods of the day (between h1 and h2 ), ,

is set to 0.6. The results are shown in Panel A of Table 11.

   Consumption goods and household care are substitutes. More market con-

sumption implies more market time and less time allocated to household care.

The equilibrium features sorting into occupations, with a larger mass of workers

choosing occupation 2. Because of the higher , productivity losses due to coor-

dination are smaller in occupation 2. As a result, occupation 2 is more attractive.

Despite the higher cost, the final goods technology rules out an equilibrium in

which no one chooses occupation 1. Wages adjust to leave workers indifferent

between the two occupations. The higher wage results in a higher supply of la-

bor in occupation 1. Hence, l1 + l2 is larger. However, they have to pay a higher

penalty and as a result effective hours are equal across occupations. To summarize,

workers in occupation 1 supply more market work and less household care. The

opposite is true in occupation 2. Why is the bunching ratio higher in occupation

1? Because workers, in an attempt to minimize the hours penalty, bunch hours to

                                         27
a larger extent in the prime period. Prime time cannot be exclusively devoted to

work, however, because home care cannot be substituted perfectly across the two

sub-periods. Finally, since workers in occupation 1 devote relatively more hours to

work in prime time they end up devoting relatively more hours of household care

during home time (h2 )


Economy 2: Gender Differences in Household Care Responsibilities          We now

consider the case of an economy where males and females are differentiated by the

weight in market consumption . Half of the workers have  = 0.9 (male) and half

have  = 0.7 (female), i.e. females have stronger preferences for household care.

The results are shown in Panel B of Table 11.

   Due to their different preferences, females and males do not sort randomly

into the two occupations. Females have a relatively higher preference for house-

hold care and thus they populate only occupation 2, the high  occupation. Oc-

cupation 2 allows females to supply household care without paying too high an

hours penalty. In addition, since household care hours are complementary dur-

ing the day, more total household care time means a higher supply of household

care hours both within prime and home time, i.e. household care hours need to be

smoothed during the day. Occupation 2 allows them to do that at a relatively lower

cost. Males have a comparative advantage in occupation 1. Because they want to

supply more labor, they downplay the importance of the penalty when choosing

their occupation. As a result, a higher proportion of males work in occupation 1.

   To summarize, workers in occupation 2 spend a bit more time in home care

(because the wage is lower). Consequently, raw hours, effective hours worked,

and earnings, are all lower. Therefore, in equilibrium there is a gender gap in

earnings of 3%. Much of the gender gap is due to earnings differentials between

                                        28
occupations - occupation 1 is only male while occupation 2 is mostly female.


Economy 3: Gender Differences in Household Care Responsibilities and Tastes

for Occupations       We now consider the case of economy 2, but we incorporate

gender differences in tastes for each occupation which results in 50% of workers

being female in each occupation. The results are shown in Panel C of Table 11.

   Conditional in working on occupation 1, females want to work more than if

they are in occupation 2 since they want to minimize the coordination cost. How-

ever, they will work less than males since they want to supply relatively more time

to household care. As a result they will end up paying a higher cost in terms of

effective hours and thus their earnings per hour are going to be lower than males.

This is also the case for males and females in occupation 2, but the effects are

lower given that  is higher. For this reason, the gender earnings gap per hour

is higher in occupation 1. In equilibrium, this example features a gender gap in

earnings per hour of 5% in occupation 1 and no gender earnings gap in occupation

2. The aggregate gender earnings gap for this economy is also 3%. While the ag-

gregate earnings gap is the same as in economy 2, the gender gap in this economy

is entirely driven by earnings differences within occupations due to the fact that

women have fewer effective hours.11

   As in the other economies, conditional on being in occupation 1, workers want

to supply more time in prime time to minimize the coordination cost, and as in

the other cases, the bunching ratio is higher in occupation 1. Therefore, the ex-

ample reflects the negative correlation between the bunching ratio and the gender

earnings gap we find in the empirical part of the paper.
  11 Note that in this particular example the share of workers in each occupation is 50% so all the
differences in earnings per hour come from differences in effective hours and not from differences
in the wage rates across occupations.


                                                29
6       Quantitative Analysis

To assess the quantitative predictions of the model, we calibrate the model using

aggregates from the US labor market. We restrict the analysis to 22 occupations

by further aggregating the 93 occupations using cross-walks provided by the SOC

codes. We also restrict the sample to married men and women with children in the

household. Among other variables of interest, solving the model yields bunching

ratios, ratio8to5, for work and home care, as well as earnings for men and women

in each occupation.



6.1      Calibration

We assume that the distribution of tastes is Frechet with a common dispersion

parameter.12 Thus, we assume that for an occupation j and a gender g taste shocks

are drawn from,



                                                                             -
                         F ( j,g ) = Prob( j,g  0 ) = exp(- Tj,g 0 )                           (22)


     The calibration chooses values for a total of 113 parameters:


                                                                                       f m
                 { j }22         22             22              22            22
                      j=1 , { j } j=1 , { Tj,m } j=1 , { Tj, f } j=1 , { A j } j=1 , ,  ,  .



     The vector of labor shares {1 , ..., 22 } can be calculated directly from the data.

Since output is only a function of labor,  j is the share of earnings of occupation

j in total earnings. The remaining parameter values are chosen to minimize the

distance between the moments in the data and the ones generated by the model.13
    12 This
        assumption is typical in discrete choice models and made for tractability.
    13 Because
           the paper is not concerned with the distribution of tastes within occupations, setting a
common dispersion parameter is irrelevant. We could assume either a different common dispersion
parameter or a different dispersion parameter by occupation and gender. Doing so would yield
                                                   30
The moments we pick to match are the following: the bunching ratios, ratio8to5,

the fraction of females relative to males within an occupation, the fraction of em-

ployment in each occupation, the average earnings per hour for each occupation,

the fraction of working time for males and females, and the ratio of the average

bunching ratio of work to the average bunching ratio of home care. The value of

the last moment is largely influenced by . A high value of  implies a low home

care ratio (little home care takes place during prime time).14

    Table 12 shows the values for the occupation-specific moments we match. Table

13 illustrates the model fit by showing the correlation between the targeted mo-

ments in the data and in the model. The model fit is quite good. The parameter

values we obtain are shown in Table 14. The most interesting set of parameters are

the 's. Their distribution is rather skewed and their correlation with the bunch-

ing ratios is -0.60. In other words, the bunching ratio across occupations is mainly

determined by the  but not completely (otherwise the two would be perfectly

negatively correlated). The share of females in an occupation also plays an impor-

tant role. The work bunching ratio of females is higher than that of males, so if an

occupation is 90% female (as is, for example, Healthcare Support) it must have a

larger  than an occupation with the same bunching ratio but only 30% females.

The skewness is an artifact of coordination costs being virtually zero for a large .

There is little information about coordination costs for an  that exceeds 50. It is

also worth noting that we estimate a relatively low value of  (0.46) which implies

that household care in different periods are less than perfect substitutes for each

other.
different values for the (female) Frechet parameters driving the mean for the model to be consistent
with the empirical female shares across occupations.
  14 Because we only model two activities and we normalize the length of each period to be 0.5,

the model can't deliver either work or home care bunching ratios in levels. Therefore we target the
ratio.


                                                31
   In Table 15 we return to the regressions reported in Section 3 but now compare

results from data and the model. The first column displays the coefficients on

the female dummy, the bunching ratio, and the interaction between the two using

data.15 The second column shows the analogous coefficients from our model-

simulated data. The bunching ratio coefficient is 0.30 in the model and is larger

than in the data because there are fewer elements affecting earnings per hour in

the model. The coefficient on the interaction between the bunching ratio and the

female dummy is -0.05. What drives the positive relationship between the gender

gap and the bunching ratio in the model? The coordination cost is higher the

lower the , which translates into a higher bunching ratio. Since females supply

more home care, and home care is not perfectly substitutable across hours of the

day, they supply fewer market hours during the prime period. As a result, they

lose hours and their compensation reflects that loss. To summarize, the coefficient

values show that the relative penalty suffered by women in high bunching ratio

occupations is about the same in the data and the model. The overall premium that

both males and females get in high bunching ratio occupations, however, appears

to be higher in the model.



6.2    The Baseline Economy

Solving the model for the set of calibrated parameter values delivers an equilib-

rium that features males and females making labor supply decisions over occupa-

tions and hours and as a result, the mechanisms in the model generate a gender

wage gap in each occupation and an economy-wide gender wage gap. Table 16 re-

ports the baseline results. The overall gender wage gap is 23% in the data and 6.6%
  15 Notethat the coefficients will not exactly match those in Table 9 due to the fact that our
occupation measure is aggregated to 22 groups.


                                              32
in the baseline model. As mentioned above, this economy-wide gender wage gap

can be decomposed into the between and within occupation components. More

specifically, let the earnings ratio between males and females for the whole econ-

omy be defined as egap = em - e f , where em and e f represent the log of the earnings

of males and females, respectively. Then,


                                            J
                              egap =             m , j e m , j -  f , j e f , j ,             (23)
                                          j =1

where m, j and  f , j are the proportions of males and females in occupation j over

total males and females in the population. Thus,


                               J                                 J
                    egap =     ( m , j -  f , j ) e m , j +   f , j ( e m , j - e f , j ) ,   (24)
                              j =1                             j =1



where  jJ=1 (m, j -  f , j )em, j is the between component and  jJ=1  f , j (em, j - e f , j ) is

the within component.

   In the data, as shown in Table 16, the within component is 26.8% while the be-

tween component is -3.9%. This is broadly consistent with Goldin (2014) who finds

that the bulk of the gender wage gap exists within occupations and only a small

component is due to the between portion. The model predicts a within component

of 6.2% which accounts for 23% of the within component in the data and 27% of the

overall gender gap. The model also generates a between component of 0.4%. The

endogenous channel in our model­ the interaction between preferences and coor-

dination costs­ has implications for the both the within and between components.

Although this channel influences mostly the within component it also affects the

between component due to the effect on the sorting of women into occupations.

While it explains a substantial component of the within component it does not


                                                    33
account for the majority, indicating that there are other forces in the economy that

affect the gender wage gap within an occupation.



6.3     Counterfactual Experiments

In this section we conduct counterfactual experiments to asses the the impact of

various parameters on the gender wage gap. The key parameters of interest that

we focus on are the 's which reflect coordination costs, the 's which reflect pref-

erences for consumption and for household care, and  which determines the

elasticity of substitution between household care at different times of the day.


6.3.1   Coordination of Schedules and the Gender Wage Gap

In the first experiment we set all 's to be equal across occupations and set it at a

relatively high value of 2.92 (reflecting low coordination costs) which is the value

estimated for "Health Care Support." One motivation for such an experiment is

changing technology such as on-line connections and internet technology which

lowers the costs of coordinating with other workers. Since in this experiment

women still have a higher preference for household care (lower ), everything else

equal, they will work less and allocate more hours to home production relative to

men. However, the costs of doing so will be lowered.

   The gender gap falls from 6.6% (baseline) to 2.7%. As shown in the third row of

Table 16 the within component falls from 6.2% to 2.2%. The within component falls

substantially because with a relatively high , the penalty for not working during

prime time is lower. As a result, despite women's larger supply of household care

their earnings per hour are now much closer to male earnings. Figure 5 shows

the within component of the gender gap (vertical axis) when this counterfactual is


                                         34
repeated for different values of  (horizontal axis). Low values of  such as that for

"Management," for example, imply a large within component of around 10%. As 

becomes larger the coordination costs become negligible and the within occupation

gender gap approaches zero. Figure 5 shows that there is little difference between

moderately high 's and very high 's­ that is, once  reaches a value of 5 and

greater, the within-occupation gender gap essentially disappears.

   The between component rises slightly when we equalize 's across occupa-

tions. Both males and females move to occupations with initially low 's because

the coordination penalty is now lower. These occupations are even more attrac-

tive to women so the female share rises in these occupations. This effect by itself

decreases the across component. To assess the size of this effect, in Table 16 we

separately report the gender wage gap across occupations holding earnings and

occupation sizes fixed at their baseline values. This column, which we label "Sort-

ing," isolates the effect of rising female share in initially low  occupations. If

sorting were the only effect, the between occupation gender gap would drop from

0.4 in the baseline to -0.1. However, in equilibrium, earnings and occupation sizes

also change. Because men initially had higher representation in low  occupations

which experienced the rise in earnings and size, this counteracts the sorting effect.


6.3.2   A Change in Female Household Care Hours

In this experiment we make male and female preferences for household care more

equal. One possible interpretation is a change in social norms that equalize the

household care responsibilities of males and females. We reduce the gap in the 's

by 50% by reducing m to 0.52 and raising  f to 0.44. The within component falls

from 6.2% to 3.1%. The reason for the fall is that an increase in  f increases the

amount of work during prime time. This lowers the penalty that females face.
                                         35
   An alternative way of looking at this counterfactual is shown in Figure 6. The

horizontal axis measures the distance between 's (a value of 0.15 is equal to the

baseline and a value of 0 means m =  f ). On the vertical axis we measure the

within component of the gender gap. As the distance between the 's drops, the

within component goes to zero. The rate at which it drops to zero depends on the

occupation. As occupations are defined by their , we plot the within component

against the within component for occupations with a small value of , 0.6; a middle

value, 1.5; and a high value, 12. When  is large, i.e. coordination costs are low, the

within component is virtually zero even when women supply substantially more

home care than men. For an occupation such as "Architecture and Engineers" with

(  0.6), then the within gender gap is low only when preferences between males

and females are similar.

   Interestingly, the between component rises so that the overall gender gap rises

slightly to 6.8%. As a result of the 's changing, women are now more likely to

move into low  occupations. This sorting effect alone would reduce the between

occupation gender gap from 0.4 in the baseline case to -0.4. However, in equilib-

rium, earnings and occupation sizes change. In this case, because women now

prefer to work more, their labor supply rises. This happens in all occupations, but

the effect is bigger in occupations which are relatively more populated by women.

As a result, wages in female-intensive occupations fall (responding to the larger

supply) leading to an increase in the between component.


6.3.3   A Change in the Ability to Smooth Household Care During the Day

In our model, the value of  determines the elasticity of substitution between

household care time during the two parts of the day. A high value of  means that it

is relatively easy to substitute household care activities throughout the day. In our
                                         36
baseline calibration  = 0.46 which indicates household care activities are fairly

substitutable but imperfectly so. Although the timing of these activities may be

difficult to change (reflecting an imperfect degree of substitution), someone other

than the parent could be responsible for undertaking them. For example, curricu-

lar education normally takes place in a school during normal business hours, but

parents outsource that activity to school teachers and staff. As shown in Section

2.3 we focus on care (i.e. doctor's appointments, school meetings, homework su-

pervision) which may be hard to outsource. What exactly determines the degree of

substitution is not clear. One interpretation is that there are constraints on the time

of the day in which some activities take place. For example, an appointment with

a school teacher normally takes place before 5pm. An alternative interpretation is

that they reflect parenting styles of modern societies, a recent phenomenon that

has been extensively studied for instance by Doepke and Zilibotti (2019).

   In order to study the effect of changes in the ability to substitute household care

time during the day, we perform a counterfactual exercise in which we increase

. As in our baseline case, women put more value on household care activities

and allocate more time to household care relative to men. The main difference

is that compared to the baseline case women can now more easily distribute the

household care to off-peak times so they do not incur a productivity loss. As a

result, the within gender wage gap decreases as predicted. The increase in  has

little effect on sorting. However, there is again a substantial increase in the between

occupation gender gap in equilibrium. Productivity and earnings rise in low 

occupations. Since men initially had higher representation in these occupations,

the between occupation component of the gender wage gap rises.




                                          37
7    Final Remarks

Although women have made remarkable gains in the labor market over the past

five decades, there is still a substantial gap in their earnings relative to men. Most

of the unexplained gap is associated with earnings gaps that arises within occu-

pations. In this paper we explore a mechanism which can explain why the gender

gap differs across occupations.

    Central to our analysis is the joint decision of workers to allocate time to market

work and to household care. Using time-diary data we document that married

women with children who report being full-time workers work less on the job

and do more household care than their male counterparts. We also document

that occupations vary in the degree to which total hours worked in the occupation

are concentrated during peak hours of the day­ a measure which we interpret

as reflecting the degree of coordinated work schedules in the occupation. Our

measure of an (in)flexible work schedule is therefore distinct from other papers in

the literature which focus on the quantity of hours worked. We find that while

men and single women receive a wage premium in occupations with concentrated

schedules, married women with children much less of one. Conditional on being

in an occupation, less working time (more household care time) at peak hours

of the day entails a productivity loss and thus earnings are lowered for women

relative to men. We calibrate our model to US data and show that the greater

demand for household care time by women together with the coordination of work

time required in different occupations generates a gender wage gap of 6.6 percent

which corresponds to approximately 30% of the observed gender earnings gap

among married men and women with children. If occupation-level coordination

was set equal to the level of "Health Care Support"­ an occupation with relatively

                                          38
low coordination, the gender gap due to women's higher demand for household

time falls by more than half to 2.7%.




                                        39
References

Albanesi, S., and C. Olivetti (2009): "Production, Market Production and the Gen-

  der Wage Gap: Incentives and Expectations," Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(1),

  80­107.


Altonji, J. G., and C. H. Paxson (1988): "Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Con-

  straints, and Hours-Wage Trade-Offs," Journal of Labor Economics, 6(2), 254­276.


Altonji, J. G., and C. H. Paxson (1992): "Labor Supply, Hours Constraints, and Job

  Mobility," Journal of Human Resources, 27(2), 256­278.


Bick, A., and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2018): "Taxation and Labour Supply of Mar-

  ried Couples across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Review of Economic

  Studies, 85(3), 1543­1576.


Blundell, R., M. Brewer, and M. Francesconi (2008): "Job Changes and Hours

  Changes: Understanding the Path of Labor Supply Adjustment," Journal of Labor

  Economics, 26(3), 421­453.


Cardoso, A. R., D. S. Hamermesh, and J. Varejao (2012): "The Timing of Labor

  Demand," Annals of Economics and Statistics, (105-106), 15­34.


Cha, Y., and K. A. Weeden (2014): "Overwork and the Slow Convergence in the

  Gender Gap in Wages," American Sociological Review, 79(3), 457­484.


Chen, M. K., J. A. Chevalier, P. E. Rossi, and E. Oehlsen (2019): "The Value of

  Flexible Work: Evidence from Uber Drivers," Journal of Political Economy, forth-

  coming.


Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011): "Adjustment Costs,

                                        40
  Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from

  Danish Tax Records," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 749­804.

                                                                             Zs
Cortes, P., and J. Pan (2016a): "Prevalence of Long Hours and Skilled WomenâA ´

  Occupational Choices," Discussion paper, Boston University, Questrom School

  of Business.


        (2016b): "When Time Binds: Returns to Working Long Hours and the Gen-

  der Wage gap among the Highly Skilled," Discussion paper, Boston University,

  Questrom School of Business.


Denning, J. T., B. A. Jacob, L. Lefgren, and C. vom Lehn (2019): "The Return to

  Hours Worked Within and Across Occupations: Implications for the Gender

  Wage Gap," Discussion paper.


Doepke, M., and M. Tertilt (2016): Families in Macroeconomicsvol. 2 of Handbook of

  Macroeconomics, chap. 0, pp. 1789­1891. Elsevier.


Doepke, M., and F. Zilibotti (2019): Love, Money, and Parenting: How Economics

  Explains the Way We Raise Our Kids. Princeton University Press.


Duchini, E., and C. V. Effenterre (2017): "Do women want to work more or more

  regularly? Evidence from a natural experiment," Discussion paper.


Eden, M. (2017): "The Week," Discussion paper, Brandeis University.


Erosa, A., L. Fuster, G. Kambourov, and R. Rogerson (2017): "Hours, Occupations,

  and Gender Differences in Labor Market Outcomes," NBER Working Papers

  23636, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


Flabbi, L., and A. Moro (2012): "The effect of job flexibility on female labor market


                                         41
  outcomes: Estimates from a search and bargaining model," Journal of Economet-

  rics, 168(1), 81­95.


Gicheva, D. (2013): "Working Long Hours and Early Career Outcomes in the High-

  End Labor Market," Journal of Labor Economics, 31(4), 785 ­ 824.


Goldin, C. (2014): "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter," American

  Economic Review, 104(4), 1091­1119.


Goldin, C., and L. F. Katz (2011): "The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-

  Powered Professionals," The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social

  Science, 638(1), 45­67.


Guner, N., E. Kaya, and V. Sánchez-Marcos (2014): "Gender gaps in Spain: poli-

  cies and outcomes over the last three decades," SERIEs: Journal of the Spanish

  Economic Association, 5(1), 61­103.


Hamermesh, D. S. (1999): "The Timing of Work Over Time," The Economic Journal,

  109, 37­66.


Labanca, C., and D. Pozzoli (2018): "Coordination of Hours within the Firm,"

  Working Papers 7-2018, Copenhagen Business School, Department of Eco-

  nomics.


Mas, A., and A. Pallais (2017): "Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements," Ameri-

  can Economic Review, 107(12), 3722­3759.


Prescott, E. C., R. Rogerson, and J. Wallenius (2009): "Lifetime Aggregate La-

  bor Supply with Endogenous Workweek Length," Review of Economic Dynamics,

  12(1), 23­36.



                                        42
Rogerson, R. (2011): "Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply with Coordinated

  Working Times," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 7­37.


Rogerson, R., and J. Wallenius (2009): "Micro and macro elasticities in a life cycle

  model with taxes," Journal of Economic Theory, 144(6), 2277­2292.


Rosen, H. S. (1976): "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage-Hours De-

  termination," Econometrica, 44(3), 485­507.


Stewart, J. (2010): "The Timing of Maternal Work and Time with Children," Indus-

  trial and Labor Relations Review, 64(1), 181­200.


Wasserman, M. (2019): "Hours Constraints, Occupational Choice, and Gender:

  Evidence from Medical Residents," Discussion paper.


Weiss, Y. (1996): "Synchronization of Work Schedules," International Economic Re-

  view, 37(1), 157­179.


Wiswall, M., and B. Zafar (2017): "Preference for the Workplace, Investment in

  Human Capital, and Gender*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1), 457­

  507.




                                          43
Figures


             40
             30
          Minutes
            20
             10
             0




                    0    3       6       9      12        15     18      21      24
                                              Hour of Day




                        Figure 1: Work among Full-time Workers

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The figure is based on
18-65 year old workers who reported working full-time in the activity summary file. "Work"
corresponds to minutes spent on "work and work-related activities" at each hour based on starting
and ending times in the time diary data. The figure includes both weekdays and weekends.




                                               44
                       40
                                  Men
                                  Women
                       35


                       30


                       25
             Minutes




                       20


                       15


                       10


                        5


                        0
                            0        5         10            15      20
                                              Hours of Day


                       40
                                  Men
                                  Women
                       35


                       30


                       25
             Minutes




                       20


                       15


                       10


                        5


                        0
                            0        5         10            15      20
                                              Hours of Day



                                Figure 2: Work among Full-time Workers

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The figure is based on
18-65 year old workers who reported working full-time in the activity summary file. The top panel
includes workers who are married with at least one own child in the household. The bottom panel
includes workers who are single and without children. "Work" corresponds to minutes spent on
"work and work-related activities" at each hour based on starting and ending times in the time
diary data. The figure includes both weekdays and weekends.




                                                    45
                10
                             Men
                 9           Women

                 8

                 7

                 6
      Minutes




                 5

                 4

                 3

                 2

                 1

                 0
                     0          5           10             15            20
                                            Hours of Day


                10
                             Men
                 9           Women

                 8

                 7

                 6
      Minutes




                 5

                 4

                 3

                 2

                 1

                 0
                     0          5           10             15            20
                                            Hours of Day



                         Figure 3: Household Care among Full-time Workers

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The figure is based on
18-65 year old workers who reported working full-time in the activity summary file. The top panel
includes workers who are married with at least one own child in the household. The bottom panel
includes workers who are single and without children. "Household Care" corresponds to minutes
spent on "caring for and helping household members" at each hour based on starting and ending
times in the time diary data. The figure includes both weekdays and weekends.




                                                 46
                              Lawyers                                               Financial analysts                                Writers, authors, news media
       40




                                                                                                                       40
                                                               40
   10 20 30




                                                                                                                  10 20 30
                                                          10 20 30
     Minutes




                                                            Minutes




                                                                                                                    Minutes
       0




                                                               0




                                                                                                                       0
               0   3    6   9 12 15 18 21 24                           0   3    6     9 12 15 18 21 24                           0    3   6    9 12 15 18 21 24
                            Hour of Day                                               Hour of Day                                              Hour of Day


               Physicians, therapists, nurses, dentists               Secretaries and administrative assistants                      Cashiers, clerks, retail persons
       40




                                                              40




                                                                                                                       40
   10 20 30




                                                          10 20 30




                                                                                                                  10 20 30
     Minutes




                                                            Minutes




                                                                                                                    Minutes
       0




                                                              0




                                                                                                                       0
               0   3    6   9 12 15 18 21 24                          0    3   6      9 12 15 18 21 24                           0    3   6    9 12 15 18 21 24
                            Hour of Day                                               Hour of Day                                              Hour of Day


               Nursing, psychiatric, home health aides                          Computer operators                            First-Line supervisors retail, non-retail sales
       40




                                                               40




                                                                                                                      40
   10 20 30




                                                          10 20 30




                                                                                                                  10 20 30
     Minutes




                                                            Minutes




                                                                                                                    Minutes
       0




                                                               0




                                                                                                                      0




               0   3    6   9 12 15 18 21 24                           0   3    6     9 12 15 18 21 24                          0    3    6    9 12 15 18 21 24
                            Hour of Day                                               Hour of Day                                              Hour of Day




                                Figure 4: Timing of Work in Selected Occupations

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The figure is based on
18-65 year old workers who reported working full-time in the activity summary file. "Work" corre-
sponds to minutes spent on "work and work-related activities" at each hour based on starting and
ending times in the time diary data. The figure includes both weekdays and weekends. The figures
display smoothed values from local polynomial regressions. We mapped detailed 2002 Census oc-
cupation codes to detailed Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes and aggregated to 93
SOC categories.




                                                                               47
                                  18

                                  16
     Gender Wage Gap-Within (%)




                                  14

                                  12

                                  10

                                   8

                                   6

                                   4

                                   2

                                   0
                                   0.5   1   1.5   2     2.5      3    3.5     4     4.5     5
                                                               


                          Figure 5: Gender Earnings Gap Within Occupations: The Effect of 

Notes: The figure shows the value of the within component of the gender wage gap (y-axis), as
defined in Section 6, for the whole economy when the parameter  (x-axis) is equal for every
occupation and takes values from 0.6 (the minimum estimated value for our baseline economy) to
5.




                                                        48
                                 0.18
                                             =0.6
                                 0.16        =1.5
                                             =12
    Gender Wage Gap-Within (%)




                                 0.14

                                 0.12

                                  0.1

                                 0.08

                                 0.06

                                 0.04

                                 0.02

                                   0
                                        0               0.05                  0.1                   0.15
                                              Distance Between  of Females and Males


                                 Figure 6: Gender Earnings Gap Within Occupations: The Effect of 

Notes: The figure shows the value of the within component of the gender wage gap (y-axis), as
defined in Section 6, for the whole economy when we change the difference between females and
males in the value of parameter  (x-axis). The value of 0.15 on the x-axis is the difference in the
value of the parameter  for females and males obtained in the calibration of the baseline economy,
that is  f = 0.40 and m = 0.55. The figure shows the value of the within earnings gap (y-axis)
as we decrease the value of m and increase the value of  f . In this way, the distance between s
decreases and, a value of 0 on the x-axis indicates that m =  f .




                                                               49
Tables

          Table 1: Work among Full-time Workers, Married with Children

                                      Weekday     Weekend                           Weekday




 Female Gap in Work Hours             -0.898***    -0.749***   -0.901***     -0.911***   -0.703***    -0.490***

                                       (0.0694)    (0.0674)    (0.0692)      (0.0702)    (0.0698)      (0.0768)


 Observations                           12113       12344       12113         12113       12113         8393

 Day of Week and Year                                             x             x           x             x
 Education, Age and Race                                                        x           x             x
 Usual Weekly Hours                                                                         x             x
 Usual Weekly Hours less than 50                                                                          x
 Average Hours, Men                     7.904        2.163

 Average Hours, Women                   7.006        1.414

 Average Hours, Total                   7.611        1.906

 Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The table is based on 18-65 year old workers
 who reported working full-time in the activity summary file who are married with at least one own child in the
 household. "Work" corresponds to minutes spent on "work and work-related activities" at each hour based on
 starting and ending times in the time diary data. Each column reports the coefficient on the "female" dummy with
 various additional controls. Column (5) controls for usual weekly hours worked reported in the activity summary
 file. Column (6) only includes workers who reported usual weekly hours of less than 50.




                                                       50
  Table 2: Household Care among Full-time Workers, Married with Children

                                      Weekday     Weekend                             Weekday




Female Gap in Household Hours          0.436***    0.264***    0.436***      0.349***   0.319***      0.266***

                                       (0.0276)    (0.0332)    (0.0276)      (0.0270)   (0.0272)      (0.0327)


Observations                            12113       12344       12113         12113      12113          8393

Day of Week and Year                                              x             x          x              x
Education, Age and Race                                                         x          x              x
Usual Weekly Hours                                                                         x              x
Usual Weekly Hours less than 50                                                                           x
Average Hours, Men                      0.821        1.002

Average Hours, Women                    1.257        1.267

Average Hours, Total                    0.963        1.093

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The table is based on 18-65 year old workers
who reported working full-time in the activity summary file who are married with at least one own child in the
household. "Household Care" corresponds to minutes spent on "caring for and helping household members" at each
hour based on starting and ending times in the time diary data. Each column reports the coefficient on the "female"
dummy with various additional controls. Column (5) controls for usual weekly hours worked reported in the activity
summary file. Column (6) only includes workers who reported usual weekly hours of less than 50.




                                                       51
Table 3: Household Care Activities of Parents by Marital and Work Status (Hours)


 Panel A: Weekday

                                                           Females                          Males

 Activity                                 Married NW       Married FT      Single FT     Married FT

 With Children Aged Less Than 6
 Routine                                        1.4             1.0            0.8            0.4
 Enrichment                                     0.6             0.4            0.3            0.3
 Other                                          0.4             0.4            0.4            0.1

 With Children Aged 6-18 Only
 Routine                                        0.4             0.2            0.2            0.1
 Enrichment                                     0.6             0.4            0.3            0.3
 Other                                          0.4             0.2            0.3            0.1



 Panel B: Weekend

                                                           Females                          Males

 Activity                                 Married NW       Married FT      Single FT     Married FT

 With Children Aged Less Than 6
 Routine                                        1.0             0.9            0.7            0.4
 Enrichment                                     0.4             0.4            0.3            0.3
 Other                                          0.1             0.1            0.1            0.1

 With Children Aged 6-18 Only
 Routine                                        0.2             0.1            0.1            0.1
 Enrichment                                     0.5             0.4            0.4            0.3
 Other                                          0.1             0.1            0.1            8.6

 Note: The table shows the average time in hours allocated to household care activities by parents.
 Panel A is on weekdays and B on weekends. The three aggregate categories of activities are "Rou-
 tine," "Enrichment" and "Other", which includes activities such as "Organization and planning,"
 "Attending household children's events," "Picking up/dropping off household children," and "Meet-
 ings and school conferences," among others. See Appendix for detailed activities that are included
 in each category. Married NW refers to married women who are not working, Married FT refers to
 men and women who are married and working full-time, Single FT refers to single women who are
 working full-time.


                                                  52
 Table 4: Working Hours Gap Relative to Fathers with a Non-working Spouse

                                                        Weekday      Weekend                     Weekday




Fathers with Part-time Spouse                             -0.121      -0.0290     -0.104       -0.163      -0.185    -0.247*
                                                          (0.116)     (0.121)     (0.116)      (0.117)    (0.115)    (0.144)

Fathers with Full-time Spouse                            -0.253**     0.00497    -0.249**      -0.269**   -0.245**    -0.160
                                                         (0.0928)     (0.0967)   (0.0926)      (0.0945)   (0.0927)   (0.114)


Observations                                               7769        7784        7769         7769       7769       4766

Day of Week and Year                                                                x             x          x         x
Education, Age and Race                                                                           x          x         x
Usual Weekly Hours                                                                                           x         x
Usual Weekly Hours less than 50                                                                                        x
Average Hours, Fathers with Non-working Spouse             8.040       2.164


Average Hours, Fathers with Part-time Spouse               7.919       2.135


Average Hours, Fathers with Full-time Spouse               7.788       2.169


Notes: Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The table is based on 18-65 year
old men who reported working full-time in the activity summary file who are married with at least one own child
in the household. "Work" corresponds to minutes spent on "work and work-related activities" at each hour based
on starting and ending times in the time diary data. Each column reports the coefficient on the "part-time spouse"
dummy and the "full-time spouse" dummy with the omitted group being "non-working spouse". Column (5) controls
for usual weekly hours worked reported in the activity summary file. Column (6) only includes workers who reported
usual weekly hours of less than 50.




                                                        53
Table 5: Household Care Hours Gap Relative to Fathers with a Non-working
Spouse

                                                         Weekday     Weekend                      Weekday




 Fathers with Part-time Spouse                             0.0702      0.0642     0.0739*      0.0885**   0.0925**    0.0650
                                                          (0.0429)    (0.0551)    (0.0429)     (0.0424)   (0.0422)   (0.0594)

 Fathers with Full-time Spouse                           0.0715**     -0.103**   0.0707**      0.112***    0.108**    0.115**
                                                         (0.0342)     (0.0439)   (0.0342)      (0.0341)   (0.0339)   (0.0469)


 Observations                                              7769         7784       7769          7769       7769      4766

 Day of Week and Year                                                                x            x          x          x
 Education, Age and Race                                                                          x          x          x
 Usual Weekly Hours                                                                                          x          x
 Usual Weekly Hours less than 50                                                                                        x
 Average Hours, Fathers with Non-working Spouse            0.776       1.036


 Average Hours, Fathers with Part-time Spouse              0.846       1.101


 Average Hours, Fathers with Full-time Spouse              0.847       0.934


 Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The table is based on 18-65 year old men
 who reported working full-time in the activity summary file who are married with at least one own child in the
 household. "Household Care" corresponds to minutes spent on " caring for and helping household members" at
 each hour based on starting and ending times in the time diary data. Each column reports the coefficient on the
 "part-time spouse" dummy and the "full-time spouse" dummy with the omitted group being "non-working spouse".
 Column (5) controls for usual weekly hours worked reported on the activity summary file. Column (6) only includes
 workers who reported usual weekly hours less than 50.




                                                        54
             Table 6: Ratio8to5 For Occupations With Fraction Of College  .4

     Occupations                                                                                     # Workers    # FT Workers    Work     Work_Std      % Females

1    Fishers and Related Fishing Workers                                                                 13             5         0.304     -3.799          0.071
2    Firefighters                                                                                       176            167        0.504     -2.018          0.036
3    Forest and Conservation Workers,logging                                                             34            26         0.533     -1.765          0.005
4    Nursing, Psychiatric, and Home Health Aides                                                       1195            746        0.547     -1.638          0.881
5    Ushers, Lobby Attendants, and Ticket Takers                                                        132            65         0.550     -1.613          0.534
6    Combined Food Preparation and Serving Workers, Including Fast Food                                1086            422        0.553     -1.581          0.687
7    Wardens,jailors,correctional officers                                                              754           716         0.557     -1.551          0.145
8    Dishwashers,hosts,hostesses                                                                        320           113         0.565     -1.480          0.531
9    Police and Detectives,protective service                                                           200           188         0.577     -1.367          0.187
10   extraction,mining related                                                                           90            77         0.579     -1.354          0.009
11   Railroad Brake, Signal, and Switch Operators                                                        72            69         0.581     -1.338          0.016
12   Crossing Guards,animal control, lifeguards etc                                                     558           426         0.597     -1.189          0.281
13   Transportation Attendants, except Flight Attendants                                                101            73         0.598     -1.187          0.134
14   Helpers, Construction Trades                                                                        39            30         0.619     -0.994          0.029
15   Chefs Head Cooks                                                                                   429           337         0.624     -0.954          0.512
16   Laborers and Freight, Stock, and Material Movers                                                  1668           1327        0.633     -0.876          0.179
17   Molders and Molding Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic                    1018           965         0.633     -0.872          0.096
18   Miscellaneous Assemblers and Fabricators                                                           627           567         0.633     -0.868          0.386
19   Cooks,Food Preparation Workers                                                                    1122            639        0.637     -0.834          0.455
20   Baggage Porters, trans.attendants,tour and travel                                                   92            52         0.642     -0.791          0.321
21   Inspectors, Testers, Sorters, Samplers, and Weighers                                              1558           1362        0.643     -0.784          0.365
22   Miscellaneous Plant and System Operators                                                           161           152         0.645     -0.764          0.087
23   First-Line Supervisors of Production and Operating Workers                                         509           485         0.650     -0.725          0.194
24   Telephone and related Operators                                                                     55            45         0.658     -0.653          0.673
25   Bookbinders and Bindery Workers, printing press operators                                          160           139         0.658     -0.650          0.187
26   Food Processing Workers, All Other                                                                 324           249         0.658     -0.649          0.393
27   Ship and Boat Captains and Operators                                                                20            17         0.663     -0.606          0.189
28   Motor Vehicle Operators, All Other                                                                2042           1581        0.664     -0.600          0.139
29   Maids and housekeeping cleaners                                                                   1964           1219        0.668     -0.562          0.514
30   Dispatchers,office clerks , cargo agents                                                          1861           1517        0.673     -0.514          0.377
31   Agricultural Inspectors, animal breeders etc                                                       467           372         0.674     -0.511          0.243
32   Supervisors of Transportation and Material Moving Workers                                          128           116         0.694     -0.328          0.206
33   Child care,Personal Care and Service Workers, All Other                                           1549            789        0.705     -0.231          0.847
34   Medical Records and Health Information Technicians                                                1336            976        0.709     -0.195          0.761
35   Cashiers,clers,retail persons                                                                     2678           1373        0.716     -0.133          0.624
36   First-Line Supervisors of Gaming Workers,personal service                                          166           125         0.720     -0.100          0.513
37   Tailors, Dressmakers, and Sewers etc                                                               355           277         0.736      0.039          0.609
38   First-Line Supervisors of Landscaping, Lawn Service, and Groundskeeping Workers                    293           228         0.741      0.088          0.246
39   First-Line Supervisors/Managers of Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Workers                           35            31         0.741      0.089          0.076
40   First-Line Supervisors of Retail , non retail Sales Workers                                       2471           2156        0.755      0.213          0.371
41   installation, maintenance workers                                                                 1202           1088        0.757      0.233          0.038
42   Carpenters,woodworkers                                                                             108            94         0.777      0.406          0.228
43   First-Line Supervisors of Construction Trades and Extraction Workers                               442           400         0.777      0.409          0.039
44   Animal Trainers,Nonfarm Animal Caretakers                                                          110            71         0.780      0.433          0.694
45   Automotive Mechanics                                                                               921           829         0.780      0.436          0.010
46   First-Line Supervisors of Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers                                     213           210         0.782      0.451          0.065
47   First-Line Supervisors of Office and Administrative Support Workers                                987           873         0.791      0.534          0.682
48   Plasterers and Stucco Masons, repair works                                                        3079           2549        0.802      0.628          0.025
49   Engineering,drafters and related Technicians                                                       413           373         0.804      0.644          0.183
50   Electronic Equipment Installers and Repairers, Motor Vehicles                                      402           363         0.806      0.663          0.102
51   other Construction and Related Workers                                                             199           182         0.807      0.672          0.069
52   Grounds Maintenance Workers                                                                        551           372         0.809      0.695          0.057
53   personal appearance workers                                                                        511           263         0.816      0.754          0.861
54   Eligibility Interviewers, Government Programs, other clerks                                       2624           1961        0.824      0.824          0.757
55   Medical Assistants                                                                                 678           399         0.833      0.904          0.891
56   Computer Operators                                                                                1614           1249        0.840      0.964          0.786
57   teacher assist,other teaching support                                                              655           359         0.860      1.144          0.895
58   Clerks                                                                                            1580           1171        0.863      1.170          0.888
59   Secretaries and Administrative Assistants                                                         1964           1515        0.893      1.434          0.962
60   Occupational Therapy Assistants and Aides                                                           50            37         0.923      1.706          0.766
61   Morticians, Undertakers, and Funeral Directors                                                      12             6         0.925      1.719          0.100

                                                                                                       46173          34583       0.696     -0.309          0.364

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The figure is based on 18-65 year old workers. Full-time work and occupations are based on
the main job. We mapped detailed 2002 Census occupation codes to detailed Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes and aggregated to 93 SOC categories.
"Ratio8to5" is the ratio of total hours worked by all full-time workers during the hours 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. relative to total minutes worked in each occupation category.
"Ratio8to5std" reports standardized values with mean zero and standard deviation equal to 1. The table keeps those occupations where the fraction of college workers
in the occupation is less than 0.4. The bottom row reports sums and (unweighted) means.




                                                                         55
             Table 7: Ratio8to5 for Occupations With Fraction Of College .4

     Occupations                                                                              # Workers    # FT Workers    Work     Work_Std          % Females

1    Geological, chemical, natural science Technicians                                          172            137         0.620      -0.984             0.402
2    Air Traffic Controllers and Airfield Operations Specialists                                 95             70         0.657      -0.658             0.099
3    Photographers, sound and light technicians,other media support                             163            100         0.689      -0.371             0.241
4    Directors,clergy, Religious Activities and Education                                       357            267         0.700      -0.280             0.295
5    Podiatrists, therapists,nurses, dentists                                                   3344           2429        0.700      -0.274             0.736
6    sports ,entertainment                                                                       383            195        0.702      -0.255             0.365
7    other teachers                                                                              455            212        0.762       0.271             0.623
8    Post secondary teachers                                                                     931            610        0.765       0.301             0.458
9    other miscellaneous managers                                                               5553           4656        0.767       0.316             0.386
10   Writers and Authors,news media                                                              518            388        0.786       0.485             0.545
11   Chief Executives, general managers                                                         1601           1458        0.788       0.501             0.304
12   Door-to-Door Sales Workers, News and Street Vendors, and Related Workers                    842            497        0.789       0.517             0.613
13   Designers, artists                                                                          570            408        0.809       0.696             0.546
14   computer/software related                                                                  2281           2118        0.817       0.759             0.232
15   pre school, middle School Teachers                                                         3463           2881        0.817       0.761             0.805
16   Sales Representatives, Wholesale and Manufacturing                                          784            698        0.819       0.780             0.277
17   Surveyors, Cartographers,architects, and Photogrammetrists                                  160            134        0.820       0.786             0.230
18   Engineers                                                                                  1257           1195        0.822       0.810             0.132
19   Lawyers                                                                                     712            628        0.824       0.824             0.345
20   Transportation, industrial,HR, admin managers                                              1880           1780        0.828       0.858             0.403
21   Miscellaneous Community and Social Service Specialists                                     1210           1024        0.829       0.871             0.750
22   Public Relations, Fundraising, advert, marketing                                            709            652        0.831       0.885             0.424
23   astronomers, ennv., physical science                                                        266            246        0.835       0.920             0.368
24   Training and development specialists,business operations                                   2049           1787        0.838       0.953             0.565
25   Other Healthcare Practitioners and health care support                                       50             43        0.838       0.954             0.483
26   Travel,sales Agents                                                                         994            860        0.839       0.962             0.417
27   Financial Analysts,Accountant,Auditors                                                     2021           1785        0.847       1.033             0.516
28   Social sciences                                                                             274            228        0.850       1.053             0.652
29   natural science, biology scientists                                                         208            193        0.856       1.107             0.529
30   Math,stats, operations research, actuaries                                                  116            107        0.872       1.252             0.484
31   curators,librarians,lib technicians                                                         187            142        0.898       1.486             0.762
32   Paralegals,legal support                                                                    359            300        0.901       1.508             0.842

                                                                                                33964          28228       0.797      0.588              0.463

Notes: Data are from the 2003-2014 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The figure is based on 18-65 year old workers. Full-time work and occupations are based on
the main job. We mapped detailed 2002 Census occupation codes to detailed Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes and aggregated to 93 SOC categories.
"Ratio8to5" is the ratio of total hours worked by all full-time workers during the hours 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. relative to total minutes worked in each occupation category.
"Ratio8to5std" reports standardized values with mean zero and standard deviation equal to 1. The table keeps those occupations where the fraction of college
workers in the occupation is greater or equal to 0.4. The bottom row reports sums and (unweighted) means.




                                                                        56
Table 8: Rank Correlations between Importance of Occupational Characteristics
and Ratio8to5


 #Cat.   Name: O*NET Characteristic                                              Corr. Coeff.
   1     Assisting and caring for others                                           -0.1828
   2     Coaching and developing others                                             0.1283
   3     Developing_and_Building_Teams                                              0.1380
   4     Establishing_and_Maintaining_Interpersonal_Relationships                   0.3777
   5     Face-to-Face_Discussions                                                   0.2964
   7     Social orientation                                                         0.1528
   8     Training_and_Teaching_Others                                              -0.0379
  10     Guiding_Directing_and_Motivating_Subordinates                              0.1204

         Concentration Index                                                        0.7544
         Male Overwork                                                              0.1567

 Notes: The table shows rank correlations between the importance of O NET occupational char-
 acteristics and our standardized Ratio8to5 for 93 SOC occupations. The bottom rows show rank
 correlations between Ratio8to5 and our concentration index and between Ratio8to5 and "Male
 Overwork." Ratio8to5 is the ratio of total hours worked by all full-time workers during the hours
 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. relative to total hours worked in each occupation category in the ATUS time diary
 data. O NET defines the importance of occupational characteristics for detailed SOC occupations.
 We aggregate the indexes to our 93 occupations by taking a weighted average where the weights
 are the total number of workers in each detailed SOC occupation. The concentration index is mea-
 sured for 93 occupations and is the Herfindahl index of the share of hours worked in each day of
 the week/hour of day interval. "Male Overwork" is the share of male workers in the occupation
 who worked more than 50 hours per week.




                                               57
Table 9: Gender Gap in Log Weekly Earnings by Coordination Measure Ratio8to5
                                   (1)                     (2)                                       (3)
                                 baseline          baseline+agg educ                     baseline+agg educ+ overwrk

    Panel A: All

    female                       -0.217                       -0.252                                   -0.245
                                  (0.0223)                     (0.0161)                                 (0.0173)

    ratio8to5                    0.119                        0.0668                                   0.0704
                                 (0.0248)                     (0.0260)                                 (0.0263)

    femaleXratio8to5             -0.0472                      -0.0394                                    -0.0321
                                 (0.0250)                     (0.0210)                                  (0.0209)

    Observations                  259565                       259565                                   259565

    Panel B: Single Without Children

    female                       -0.136                       -0.169                                   -0.165
                                  (0.0183)                     (0.0155)                                 (0.0164)

    ratio8to5                    0.106                        0.0617                                   0.0627
                                 (0.0211)                     (0.0281)                                 (0.0277)

    femaleXratio8to5             -0.0151                      -0.0132                                   -0.0102
                                 (0.0203)                     (0.0214)                                  (0.0214)

    Observations                   72299                       72299                                     72299

    Panel C: Married With Children

    female                       -0.261                       -0.295                                   -0.287
                                  (0.0264)                     (0.0186)                                 (0.0197)

    ratio8to5                    0.114                        0.0681                                   0.0727
                                 (0.0280)                     (0.0263)                                 (0.0284)

    femaleXratio8to5             -0.0615                      -0.0548                                  -0.0455
                                 (0.0312)                      (0.0237)                                (0.0237)

    Observations                  108846                       108846                                   108846
    Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.      p < .10,      p < .05,      p < .001. Data are from the 2003-2014 ATUS-CPS files. CPS
    data includes all individuals in the final interview month selected to participate in the ATUS and members of their households.
    The sample includes 18-65 year old workers who reported usual weekly hours 35 and had positive weekly earnings. The
    tables report the coefficients from regression of log weekly earnings on the female dummy, Ratio8to5, and the interaction term.
    Ratio8to5 is measured for 93 occupation categories but we keep only 76 occupations with at least 100 ATUS respondents in the
    regression. Additional controls include a quartic in age, log weekly hours on the main job, education dummies, race dummies,
    and year dummies. Column (2) includes the average education level in the occupation as an additional control. Column (3)
    also includes the share of workers in the occupation who work more than 50 hours per week. Standard errors are clustered at
    the occupation level. Occupations with Ratio8to5 beyond 2 standard deviations from the mean have been dropped.




                                                                     58
Table 10: Log Weekly Earnings of Males by Working Status of Spouse and Coordi-
nation Measure Ratio8to5 ­ Married with Children

                                           (1)                         (2)                             (3)
                                         baseline              baseline+agg educ           baseline+agg educ+ overwrk

 ratio8to5                               0.154                         0.115                             0.117
                                         (0.0330)                      (0.0287)                          (0.0303)

 Spouse PT                                0.0170                        0.0127                             0.0122
                                         (0.0112)                      (0.0112)                           (0.0114)

 Spouse FT                              -0.0417                        -0.0471                          -0.0461
                                         (0.0138)                       (0.0139)                         (0.0133)

 Spouse PT X ratio8to5                  -0.0381                    -0.0440                              -0.0435
                                         (0.0111)                   (0.0101)                             (0.0100)

 Spouse FT X ratio8to5                 -0.0534                     -0.0570                              -0.0574
                                        (0.0142)                    (0.0146)                             (0.0143)

 Observations                             67058                         67058                              67058
 Standard errors in parentheses.      p < .10,      p < .05,      p < .001. Data are from 2003-2014 ATUS-CPS files. CPS data include
 individuals in the final interview month selected to participate in the ATUS and members of their households. The sample includes
 married men with children who are full-time workers and are 18-65 years old. "Spouse PT" is an indicator of a male worker who
 has a part-time working spouse. Similarly, "Spouse FT" refers to a male with a full-time working spouse. Additional controls
 include a quartic in age, log weekly hours on the main job, education dummies, race dummies, and year dummies. Column (2)
 includes the average education level in the occupation as additional control. Column (3) also includes the share of workers in the
 occupation who work more than 50 hours per week. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation level. Occupations where
 less than 100 ATUS respondents are used as well as those with Ratio8to5 beyond 2 standard deviations from the mean have been
 dropped.




                                                                  59
                    Table 11: A Simple Case with Gender Differences

Occupation                   % Workers     Bunching Ratio    Earnings    l1 + l2    l     % Females      E. Gap

(1)                              (2)             (3)            (4)        (5)     (6)        (7)         (8)


Panel A: No Gender Differences

1                               0.49            0.58            0.41      0.83     0.80
2                               0.51            0.53            0.39      0.81     0.80



Panel B: Gender-Specific 

1                               0.44            0.55            0.46      0.91     0.90        0
2                               0.56            0.52            0.35      0.73     0.73       89

Gender Earnings Gap          1.031


Panel C: Gender-Specific  and Tastes

1                               0.50            0.60            0.40      0.81     0.79       50          1.05
2                               0.50            0.51            0.40      0.81     0.80       50          1.00

Gender Earnings Gap          1.026

Note: This table shows the results of the numerical exercises described in Section 5. Panel A refers to the
case with no gender differences, i.e. homogeneous agents. Panel B is the case with gender differences in the
preferences for household care, governed by parameter . Panel C describes the same case of Panel B but we
add gender specific taste shocks. Panel D describes the case of a reduction in the elasticity of substitution
in household care time during the day. Column (1) refers to the different occupations considered, 1 and 2.
Column (2) describes the share of total workers in each occupation. Column (3) is the bunching ratio as
defined in Section 2. Column (4) contains the earnings in equilibrium in each occupation. Column (5) contains
the total number of working hours in each occupation. Column (6) presents the total number of effective hours,
Column (7) the share of females in each occupation, and Column (8) the gender gap in earnings per hour in
each occupation. Finally, in Panel B, C, and D, the table reports the ratio of earnings of males over females for
the whole economy, denoted as the gender earnings gap.




                                                       60
                                                Table 12: Moments
Occupation no.      Occupation                                                    Labor Share      8to5ratio    Av. Earn. Per Hour        % Fem.
      1             Management                                                       0.185           0.807             1.00                0.31
        2           Business and financial operations                                 0.062          0.856               0.90               0.52
        3           Computer and mathematical                                         0.053          0.837               1.08               0.22
        4           Architecture and engineering                                      0.042          0.825               1.03               0.08
        5           Life, physical, and social science                                0.014          0.830               0.96               0.34
        6           Community and social service occupations                          0.016          0.778               0.67               0.54
        7           Legal                                                             0.021          0.863               1.09               0.46
        8           Education, training, and library                                  0.069          0.834               0.72               0.72
        9           Arts, design, entertainment, sports, and media                    0.014          0.817               0.82               0.33
       10           Healthcare practitioners and technical                            0.068          0.723               0.88               0.70
       11           Healthcare support                                                0.009          0.710               0.42               0.87
       12           Protective service                                                0.030          0.592               0.73               0.12
       13           Food preparation and serving related                              0.012          0.604               0.37               0.46
       14           Building and grounds cleaning and maintenance                     0.017          0.715               0.40               0.31
       15           Personal care and service                                         0.008          0.667               0.42               0.73
       16           Sales and related                                                 0.091          0.788               0.72               0.34
       17           Office and administrative support                                 0.085          0.826               0.54               0.72
       18           Farming, fishing, and forestry                                    0.004          0.627               0.33               0.24
       19           Construction and extraction                                       0.055          0.791               0.62               0.01
       20           Installation, maintenance, and repair                             0.042          0.764               0.65               0.03
       21           Production                                                        0.057          0.648               0.52               0.23
       22           Transportation and material moving                                0.045          0.659               0.51               0.11
Note: The table presents the occupational level moments we use in our calibration. Labor shares are calculated by dividing the total earnings of
workers in each occupation by the total mass of earnings in the sample. The 8to5ratio is our measure of coordination using time use data obtained
as we explain in the text. We also report the average earnings per hour of workers in each of the occupations ( Av.Earn. PerHour) and the share of
females in the total number of workers in each occupation (% Fem.).




                                                             61
                                   Table 13: Model Fit


Panel A: Occupational-level Moments

Moment                                                        Correlation Coeff. Model-Data
Labor Shares                                                               1.00
8to5ratio                                                                     1.00
Average Earnings Per Hour                                                     1.00
% Females                                                                     0.98
Occupational Shares                                                           0.84


Panel B: Economy-wide Moments

Moment                                              Data                    Model
Av. Hours Worked Male                               0.63                     0.61
Av. Hours Worked Female                              0.54                     0.47
8to5ratio Work/8to5ratio Household Care              2.03                     2.06
Note: The table shows the model fit by comparing the value of the targeted moments in the data
and in the model. For the economy-wide moments we show their values in the data and in the
model (Panel A). For the occupational-level targeted moments we show in Panel B, for each targeted
moment, the correlation across occupations between the value of the moments in the data and in the
model. In the case of average hours targeted, they are as a percentage of an assumed time allocation
of 10 hours a day.




                                             62
                                    Table 14: Parameter Values


Panel A: Occupational-specific Parameters

Occupation no.      Occupation                                                                       A       Tf      Tm

        1           Management                                                   0.185     1.02     0.87    4.61    1.22
        2           Business and financial operations                            0.062     0.82     0.40    8.03    0.70
        3           Computer and mathematical                                    0.053     0.65     0.57    2.06    0.86
        4           Architecture and engineering                                 0.042     0.64     0.77    0.65    0.82
        5           Life, physical, and social science                           0.014     0.81     2.36    0.87    0.22
        6           Community and social service occupations                     0.016     1.50     1.12    2.55    0.39
        7           Legal                                                        0.021     0.65     1.87    1.56    0.20
        8           Education, training, and library                             0.069     1.41     0.23   21.16    0.29
        9           Arts, design, entertainment, sports, and media               0.014     0.92     2.00    1.00    0.27
       10           Healthcare practitioners and technical                       0.068     2.69     0.36   13.88    0.25
       11           Healthcare support                                           0.009     2.92     1.55    4.69    0.13
       12           Protective service                                           0.030    47.05     1.01    0.84    0.83
       13           Food preparation and serving related                         0.012    166.82    1.16    3.93    0.62
       14           Building and grounds cleaning and maintenance                0.017     2.25     0.73    4.03    0.99
       15           Personal care and service                                    0.008     3.73     2.30    3.63    0.10
       16           Sales and related                                            0.091     1.31     0.98    5.63    1.13
       17           Office and administrative support                            0.085     1.49     0.10   45.49    0.57
       18           Farming, fishing, and forestry                               0.004    66.19     3.73    0.65    0.31
       19           Construction and extraction                                  0.055     0.85     0.54    0.18    1.98
       20           Installation, maintenance, and repair                        0.042     1.16     0.51    0.37    1.68
       21           Production                                                   0.057     3.56     0.38    5.36    2.22
       22           Transportation and material moving                           0.045     2.94     0.71    1.63    1.75


Panel B: Rest of Parameters


                                                                                  0.46
f                                                                                 0.40
m                                                                                 0.55
Note: Panel A shows the values of the parameters that are specific to the different occupations and Panel B the values
obtained for the utility function, m and  f , for males and females, respectively. In addition, Panel B presents the value
obtained for the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution of the technology for household care, .




                                                     63
            Table 15: Regressions: Model vs. Data

                        Data                    Model

female                -0.272                     -0.07
                       (0.004)                  (0.17)

ratio8to5             0.086                     0.30
                       (0.002)                   (nil )

femaleXratio8to5      -0.015                     -0.05
                       (0.004)                  (0.23)
Standard errors in parentheses.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Note: This table shows the estimates of the regression using the data
for married workers with children (column Data) and the estimates of
the same regression using data generated by the model in its baseline
calibration (column Model). The dependent variable is earnings per
hour.




                                 64
               Table 16: Gender Earnings Gap (%)

                            Overall       Between     Between      Within
                                                     (Sorting)

Data                          22.9         -3.9           -          26.8
Baseline                       6.6          0.4           -           6.2
Equal  ( = 2.92)               2.7          0.5         -0.1          2.2
50% Drop in m -  f             6.8          3.7         -0.4          3.1
Increase in                    7.2          2.7          0.3          4.5
Note: The table shows the overall gender wage gap (Overall) and its
decomposition into the portion explained by the differences in the gen-
der wage gap across occupations (Across) and the portion explained by
differences in earnings between males and females within occupations
(Within). The column labeled Between (Sorting) shows a between gen-
der gap when earnings across occupations and occupation sizes are fixed
at their Baseline values. The table shows the values in the data, in the
baseline economy and in two counterfactual economies: (i) when the pa-
rameter  is the same across occupations and equal to 2.92 (the one cor-
responding to Healthcare support), (ii) when the difference between the
values for m and  f decreases by 50%, and (iii) when  ­ the parameter
that drives the elasticity of substitution between child care across the two
time periods ­ rises from about 0.46 to 0.65.




                                     65
Appendix

Table A.1: Classification of Activities among Routine Care, Enrichment Care, and
Other

  Routine Childcare
  030101                                       Physical care of household children
  030101                                       Physical care of household children
  030301                                       Providing medical care to household children
  Enriching childcare (children of all ages)
  030102                                       Reading to/with household children
  030103                                       Playing with household children, not sports
  030104                                       Arts and crafts with household children
  030105                                       Playing sports with household children
  030106                                       Talking with/listening to household children
  030107                                       Helping/teaching household children (not related to education)
  030201                                       Homework (household children)
  030203                                       Homeschooling of household children
  030101                                       Physical care of household children
  030101                                       Physical care of household children
  030301                                       Providing medical care to household children
  Enriching childcare (children ages 2+)
  1201                                         Socializing and communicating
  120307                                       Playing games
  120309                                       Arts and crafts as a hobby
  120310                                       Collecting as a hobby
  120311                                       Hobbies, except arts 8c crafts and collecting
  120401                                       Attending performances
  120402                                       Attending museums
  120403                                       Attending movies/films
  1301                                         Participating in sports
  1302                                         Attending sporting event
  Other childcare
  030108                                       Organization and planning for household children
  030110                                       Attending household children's events
  030111                                       Waiting for/with household children
  030112                                       Picking up/dropping off household children
  030199                                       Caring for and helping household children, not elsewhere classified
  030202                                       Meetings and school conferences (household children)
  030204                                       Waiting associated with household children's education
  030299                                       Activities related to household children's education, not elsewhere classified
  030302                                       Obtaining medical care for household children
  030303                                       Waiting associated with household children's health
  030399                                       Activities related to household children's health, not elsewhere classified
  170301                                       Travel related to caring for and helping household children
  180301                                       Travel related to caring for and helping household children
  180302                                       Travel related to household children's education
  180303                                       Travel related to household children's health
  Note. A child must be present during enriching care activities. For children ages 2+, enriching childcare includes leisure activities
  during which the child was present (see text for further details).




                                                                  66
Table A.2: Gender Gap in Log Weekly Earnings ­ Married with Children, by
College/Non-College
                           (1)               (2)                            (3)
                         baseline    baseline+agg educ          baseline+agg educ+ overwrk

    Panel A: College
    female               -0.169           -0.212                           -0.216
                          (0.0407)         (0.0265)                         (0.0297)

    ratio8to5            0.149            0.0817                            0.102
                         (0.0423)         (0.0368)                          (0.0457)

    femaleXratio8to5     -0.158            -0.114                          -0.0810
                         (0.0542)          (0.0402)                         (0.0388)

    Observations          42929             42929                            42929

    Panel B: Non-College
    female            -0.286              -0.326                           -0.324
                       (0.0206)            (0.0197)                         (0.0202)

    ratio8to5            0.110            0.0744                            0.0746
                         (0.0282)         (0.0307)                          (0.0310)

    femaleXratio8to5     -0.0480          -0.0579                          -0.0558
                         (0.0277)          (0.0266)                         (0.0266)

    Observations          65917           65917                              65917
                                            
    Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. p < .10,               
                                                           p < .05,     p < .001. Data are from 2003-
    2014 ATUS-CPS files. CPS data includes all individuals in the final interview month selected to
    participate in the ATUS and members of their households. The sample includes 18-65 year old
    workers who reported usual weekly hours 35, had positive weekly earnings, and are married
    with at least one own child in the household. "College" refers to those who hold at least a
    bachelors degree. The tables report coefficients from regression of log weekly earnings on female
    dummy, Ratio8to5, and the interaction term. Ratio8to5 is measured for 93 occupation categories
    but we keep only 76 occupations with at least 100 ATUS respondents in the regression. Additional
    controls include a quartic in age, log weekly hours on the main job, education dummies, race
    dummies, and year dummies. Column (2) includes the average education level in the occupation
    as additional control. Column (3) also includes the share of workers in the occupation who work
    more than 50 hours per week. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation level. Occupations
    with Ratio8to5 beyond 2 standard deviations from the mean have been dropped.




                                                    67
Table A.3: Gender Gap in Log Weekly Earnings: Omitting Occupations with More
than 12 Percent Evening and Night Shift Workers
                                   (1)                     (2)                                       (3)
                                 baseline          baseline+agg educ                     baseline+agg educ+ overwrk

    Panel A: All

    female                       -0.181                       -0.240                                   -0.239
                                  (0.0511)                     (0.0351)                                 (0.0349)

    ratio8to5                    0.110                        0.0606                                    0.112
                                 (0.0365)                     (0.0328)                                  (0.0387)

    femaleXratio8to5              -0.102                       -0.0566                                   -0.0448
                                 (0.0602)                     (0.0451)                                  (0.0459)
    Observations                  196165                       196165                                    196165

    Panel B: Single Without Children

    female                       -0.127                       -0.173                                   -0.172
                                 (0.0472)                      (0.0319)                                 (0.0312)

    ratio8to5                    0.0978                        0.0571                                  0.0909
                                 (0.0343)                     (0.0345)                                 (0.0380)

    femaleXratio8to5             -0.0401                      -0.0125                                  -0.00857
                                 (0.0579)                     (0.0434)                                 (0.0436)
    Observations                  51117                        51117                                    51117

    Panel C: Married With Children

    female                       -0.196                       -0.255                                   -0.255
                                  (0.0497)                     (0.0384)                                 (0.0387)

    ratio8to5                    0.117                        0.0741                                    0.126
                                 (0.0398)                     (0.0345)                                  (0.0415)

    femaleXratio8to5             -0.153                       -0.107                                   -0.0916
                                 (0.0604)                     (0.0497)                                 (0.0505)
    Observations                  86498                        86498                                    86498
    Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.      p < .10,      p < .05,      p < .001. Data are from the 2003-2014 ATUS-CPS files. CPS
    data includes all individuals in the final interview month selected to participate in the ATUS and members of their households.
    The sample includes 18-65 year old workers who reported usual weekly hours 35 and had positive weekly earnings. The
    table reports the coefficients from regression of log weekly earnings on the female dummy, Ratio8to5, and the interaction term.
    Ratio8to5 is measured for 93 occupation categories but we keep only 76 occupations with at least 100 ATUS respondents in the
    regression. Additional controls include a quartic polynomial in age, log weekly hours on the main job, education dummies,
    race dummies, and year dummies. Share of workers in the occupation who are evening and night shift workers was calculated
    using the May 2004 Work Schedule Supplement and merged with the individual level CPS data. Occupations in which more
    than 12 percent report working evening and night shifts were omitted from the regressions. This cutoff results in deleting
    the top quartile of occupations based on this measure which reduces the number of occupations to 55. Column (2) includes
    the average education level in the occupation as an additional control. Column (3) also includes the share of workers in the
    occupation who work more than 50 hours per week. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation level. Occupations with
    Ratio8to5 beyond 2 standard deviations from the mean have been dropped.




                                                                     68
 Table A.4: Gender Gap in Log Weekly Earnings by Concentration Index
                        (1)               (2)                           (3)
                      baseline    baseline+agg educ         baseline+agg educ+ overwrk

Panel A: All
female                -0.237           -0.270                          -0.258
                       (0.0194)         (0.0175)                        (0.0187)

conc index            0.119            0.0698                          0.0797
                      (0.0224)         (0.0239)                        (0.0239)

femaleXconc index     -0.0678          -0.0532                         -0.0470
                       (0.0237)         (0.0205)                        (0.0203)

Observations           259565           259565                          259565

Panel B: Single Without Children
female               -0.145            -0.177                          -0.172
                      (0.0174)          (0.0179)                        (0.0187)

conc index            0.113            0.0724                          0.0770
                      (0.0190)         (0.0255)                        (0.0248)

femaleXconc index     -0.0353          -0.0295                          -0.0257
                      (0.0205)         (0.0208)                        (0.0204)

Observations            72299            72299                          72299

Panel C: Married With Children
female              -0.284             -0.317                          -0.305
                     (0.0205)           (0.0188)                        (0.0200)

conc index            0.111            0.0670                          0.0783
                      (0.0250)         (0.0242)                        (0.0262)

femaleXconc index     -0.0831          -0.0680                         -0.0612
                       (0.0290)         (0.0238)                        (0.0242)

Observations           108846           108846                          108846
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .001. Data are from 2003-
2014 ATUS-CPS files. CPS data includes all individuals in the final interview month selected to
participate in the ATUS and members of their households. The sample includes 18-65 year old
workers who reported usual weekly hours 35 and had positive weekly earnings. "Concentration
Index" is measured for 93 occupations and is the Herfindahl index of the share of hours worked
in each day of the week/hour of day interval. The tables report coefficients from regression of
log weekly earnings on female dummy, concentration index and the interaction term. Additional
controls include a quartic in age, log weekly hours on the main job, education dummies, race
dummies, and year dummies. Column (2) includes the average education level in the occupation
as additional control. Column (3) also includes the share of workers in the occupation who work
more than 50 hours per week. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation level.




                                             69
