                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     BALANCE SHEET INSOLVENCY AND CONTRIBUTION REVENUE IN PUBLIC
                             CHARITIES

                                         Tatiana Homonoff
                                         Thomas L. Spreen
                                          Travis St.Clair

                                       Working Paper 26546
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26546


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




We gratefully acknowledge Thad Calabrese, Jacob Goldin, Ben Marx, Alex Rees-Jones, Dan
Tinkelman, and Job White as well as seminar and conference participants at New York
University, University of Maryland, NTA, APPAM, and ABFM for conversations and
suggestions that have greatly improved the quality of this project. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Tatiana Homonoff, Thomas L. Spreen, and Travis St.Clair. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Balance Sheet Insolvency and Contribution Revenue in Public Charities
Tatiana Homonoff, Thomas L. Spreen, and Travis St.Clair
NBER Working Paper No. 26546
December 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. H31,L31

                                           ABSTRACT

Using Form 990 data reported by public charities, we document significant bunching of
nonprofits at near-zero net assets, the threshold for insolvency. Bunching occurs despite the fact
that creditors cannot force insolvent nonprofits into involuntary bankruptcy. We show that the
extent of bunching is greater among organizations that rely more heavily on contribution revenue,
and that by inflating their net assets, bunching organizations are able to increase their contribution
revenue relative to firms that report negative net assets. Charitable donors appear to use the net
assets threshold as a heuristic for a charity's financial health; nonprofit managers, in turn, respond
to the preferences of their donors.

Tatiana Homonoff                                  Travis St.Clair
New York University                               New York University
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service         Robert F. Wagner
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor                   School of Public Service
New York, NY 10012                                295 Lafayette St, 2nd Fl
and NBER                                          New York, NY 10012
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu                          travis.stclair@nyu.edu

Thomas L. Spreen
University of Maryland School of Public Policy
4139B Van Munching Hall
7699 Mowatt Lane
College Park, MD 20742
tlspreen@umd.edu
I. Introduction
One of the key features that distinguishes for-prot and nonprot entities in the United


States is how federal law treats them in insolvency. The bankruptcy code permits creditors


of for-prot corporations to le involuntary bankruptcy petitions, and consequently the


typical outcome for corporations that are unable to service their debts is either liquidation


or restructuring.   This is not the case for nonprot rms, whose creditors cannot initiate


involuntary bankruptcy proceedings. Instead, the decision to liquidate or re-structure lies


with a nonprot organization's board of directors (Peterman and Morissette, 2004).


   As such, insolvency may be less immediately consequential for nonprot organizations.


This is especially the case with balance sheet insolvency, in which an organization's liabilities


exceed its assets. Balance sheet insolvency diers from cash-ow insolvency insofar as an


organization may be insolvent on the books but still able to meet its near-term obligations.


Nevertheless, nonprot organizations that are balance sheet insolvent may face incentives to


report otherwise if doing so helps to preserve their reputation with important stakeholders.


   In the case of nonprots, the most important stakeholders are typically donors. Donor


contributions are the primary source of revenue for the average public charity; Internal Rev-


enue Service Form 990 data show the median nonprot receives 52 percent of its revenue


from contributions.   Consequently, how donors allocate their charitable contributions has


signicant implications for the strategic decisions of nonprot rms. If donors use balance


sheet solvency as a heuristic for assessing the nancial health and viability of organizations


(rather than the underlying value of net assets) when deciding where to allocate their char-


itable dollars, insolvent organizations may have an incentive to report nancials that place


them just above the insolvency threshold.


   We investigate this question using data from the National Center for Charitable Statistics


Core Financial Files, which include all 501c(3) public charities in the United States - a panel


of nearly half a million public charities spanning 2005 to 2015. Using nancial information


reported in the Internal Revenue Service's Form 990 or 990-EZ, we examine whether charities



                                               2
manipulate their income to avoid insolvency, and explore the consequences of this behavior.


We start by documenting two features of the distribution of nonprots. First, a considerable


number of charities are balance sheet insolvent. Approximately seven percent of charities


report negative net assets, or more than 22,000 charities in 2015 alone. Second, we document


signicant bunching at zero net assets.     We examine several explanations for this result


and nd that the bunching is not solely a product of organization age, transfers between


organizations, or a desire to spend down resources.    Instead, a substantial portion of the


bunching we observe appears to be due to income manipulation rather than any quirk of


nonprot nancial reporting.


   To quantify the magnitude of the behavioral response, we estimate the size of the excess


mass just above the insolvency threshold using methods from the bunching literature (Chetty


et al., 2011; Dee et al., 2019; Diamond and Persson, 2016; Kleven and Waseem, 2013). The


size of the excess mass suggests that 0.2 percent of all public charities engage in income


manipulation at the threshold. For context, this estimate is roughly twice the size of the


observed behavioral response to the requirement that nonprots le the Form 990 (Marx,


2018).   This corresponds to an 8 percent probability that charities falling just below the


threshold inate their net assets so as to appear solvent.


   Next, we explore the characteristics of bunching organizations using methods described


in Diamond and Persson (2016).     We nd that bunching is most common among smaller


organizations that receive a large proportion of their revenues from charitable contributions


rather than from program fees. We nd that our bunching estimates increase monotonically


with the percent of revenues from contributions and that the extent of bunching is approx-


imately ve times greater for organizations in the highest quartile of contribution revenue


than for rms in the lowest quartile. These ndings are consistent with a model in which


nonprots are motivated to manipulate their nancial reporting in order to appear balance


sheet solvent so as to appeal to their donor base.


   Finally, we exploit the panel structure of our data to examine the consequences of bunch-




                                              3
ing by comparing outcomes in later years for charities that manipulated their nancial re-


porting to the outcomes of charities that were eligible to bunch but did not. Motivated by


our prior ndings, we rst consider the eect of bunching on contribution revenue. We nd


no evidence of an eect of bunching on contribution revenue in the year that an organiza-


tion bunches, consistent with the timing of the release of nancial statements. However, we


observe that bunching leads to an increase in contribution revenue in subsequent years 


charities near the threshold in year   t   experience a signicant 7 percent increase in contribu-


tion revenue in each of the following three years, suggesting that donors are more likely to


contribute to charities just above the insolvency threshold. We also nd that bunching leads


to small but statistically signicant increases in attrition. These exiting rms are smaller


and more likely to report exactly zero net assets, evidence consistent with a model in which


a subset of rms that bunch do so to deplete their assets in the year that they discontinue


operations. These extensive margin eects do not substantively change our ndings on the


eects of bunching on contribution revenue.


   Our analysis contributes to several strands of the literature on charitable giving and the


private provision of public goods. First, we document new features of donor preferences and


the allocation of charitable giving. Our ndings are consistent with previous work showing


that donors consider the nancial health of the organizations to which they contribute.


Prior research indicates that donors are sensitive to the amount of cash charities have on


hand (Calabrese, 2011), their degree of leverage (Calabrese and Grizzle, 2012), and the


amount of program revenue they earn (Okten and Weisbrod, 2000). Moreover, there is also


clear evidence that nonprots shift their behavior in response to these donor preferences


(Calabrese, 2013; Krishnan and Yetman, 2011).


   We also contribute to the behavioral economics literature on decision-making heuristics in


charitable giving. For example, Karlan and List (2007) suggest that donors use the presence


of a donation match as a heuristic for the price of giving: donors are more likely to contribute


when there is a match, but are insensitive to the size of the match. Yoruk (2016) documents




                                                  4
a jump in contributions for charities just above the threshold for receiving an additional


star on Charity Navigator, a third-party rating agency, relative to charities just below the


threshold, suggesting that donors respond to simplied benchmarks of nancial health. In


our context, donors may regard balance sheet solvency as a heuristic for nancial health,


which they use to simplify decision-making on how to best allocate scarce donative resources.


Our results are also consistent with ndings that individuals bunch at salient reference points


 such as zero tax liability (Rees-Jones, 2017) or round-numbered marathon nishing times


(Allen et al., 2016)  due to loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979).        Again, in our


context, this would suggest that loss-averse donors avoid charities whose net assets fall below


the donor's reference point of zero.


   Finally, we build on a number of recent papers that have used bunching methods to study


income manipulation among nonprot rms. Marx (2018) shows that the average charity


reduces reported income by $750-$1000 in order to avoid ling the full version of the Form


990, the information return required by the IRS of all tax-exempt organizations. St. Clair


(2016) demonstrates how charities manipulate their revenues to avoid state audit require-


ments.   While the current paper also uses bunching methods to understand the strategic


responses of rms, it diers from these other papers in that the observed bunching is not


driven by a regulatory requirement, but rather by preferences of key stakeholders.


   This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on insolvency and non-


prot nance.     Section 3 describes the data and provides summary statistics.        Section 4


presents graphical evidence of bunching at zero net assets and quanties the size of the


behavioral response. Section 5 examines the characteristics of bunching charities and pro-


vides motivation for the empirical analyses. Section 6 evaluates the eects of bunching on


charitable contributions as well as other nancial metrics. Section 7 concludes.




                                              5
II. Background on Nonprot Finance and Insolvency
An entity is generally recognized as insolvent when it is unable to meet its outstanding


obligations in full and on time. There are two versions of insolvency: cash ow insolvency


and balance sheet insolvency. Cash ow insolvency occurs when an organization is unable to


meet its near-term obligations due to liquidity constraints. Balance sheet insolvency occurs


when a rm's total liabilities exceed its total assets; the organization is insolvent on the

                                                                        1
books even if it is able to service its debts in the near term.


    Under federal law, bankruptcy lings typically focus on whether or not an entity is


paying its debts as they become due, i.e. whether it is cash-ow insolvent. In the private


sector, the duciary duty of the directors of for-prot companies is to serve the interest of

                                                                                                           2
their company's shareholders, who own the residual (surplus) value of assets over liabilities.


Once a for-prot corporation is unable to pay its debts, its creditors gain standing to le an


involuntary bankruptcy petition under the United States Bankruptcy Code. A company may


also voluntarily discharge its debts through liquidation under Chapter 7 of the United States


Bankruptcy Code or reorganize under Chapter 11, and there are also separate considerations


beyond liquidity that contribute to the decision to enter bankruptcy, including bankruptcy


costs, tax considerations, and the ranking of interest in distributing the company's liquidated


value (Bulow and Shoven, 1978; White, 1989). So long as a for-prot corporation is able to


service its debts in the near-term, its creditors may not necessarily have standing to petition


for involuntary bankruptcy, even if it is balance sheet insolvent (McCoid, 1987).


    In the case of nonprot organizations, creditors are ineligible to force the rm into


bankruptcy, regardless of whether it is cash-ow or balance-sheet insolvent.                     While sol-


vent, the duciary duty of nonprot directors is to fulll its chartered mission. Similar to


for-prots, this duty expands to include the interests of the organization's creditors once

   1 Financial statements are typically prepared under the assumption that the reporting entity will continue
to operate as a going concern.   If liquidation is imminent, then generally accepted accounting principles
require that nancial statements be prepared under the liquidation basis of accounting (FASB, 2014).
   2 A company's residual value is captured in the shareholders' equity account on the balance sheet. Net
assets are the nonprot equivalent of shareholders' equity.




                                                     6
the nonprot approaches insolvency. Regardless, federal law does not permit a nonprot's


creditors to sue nonprot directors, and U.S. courts have not recognized those creditors as


holding a residual interest in the organization (Elliot and Hollander, 2014). While the direc-


tors of an insolvent nonprot organization are advised to take their creditors' interests into


account, their legal duty is to fulll the organization's mission, even if that comes at their


creditors' expense (Peterman and Morissette, 2004).


   If insolvency does not have immediate legal ramications for the nonprot sector, then


what incentives do organizations have to maintain positive net assets?      Despite a lack of


owners to lay claim to surpluses (the nondistribution constraint) and research that nds


that nonprots are not revenue-maximizing (Okten and Weisbrod, 2000), nonprot managers


may wish to preserve the long-term viability of the organization so as to collect salaries and


continue the rm's mission.     This viability may be threatened if donors or other external


parties attach negative consequences to a designation of insolvency.


   In this paper, we focus on balance sheet insolvency because it is directly observable


- and potentially salient - to anyone with access to nancial information about the rm.


The ability of donors and external parties to observe the nancial position of nonprot


organizations has grown in recent years with the ubiquity of third-party rating agencies


such as Charity Navigator and GuideStar. These sites compile and report on the nancial


position of nonprot organizations based on information extracted from their annual Form


990 information returns led with the Internal Revenue Service. Indeed, GuideStar reports


specically on whether an organization has reported negative net assets in the last ve years,


while Charity Navigator reports on an organization's ratio of liabilities to assets. Thus, even


for unsophisticated donors with little nancial knowledge, information on the insolvency


threshold is available and potentially salient.




                                                  7
III. Data and Summary Statistics
Our data source is the National Center for Charitable Statistics' (NCCS) 2005-2015 Core


Financial Files for public charities, which are based on the IRS' annual Return Transaction


Files.   The public charities core les contain approximately 50 nancial variables for all


501c(3) public charities reporting at least $50,000 in gross receipts that led either the Form

                               3
990 or the Form 990 EZ.            The public charities les contain data only on 501c(3) public


charities, and consequently our analysis does not include private foundations or exempt

                                          4
organizations that are not 501c(3)s . The data contain information on 578,282 charities for


a total of just under 3.5 million annual returns.




A. Graphical Evidence of Bunching and Sample Selection

Figure 1a presents a density plot of public charities using the raw data, with the x-axis show-

                                                                                                          5
ing net assets scaled by total assets and the y-axis showing the number of organization-years.


The gure shows substantial bunching just above the insolvency threshold. This bunching


occurs despite the fact that there is no discontinuity in policy such as the requirement for


organizations above a certain threshold to be audited, as in other analyses of bunching in


the nonprot sector (St. Clair, 2016; Marx, 2018).


    To investigate whether the bunching we observe is due to income manipulation rather


than other factors unrelated to rm responses, we impose several sample restrictions. Ap-


pendix Table 1 summarizes the restrictions and their eect on the size of the sample. These


restrictions are most likely conservative and, if anything, bias our bunching estimates down-


wards. First, to ensure that the bunching we observe is not simply a matter of data quality,

   3 The Form 990 is an information return required by the IRS of all tax-exempt organizations. Organiza-
tions with gross receipts of less than $200,000 and total assets of less than $500,000 can le the Form 990
EZ, a simpler version of the form. Organizations with gross receipts of less than $50,000 can le the Form
990-N (e-Postcard).
   4 Private foundations le a separate return, the Form 990-PF, which contains similar information as the
Form 990. Because of dierences in reporting and variable denitions, we do not include private foundations
in our analysis. However, we report on a separate analysis of Form 990-PF data in footnote 13.
   5 Scaling by total assets enables us to examine organizations of disparate size. For the remainder of the
paper we use `net assets' as a shorthand for net assets as a share of total assets.



                                                      8
whereby missing observations are coded as exact zeroes, we exclude charity-year observations


with missing assets, observations with reported assets of zero or 1, and charities with con-

                                                  6
secutive years of precisely zero net assets.          To ensure that bunching is not merely a feature


of new charities, which are unlikely to accumulate signicant net assets in their rst year


of operation, we exclude organizations that have been in operation for less than ve years,


where age is based on the year in which the IRS recognized the organization's tax exempt

       7
status.    Next, to allow for the possibility that some tax-exempt organizations may seek to


spend down their resources each year, we exclude organizations that report an average net


income of exactly zero and organizations that never report any contribution revenue. Finally,


we consider whether bunching may be driven by subsidiary organizations that transfer all


of their fund balance at year's end to a parent organization. We do nd cases of charities


who provide specialized services in the form of fund-raising or investment management for a


closely related organization and who frequently transfer net assets. Consequently we remove


all charities that are deemed supporting public charities. These restrictions leave us with


a nal sample of 2,182,693 observations and 331,568 distinct charities.


    Figure 1b repeats the analysis in Figure 1a after cleaning the data (i.e., the rst restriction


in Appendix Table 1), while Figure 1c shows the nal sample. We nd that the extent of


bunching declines due to these restrictions, as expected; however, we still observe substantial


bunching just above the insolvency threshold. This suggests that the bunching we observe


in our nal sample is likely to be due to charities manipulating their net assets rather than


any structural features of nonprot nancial reporting.

   6 While our nal sample includes charities that report one year of precisely zero net assets, which could
be consistent with income manipulation, we continue to observe substantial bunching even when we remove
all exact zeros. Insofar as these exact zeros may be more likely to represent a reporting response rather than
true change in the net assets of the rm, this nding suggests that at least a portion of the bunching we
observe is due to a change in rm operations.
   7 Appendix Figure 1 shows density distributions for charities that have been in operation for dierent
lengths of time, ranging from 2 to 24 years.    While the extent of bunching declines somewhat with age,
bunching persists even among organizations that have been in existence for decades.




                                                       9
B. Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics for the nal sample. The nancial variables are highly


skewed, and consequently for the analyses in sections 5 and 6 we apply log transformations


to the outcome variables of interest.          There are two features of the data that are worth


highlighting.    First, a very large fraction of public charities have either no or very low


liabilities. The median charity in our sample has a net assets to total assets ratio of 0.97,


implying that liabilities are only three percent of assets; the mean is 0.74. While only about


63 percent of the organizations in the sample earn program revenue  revenue earned through


the provision of goods or services to clients  those that do engage in revenue-generating


activities collect more revenue on average from their programs than from contributions. The


median charity in the nal sample collects 52 percent of their revenues from contributions.


Second, approximately six percent of the charities in our analytic sample  and seven percent

                                                                                                          8
in the raw data  report liabilities in excess of assets, i.e., are balance sheet insolvent.


The relatively large proportion of insolvent rms highlights that nonprots can continue to


operate unimpeded with negative net assets.




IV. Bunching at Zero Net Assets

A. Measuring the Excess Mass

We employ standard methods for measuring the extent of bunching and the size of the


behavioral response. The bunching design was rst introduced by Saez (2010) and further


developed by Chetty et al. (2011) and Kleven and Waseem (2013) to identify tax-induced

   8 Bowman (2011) draws a distinction between for-prot and nonprot balance sheet insolvency, arguing
that nonprots are balance sheet insolvent when their unrestricted net assets, rather than total net assets,
drop below zero, since organizations with negative unrestricted net assets will be unable to discharge their
obligations to their creditors. However, we focus on total net assets because it is more salient to users of
nancial statements and also because it is among the nancial metrics highlighted by GuideStar and Charity
Navigator. Moreover, while we observe bunching at zero unrestricted net assets, the majority of charities
do not report temporarily or permanently restricted net assets, and consequently most of the bunching
observable in unrestricted net assets represents overlap with bunching in total net assets.




                                                     10
behavior distortions using kink points in tax schedules. Although initially developed to study


the elasticity of taxable income, it has since been employed to study behavioral responses


in other contexts, including among small businesses (Onji, 2009) and nonprots (St. Clair,


2016; Marx, 2018).


   The basic bunching design divides the running variable into bins and counts the number


of observations within each bin. The number of excess bins on one side of the threshold is


then compared to a counterfactual distribution in which no bunching occurs, with the iden-


tifying assumption being that the counterfactual distribution is smooth across the threshold.


Borrowing the notation of Kleven (2016), we estimate bunching as follows:



                                       p                   z+
                                                   i
                               cj =         i · (zj ) +          j · 1[zj = i] + vj                            (1)
                                      i=0                 i=z-

   where     cj   represents the number of organizations in bin               j   and   z   represents the level of


                                                                 j
scaled net assets (net assets / total assets) in bin . The left-hand side of the equation repre-


sents the counterfactual, estimated as a polynomial function that expresses the association


between the organization count and net assets, with                  p   as the degree of the polynomial. We


use a fourth order polynomial based on the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), which


decreases monotonically for polynomials of order one through four before increasing when


we add a fth order polynomial (see Appendix Table 2). The right-hand side measures the


extent of bunching by estimating the dierence in the bin counts around the threshold (be-


tween   z- and z+ ) relative    to the counterfactual, obtained using a series of dummy variables


for bins   z- through z+.    Bins   z- to 0 represent the region of missing mass below the threshold,
while bins 0 to     z+   represent the region of excess mass.


   To identify the manipulation range or exclusion window in which the empirical distri-


bution departs from smoothness, we iteratively vary the bounds of the excluded region until


we satisfy the integration constraint; that is, we set the area under the counterfactual dis-


tribution equal to the area under the empirical distribution, or equivalently we set the excess


mass equal to the missing mass on the other side of the cuto (Chetty et al., 2011; Diamond



                                                          11
and Persson, 2016; Dee et al., 2019).          This leaves us with an excluded window of -0.3 to


0.10 net assets. Figure 2 shows the density plot of public charities along with a tted coun-


terfactual distribution based on this excluded range. As in Figure 1, we observe signicant


bunching to one side of the zero net assets threshold. The density distribution is asymmetric


around the threshold, with the region of missing mass extending further than the region of

                                                                                                       9
excess mass, as is common in empirical distributions around notches (Kleven, 2016).                        As


noted previously, the bunching occurs despite the fact that there is no discontinuity in policy.


    Table 2 reports our estimates of the size of the excess mass, and thus the extent of bunch-


ing. The main specication uses an exclusion window of -0.3 to 0.1 and an estimation range


of -0.8 to 0.8. Following Dee et al. (2019), we provide estimates for both total manipulation


and in-range manipulation. Total manipulation is the excess mass as a percent of the total


sample size, which corresponds to the percentage of total charities in the sample that bunch.


In-range manipulation is the excess mass as a percent of the number of charities in the


counterfactual range in the region of missing mass (bins            -z   to 0), which can be interpreted


as the probability of bunching conditional on falling just below the solvency threshold. We


calculate standard errors using a parametric bootstrap procedure, similar to the one used in


Dee et al. (2019) and Chetty et al. (2011). We draw with replacement from the distribution


of residuals estimated in Equation (1) to generate a new density distribution from which we


generate bootstrapped estimates of the excess mass.              The standard error we report is the


standard deviation of 200 of the bootstrapped estimates.


    Column 1 presents our total manipulation estimate and shows that the number of excess


organizations above the threshold represents approximately 0.2 percent of all public charities.


This is equivalent to an 8 percent probability that charities falling just below the threshold


will manipulate their nancial reporting so as to appear solvent (column 4). By comparison,

   9 Although the distribution appears to more closely resemble those of notches, in which agents face a
discontinuous jump in their choice set, rather than kinks, in which agents face a discontinuity in the slope
of their choice set, it is possible that the threshold is a combination of a kink and a notch. While it may be
advantageous for a nonprot to remain on one side of the threshold, there also may be a bigger dierence in
donor perception between, e.g., -0.2 and -0.1 than there is between 0.1 and 0.2. We thank a helpful reviewer
for this insight.




                                                     12
Marx (2018) nds that the number of excess organizations above the ling threshold for

                                                                                                     10
the Form 990 is equal to 0.1 percent, or approximately half the size of our estimate.                     We


also provide robustness checks on our main specication to ensure that our estimates are


insensitive to specication choices, such as bin size and the order of the polynomial. Columns


2, 3, 5, and 6 show that these choices have very little eect on the estimated size of the excess


mass; the total manipulation estimates range from 0.193 to 0.203 percent.




B. Size of the Behavioral Response

Our measurement of the excess mass enables us to estimate another behavioral parameter


of interest: the extent of avoidance behavior demonstrated by charities at the threshold.


By measuring how far the excess mass can be distributed into the counterfactual density


distribution below the threshold, we can estimate              ,   the distance that the average buncher


traveled" to move above the threshold.



                                               z+
                                                    j · 1[zj = i] · 
                                              i=0
                                       =                                                                  (2)
                                                       f (0)

    Specically, we multiply the number of excess organizations that we obtain from our


preferred specication (column 1, table 2) by          , the size of the bins (0.02 in our specication),
and divide this by the height of the counterfactual density distribution at the threshold,             f (0).
This follows the practice in other bunching studies of assuming that because the density is


not very steep at the threshold, the counterfactual density distribution is approximately at


in a narrow range around the threshold. Equation (2) yields an estimate of 0.017, suggesting


that the average buncher inates their net assets by an amount equivalent to 1.7 percent of


their assets. Using the values we obtain in the next section, this response is equivalent to


$1,241 for the average (mean) buncher.

  10 Relatedly, we investigated whether the re-design of the Form 990 in 2008 impacted the extent of bunching
we observe. We observe little dierence in the size of the excess mass before and after 2008, suggesting that
our results are not driven by a quirk in either version of the IRS form.




                                                      13
V. Who are the Bunchers?
In this section, we turn away from estimating the extent of manipulation and focus instead


on characterizing the bunchers in our sample. We seek to understand why certain types of


charities might be motivated to bunch and what distinguishes the bunchers from charities


that are otherwise in similar nancial health. In the next section, we explore the downstream


consequences of bunching.


   We follow the general approach of Diamond and Persson (2016). This involves comparing


the mean characteristics of the bunchers to those charities that fall just below the insolvency


threshold and might have chosen to bunch but did not. We rst estimate a counterfactual by


tting a set of polynomials to the region of the data outside the manipulation region, i.e., re-

                                                                                                            11
estimating Equation (1) for the outcome of interest rather than for the density distribution.


This allows us to calculate the average values for the bins above the threshold in the region of

                 up_all
excess mass (Y            ) as well as the average values for the bins in the empirical distribution in


the region of the missing mass (Y
                                        down
                                               ).   Y up_all   represents the average values of a combined


group consisting of the compliers (i.e., the bunchers), and the always-takers (i.e., those


charities that would have reported net assets just above the threshold even in the absence


of income manipulation).


   After calculating the average characteristics for both the empirical distribution and the


counterfactual by multiplying the estimated outcome for each bin by the number of charities


falling into that bin, we can distinguish the characteristics of the compliers from those of


the always-takers by using the counterfactual to determine the average characteristics of the


always-takers:



                                           tot
                                         Nup                  Nup
                       ¯compliers =
                       Y                        ¯ up_all -
                                                Y                    ¯ up
                                                                     Y                                     (3)
                                       tot
                                      Nup - Nup             tot
                                                           Nup - Nup
  11 Because we focus on pre-determined variables in this section, we t a single polynomial to the data outside
of the manipulation region. However, in the next section, when examining outcomes that may be aected
by bunching, we t polynomials separately on both sides of the threshold and allow for a discontinuity.




                                                         14
              tot
    where    Nup    represents the total number of charities above the threshold in the empirical


distribution,   Nup represents the number of charities above the threshold in the counterfactual,
¯ up_all
Y          represents the mean value of charities in the region of excess mass in the empirical


distribution, and      ¯ up represents the mean value of charities in the region of excess mass in the
                       Y
counterfactual. As described in the previous section, the region of excess mass extends from


net assets of 0 to 0.10. We calculate standard errors using the same parametric approach


in the previous section, except that each simulation now includes a multi-step procedure:


estimating the frequency counts as well as the outcomes of interest for the empirical and


counterfactual distributions.


    Table 3 reports our results. In the rst ve rows, we report the types of charities that


bunch. In the bottom seven rows, we examine their nancial characteristics. The nature of


the charity is of course pre-determined. This is not the case with the nancial metrics; as


we show in the following section, bunching does aect the nancial attributes of charities.


To limit the potential endogeneity of the nancial characteristics, we consider lagged values


from the year       t-1.
    Column 1 presents the characteristics of the bunchers.            Column 2 presents the mean


characteristics of the charities falling just below the threshold, and column 3 presents the


dierence. The charities that bunch are less likely to be health or human-services charities


(such as hospitals, Boys & Girls clubs, YMCA's, and the Boy Scouts of America) and more


likely to be charities in the other category (including environmental, international, public


benet, and religious organizations). The bunching charities also appear to be signicantly


smaller than the charities that do not bunch, with substantially fewer assets and lower


revenue.


    One characteristic of note is that bunching charities receive a higher proportion of their


revenue from contribution revenue.          The Form 990 breaks down revenue into three main


categories: contribution revenue, program revenue, and other. Contributions include cash


and non-cash amounts received as voluntary contributions from the public, government units,




                                                    15
or foundations. Program revenue includes income earned by the organization in exchange for


providing a good or service, such as charging admission to a museum, while other revenue

                                                           12
includes investment incomes and rental income.                  That bunching charities would receive a


higher proportion of their revenue from contributions is consistent with the nature of the


charities in the other category; environmental and international organizations typically


rely on donor contributions to support their activities rather than fees charged for specic


services provided, as is the case with non-prot hospitals. To further probe the association


between bunching and reliance on contribution revenue, Figure 3 splits the sample into four


quartiles according to the percentage of revenue that charities receive from contributions


and replicates the density distributions from Figure 1 separately for each quartile. While we


observe graphical evidence of bunching in all four quartiles, the extent of bunching appears


more pronounced among charities in the fourth quartile.


    Table 4 provides the corresponding in-range manipulation estimates by contribution rev-


enue quartile. Overall, we nd that the extent of bunching grows monotonically with the


reliance on contribution revenue. Among charities in the bottom two quartiles, we nd a 5-6


percent probability that charities falling just below the threshold manipulate their nancial


reporting in order to cross the insolvency threshold. This estimate increases to 10 percent


for charities in the third quartile. However, for charities in the top quartile, we observe a


substantial increase in the extent of bunching  27 percent of charities falling just below the

                                                                  13
threshold manipulate their income to appear solvent.

  12 Government grants are considered contributions if they help an organization maintain services to the
public, and are not considered contributions if they represent a payment for a service. Similarly, membership
dues can consist of a charitable contribution portion as well as a separate portion that represents payments
for benets received (IRS, 2018).
  13 Our analytic sample focuses only on public charities; however, private foundations also receive contribu-
tion revenue. We conducted a separate analysis of private foundation data obtained from the NCCS over the
same time period. When we apply the same sample restrictions to the foundation data, we end up with a
small sample (about 73,000 observations), however we do observe bunching above the threshold, particularly
among foundations that collect most of their revenue in the form of contributions. If we relax our restrictions
to expand the sample, we continue to observe a positive relationship between the extent of bunching and
reliance on contribution revenue . Though we are reluctant to draw rm conclusion given the small number
of observations and dierences in reporting between foundations and public charities, we see this as a helpful
corroboration of our main ndings.




                                                      16
VI. Eect of Bunching
In this section, we investigate the eects of bunching, that is, we examine the outcomes


for public charities that manipulated their nancial reporting so as to remain balance sheet


solvent and compare these outcomes to charities that were eligible to bunch but did not.




A. Main Results

We start by once again using the general framework outlined by Diamond and Persson


(2016). We construct an estimate of what outcomes would have looked like for charities in


the exclusion window absent income manipulation. We then compare this counterfactual to


the actual distribution of outcomes for charities in the same range. The dierence between


these two estimates represents the reduced form eect, an intent-to-treat (ITT) estimate of


the eect of falling in the manipulation region. We then scale this eect by the rst stage,


the probability of being a buncher, which we previously calculated and reported in Table 2 as


the estimates of in-range manipulation. This constitutes the local average treatment eect


(LATE) of bunching. The dierence between these two estimates stems from separating the


characteristics of the always-takers from the compliers. We estimate the counterfactual by


tting polynomials to the region of the data outside the manipulation region. We estimate


the polynomials separately on both sides of the cut-o, and allow for the possibility of a


discontinuous jump in the outcome at the threshold.


   One challenge we face is that the nancial outcomes we are interested in studying are


mechanically related to net assets; by denition, bunching organizations inate their net


assets by somehow increasing their reported revenue, decreasing their reported expenses, or


some combination. If we focus on outcomes that are themselves subject to manipulation, the


estimates we calculate may not be the eects of bunching but rather the cause. However, the


panel nature of the data gives us some insight into which variables are subject to manipulation


as well as which variables are aected by manipulation. Specically, we assume that it is




                                              17
                                                                          t
not possible for bunching to have any causal eect in year , the year in which manipulation


occurs. Therefore, any eect that we observe in that year may be part of the mechanism


by which charities inate their net asset position.                 In contrast, if we do not observe any


distortion in the outcome distribution in year              t,   but observe eects in subsequent years,


this would suggest that the outcome in question was not subject to manipulation, but may


instead have been aected by the decision to bunch. In eect, by examining outcomes across


a variety of years, we can use our estimates from year              t   (the year in which bunching occurs)

                                                                                                    14
as a benchmark against which to compare the eects of bunching in future years.


      We examine several nancial variables as outcomes. First, motivated by our descriptive


ndings in the previous section, we examine the eects of bunching on contribution revenue.


Consistent with the panel approach discussed above, if charities appear solvent by inating


their reported contribution revenue (for example, by increasing fund raising eorts to avoid


insolvency), we should see an increase in contribution revenue across the threshold in year


t.   In contrast, if contribution revenue is not the source of income manipulation but rather


donors are more likely to donate to solvent charities, we would expect to see an increase


in contribution revenue in the years following the decision to bunch, but not in the year in


which bunching occurs. Our assumptions regarding the timing of donor response are based


on the dynamics of the release of nancial information to the public. Specically, nancial


statements and Form 990s are not completed and released until several months after the scal


year-end. Moreover, websites that disseminate information regarding the nancial health of


charities, such as Charity Navigator or GuideStar, do not obtain or publish this information


until many months after nancial statements are released. It follows that if bunching has an


eect on contribution revenue, it would not be observable until one or more years later.


      Tables 5a and 5b provide estimates of the impact of falling in the manipulation region


(ITT) and the impact of bunching (LATE) on contribution revenue in years                      t   through   t+4
     14 This would seem to suggest event study methods as an alternative empirical strategy. However, it is not
feasible to precisely identify which specic public charities are bunching at any point in time.




                                                       18
                                                 15
using the methodology described above.                Column 1 shows that in the year that bunching


occurs, the estimated impact of falling just above the threshold is positive, but small and


not statistically signicant. In contrast, we observe larger positive estimates in the two years


after bunching occurs. Specically, organizations that fall in the manipulation region in year


t   receive 7 log points more in contribution revenue in year            t+1,   7.4 log points in year   t+2,
and 7.3 log points in year       t+3.    When the reduced form eect is scaled by the probability


of bunching, the LATE indicates that bunching organizations increase their contribution


revenue by 87 to 91 log points in years               t+1   through   t+3.16    The eect of bunching on


contribution revenue appears to fade in year                t+4    the coecient reverses sign and is no


longer signicant.


     Figure 4 complements the regression analysis by plotting charitable contributions in year


t+1    as a function of net assets. The gure shows a sharp increase in log contributions at


the zero net assets threshold.          A donut regression discontinuity analysis (Barreca et al.,


2011) that uses the same bandwidth and excluded window as our main specication nds


that there is an eect of crossing the insolvency threshold equal to 90 log points in year


t+1, very similar to the LATE estimate we report in Table 5b.                  This suggests that the eect


of bunching on contribution revenue is largely driven by the exogenous eect of crossing


the solvency threshold. If instead the donut RD estimates diered substantially from our


LATE estimates, it would imply that bunching rms engaged in behavior to increase their


contribution revenue, such as increasing their fund-raising eort. The results we observe are


consistent with the hypothesis that donors exhibit preferences for solvent rms.


     Tables 6 and 7 repeat the analysis in Table 5 for expenses and program revenue respec-

    15 Appendix Table 3 repeats the analysis in Table 5a for each sample restriction described in Appendix
Table 1. We nd that our results are not sensitive to the exclusion of any individual sample restriction.
    16 Although these LATE estimates are quite large, the average buncher is fairly small, with median revenue
and contribution levels signicantly lower than the mean values reported in Table 3. For example, looking
at the distribution of (non-transformed) contribution revenue, we see that charities falling just below the
threshold report median contribution revenue of $74,000 (compared to a mean value of $1.2 million). Based
on the results in Table 3, we observe that the bunchers are even smaller in terms of assets and overall
revenue than charities falling below the threshold. Given that there is substantial within-charity variance in
contribution revenue, our LATE estimates are large, but not implausible.




                                                       19
tively. Again, if rms inate their net assets by manipulating their expense reporting, we


would expect to see a negative impact on expenses in the year that bunching occurs. Sim-


ilarly, if rms bunch by manipulating their program revenues, we would expect to see an


                                       t
increase in program revenues in year . If instead, bunching has an eect on expenses or pro-


gram revenue, dierences should emerge in the years following bunching, but not necessarily


in the year that bunching occurs.


   In both tables, columns 1 through 3 estimate the eect of bunching in year       t   through


t+4,   respectively. For both expenses and program revenues, the eects of bunching are not


statistically signicant in the year in which manipulation occurred nor in any follow-up year.


The fact that we do not obtain statistically signicant results for any variable in year      t
may appear puzzling: in order to bunch, rms must inate revenues or decrease expenses.


However, our earlier results suggest that bunchers inate their net assets by a very small


amount.    Specically, we found that the average buncher inates their net assets by 1.7


percent of assets, or approximately $1,200. Therefore, our analysis may not be suciently


powered to detect changes in any one nancial characteristic that allows a rm to bunch.




B. Extensive Margin Responses

One concern with our analyses in this section is that there may be extensive margin responses


at the threshold, i.e., nonprots may cease operations or fail to ll out the Form 990 as a


result of becoming insolvent.    In the presence of extensive margin responses, our analyses


may be biased if the charities on one side of the threshold are systematically dierent from


charities on the other side.    In this section, we test for the presence of extensive margin


responses and present results from alternative specications that use an imputation strategy


to account for charity exit.


   To test for extensive margin responses, we rst re-visit our measurement of the coun-


terfactual density by estimating separate polynomials on both sides of the threshold, as


suggested by Kopczuk and Munroe (2015) and Marx (2019). In the presence of extensive



                                              20
margin responses, the size of the missing mass would exceed the size of the excess mass,


provided that the two are not constrained to be equal. Using a two-sided specication with


cubic polynomials, we obtain estimates of 0.186 for the excess mass and 0.169 for the miss-


ing mass. The excess mass exceeds the missing mass, and the dierence is not statistically


signicant (with a t-statistic of 0.26). Based on this test, we do not see evidence of extensive


margin responses.


    However, we further explore the issue by plotting attrition in year        t+1   against the running


variable (Appendix Figure 2). While we do not observe a discontinuity in exit rates at the


threshold, there does appear to be an outlier caused by higher rates of exit among rms


that report exactly zero net assets. One explanation for why we observe a higher exit rate


for rms reporting exactly zero net assets may be that these organizations are purposefully


depleting all of their assets by year end. Alternatively, there may be some rms that exit


the sample out of a concern for their ability to maintain contribution revenue in the future,


potentially biasing our estimates upward.


    As an alternative to the two-sided test above, we examine the eect that falling in the


manipulation region has on exit rates in future years using the same methods from Diamond


and Persson (2016) as in the prior subsection. Specically, we measure the eect on perma-


nent exit from the sample in year      t+1.17   Table 8 shows that there is a small, but statistically


signicant positive eect on the likelihood of exiting. When we remove the exact zeroes from


the sample, this eect declines but does not disappear completely. Falling in the manipula-


tion region increases exit rates in year      t+1   by 0.8 to 1.7 percentage points, while bunching


increases the rate of exit by 11-21 percentage points.


    In order to better interpret our ndings, we once again estimate the characteristics of the


bunching charities, except this time we estimate the characteristics using data from above


as well as below the threshold. In the presence of extensive margin responses, estimating the


characteristics of bunching charities using data above the threshold will reveal information

  17 To measure permanent exit, we exclude the last three years of our sample, so that a charity that is
deemed to permanently exit is missing for at least three years before it goes unobserved.




                                                    21
about all charities that manipulate their nances, including those who exit, while estimating


the characteristics of bunching charities using data below the threshold will reveal informa-


tion about only those charities that manipulate their nances and remain in the sample.


The results are in Appendix Table 4. Consistent with extensive margin responses, there are


some statistically signicant dierences between the estimates. The bunchers appear to be


smaller (in assets and in revenue) when estimated using data above the threshold than when


estimated using data from below, implying that the charities that manipulate their nances


and then exit are smaller than the charities that manipulate their nances and remain in


the sample. The charities that exit are also less likely to report program revenue and high


levels of compensation.


   One interpretation of these results is that, for many rms, bunching is an indication that


the rm is choosing to unwind its operations. If the exit rates we observe were due to higher


rates of bankruptcy and involuntary closure in the wake of bunching, then we would expect


the exiting rms to be larger charities weighed down with future nancial commitments.


Additionally, more than half of the attrition eect we estimate is driven by rms that report


exactly zero net assets; the very fact that they report exactly zero net assets may itself be a


signal that they are discontinuing operations. In the absence of more information, we cannot


denitively establish this interpretation, but we believe it is consistent with what we observe


about the exiting charities.


   Having shown that some charities in the manipulation region do exit the sample at higher


rates, we next gauge the extent to which extensive margin responses may bias our estimates


in Table 5. To do so, we use an imputation approach to account for the missing outcomes

                                   18
of rms that exit the sample.            Specically, we calculate the percentage change in contribu-


tions that each rm experienced during its last year in the sample. For example, if a rm


experienced a 5 percent drop in contributions between year              t-1   and year t before exiting in

  18 In addition to permanent exits, charities may temporarily exit the sample as a result of falling below the
reporting threshold. We impute missing outcomes for charities that exit both permanently and temporarily,
however we see no eect of falling in the manipulation region on temporary exit.




                                                     22
year   t+1, then we assume the rm would experience a continued 5 percent drop in all subse-
               19
quent years.        We regard these assumptions as conservative, particularly in the later years.


The results are presented in Appendix Table 5. Our estimates do decrease in magnitude,


with the largest decreases in year        t+2.   Nonetheless, our estimates of the treatment eects


in years   t+1   and   t+3   shrink by less than 20 percent of the original magnitude and remain


statistically signicant.       Thus, while we nd some evidence of selective attrition from the


sample, we do not believe the potential bias arising from extensive margin responses alters


our substantive conclusions.




VII. Discussion
In this paper, we document signicant bunching of public charities at the zero net assets


threshold. This bunching persists even after limiting our sample to rms that are unlikely


to have a mechanical reason to report zero net assets, suggesting that rms may manipulate


their income to appear balance sheet solvent. This is somewhat surprising given the lack of


direct nancial penalties for reporting negative net assets.


    We estimate the characteristics of the bunchers and show that the rms that inate


their nancial position tend to be smaller charities that earn most of their revenues from


donations. We nd that bunching charities report higher contributions from donors in the


years after bunching than they otherwise would, suggesting that one motivation for bunching


is to appeal to donor preferences.


    These ndings are consistent with prior research indicating that donors care about the


nancial health and viability of the charities they donate to.            Specically, it relates to a


literature in which donors rely on heuristics to simplify their decision-making about where


to spend their contribution dollars (Karlan and List, 2007; Yoruk, 2016). Our results suggest


that donors may not wish to give to insolvent organizations, even though there may be very

  19 If a rm exits the sample but does not report an observation for t-1, then we extrapolate the growth
rate using the most recent lagged value, e.g., t-2.




                                                      23
little dierence between a charity that is just barely solvent and one that is just barely


insolvent, potentially due to loss-averse preferences. The emphasis of the insolvency threshold


as a binary metric of nancial health may be fostered in part by third-party rating agencies,


such as GuideStar, which track performance metrics, including specically whether charities


have reported negative net assets. In the face of these donor preferences, nonprot managers


respond by inating their reported nancial health.


   What, if any, conclusions can we draw about welfare? If the use of heuristics and third-


party ratings lead to the misallocation of charitable dollars, for example, as a result of loss-


averse donors over-emphasizing solvency relative to more meaningful indicators of a rm's


nancial health, then the use of simplied nancial metrics in the nonprot sector may have


negative welfare consequences. Alternatively, if the use of these heuristics improves the al-


location of charitable donations, they may enhance the eciency of public goods provision.


Additionally, if the increase in charitable contributions that we document reects an increase


in overall donations for the sector as a whole, it is possible bunching could actually increase


public goods provision. In the absence of clear performance metrics, it is dicult to deni-


tively conclude that bunching rms operate less eciently. Moreover, we have conned our


analysis to a specic region of the data and our ndings may have limited generalizability


to rms in better nancial condition. We leave to future work to expand on the implica-


tions of donor preferences and the use of heuristics for the allocative eciency of charitable


contributions.




                                              24
References
Allen, Eric J, Patricia M Dechow, Devin G Pope, and George Wu.                         2016.


  Reference-dependent preferences: Evidence from marathon runners.         Management Sci-
  ence, 63(6): 16571672.

Barreca, Alan I, Melanie Guldi, Jason M Lindo, and Glen R Waddell. 2011. Saving
  babies? Revisiting the eect of very low birth weight classication.   The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 126(4): 21172123.

Bowman, Woods. 2011. Finance Fundamentals for Nonprots. Vol. 2, John Wiley & Sons.

Bulow, Jeremy I, and John B Shoven.           1978. The Bankruptcy Decision.       The Bell
  Journal of Economics, 437456.

Calabrese, Thad.     2013. Running on Empty: The Operating Reserves of US Nonprot


  Organizations.   Nonprot Management and Leadership, 23(3): 281302.

Calabrese, Thad, and Cleopatra Grizzle.          2012. Debt, Donors, and the Decision to


  Give.   Journal of Public Budgeting, Accounting & Financial Management,        24(2): 221


  254.



Calabrese, Thad D. 2011. Do Donors Penalize Nonprot Organizations with Accumulated
  Wealth?   Public Administration Review, 71(6): 859869.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. Adjustment
  Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from


  Danish Tax Records.    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 749804.

Dee, Thomas S, Will Dobbie, Brian A Jacob, and Jonah Rocko.                      2019. The


  causes and consequences of test score manipulation: Evidence from the new york regents


  examinations.    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(3): 382423.


                                            25
Diamond, Rebecca, and Petra Persson. 2016. The Long-term Consequences of Teacher
  Discretion in Grading of High-stakes Tests. National Bureau of Economic Research 22207.



Elliot, Dana, and Evan Hollander. 2014. Navigating a Nonprot Corporation Through
  Bankruptcy.    Nonprot Quarterly, April 29, 2014.

FASB. 2014. Presentation of Financial StatementsGoing Concern:          Disclosure of Uncer-


  tainties about an Entity's Ability to Continue as a Going Concern.



IRS.   2018. 2018 Instructons for Form 990 Return or Organization Exempt from Income


  Tax.



Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory:              An Analysis of Deci-


  sion under Risk.   Econometrica, 47(2): 263292.

Karlan, Dean, and John A List.           2007. Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving?


  Evidence from a Large-scale Natural Field Experiment.         American Economic Review,
  97(5): 17741793.



Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen. 2016. Bunching. Annual Review of Economics, 8: 435464.

Kleven, Henrik J, and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. Using Notches to Uncover Optimization
  Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.   The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 128(2): 669723.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and David Munroe.               2015. Mansion tax: The eect of transfer


  taxes on the residential real estate market.   American economic Journal: economic policy,
  7(2): 21457.



Krishnan, Ranjani, and Michelle H Yetman. 2011. Institutional Drivers of Reporting
  Decisions in Nonprot Hospitals.    Journal of Accounting Research, 49(4): 10011039.

Marx, Benjamin M. 2018. The Cost of Requiring Charities to Report Financial Informa-
  tion. Working Paper.


                                             26
Marx, Benjamin M. 2019. Dynamic Bunching Estimation with Panel Data. 2019 MPRA
  Paper #88647.



McCoid, John C.     1987. The Occasion for Involuntary Bankruptcy.       American Bankr-
  ruptcy Law Journal, 61: 195.

Okten, Cagla, and Burton A Weisbrod. 2000. Determinants of Donations in Private
  Nonprot Markets.      Journal of Public Economics, 75(2): 255272.

Onji, Kazuki. 2009. The Response of Firms to Eligibility Thresholds:     Evidence from the


  Japanese Value-added Tax.      Journal of Public Economics, 93(5): 766  775.

Peterman, Nancy A, and Sherri Morissette. 2004. Directors' Duties in the Zone of
  Insolvency: The Quandary of the Nonprot Corporation.       American Bankruptcy Institute
  Law Review, 23: 12.

Rees-Jones, Alex. 2017. Quantifying loss-averse tax manipulation. The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 85(2): 12511278.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points? American Economic Jour-
  nal: Economic Policy, 2(3): 180212.

St. Clair, Travis. 2016. How Do Nonprots Respond to Regulatory Thresholds:       Evidence


  From New York's Audit Requirements.         Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
  35(4): 772790.



White, Michelle J.      1989. The Corporate Bankruptcy Decision.      Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 3(2): 129151.

Yoruk, Baris K. 2016. Charity Ratings. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
  25(1): 195219.




                                             27
                          Figure 1a: Bunching in Raw Data




                                8
                                6
                            Density
                              4 2
                                0
                                        -.4   -.2            0            .2   .4
                                                    Net Assets / Assets




                      Figure 1b: Bunching After Data Cleaning
                                2.5
                                2 1.5
                            Density
                                1
                                .5
                                0




                                        -.4   -.2            0            .2   .4
                                                    Net Assets / Assets




                         Figure 1c: Bunching in Final Sample
                                2.5
                                2
                                1.5
                            Density
                                1
                                .5
                                0




                                        -.4   -.2            0            .2   .4
                                                    Net Assets / Assets




Note: Figure 1b shows the density distribution of public charities after cleaning the data
but before placing any restrictions on the sample. Figure 1c shows the distribution for our
analytic sample after imposing a series of sample restrictions.




                                                       28
                              Figure 2: Bunching at Near-Zero Net Assets



                10000 12000
           6000 8000
             Frequency
                4000
                2000




                              -.4         -.2             0               .2       .4
                                                Net Assets / Assets

                                            Observed              Counterfactual



Note: This gure shows the density distribution of public charities in the vicinity of zero
net assets. The dashed line beneath the observed distribution is a fourth degree polynomial
tted to observations outside the manipulated region (-0.3 - 0.10). Each point represents the
number of charity-years in a bin of size 0.02.




                                                     29
    Figure 3: Bunching by the Percentage of Revenues from Contributions
                                (Quartiles)


                    3
                    2
                    1               1                               2
          Density
                    0




                                    3                               4
                    3
                    2
                    1
                    0




                        -.4   -.2   0   .2      .4   -.4      -.2   0   .2     .4
                                        Net Assets / Assets




Note: This gure shows heterogeneity in the extent of bunching by splitting the sample into
quartiles according to the percentage of revenues that charities receive from contributions.




                                               30
                                               Figure 4: Log Contributions, Year t +1



                        14          13
           Log Contributions, Year t+1
           11          12
                        10




                                         -.6          -.3                  0                  .3                .6
                                                            Net Assets / Total Assets, Year t



Note: The gure plots log contributions in year                              t +1   by net assets in year   t   where year   t   is
dened as the year in which bunching occurs. Each observation represents the local sample
mean for bins of size 0.03. The dashed-lines are linear trends t to the observations that fall
outside of the manipulation range.




                                                                       31
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                    Analytic Sample
                                                   Mean   Median    SD
                                                   (1)      (2)     (3)
                   Assets (millions)                11     0.25     233
                   Liabilities (millions)          4.4     0.008     96
                   Net Assets / Assets             0.74    0.97     0.55
                   Contributions (millions)        1.3     0.074     18
                   Program Revenue (millions)      4.8     0.022    108
                   Contributions/ Revenue          0.51    0.52     0.39
                   Expenses (millions)             6.1     0.20     112
                   Age of Organization              24      19       16
                   Insolvent (Net Assets < 0)      0.06      0      0.24


Note: Data come from the National Center of Charitable Statistics' (NCCS) 2005-2015 core
les for public charities. N = 2,182,693 observations, 331,568 charities. The ratio variables
have been windsorized at the top and bottom 1 percent of the distribution.




                                              32
                            Table 2: Measures of Bunching

                                            Total                         In-Range
                                    Manipulation                        Manipulation
                            (1)              (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)         (6)


           Excess Mass    0.196**      0.193**      0.203**     8.06**     7.93**    8.44**
                          (0.020)       (0.014)     (0.019)     (0.835)   (0.587)    (0.817)


           Bin Size         0.02            0.01         0.02    0.02       0.01       0.02
           Polynomial      Fourth       Fourth       Fifth      Fourth     Fourth      Fifth


Note: ** p   <   0.01 and * p   <   0.05.    This table presents estimates of the manipulation in
the sample under alternative measurement assumptions. Manipulation is measured by the
excess mass to the right of the solvency threshold. Total manipulation is the excess mass as
a percentage of all charities in the sample. In-range manipulation is the excess mass relative
to the counterfactual distribution in the range of the missing mass, or the probability of
manipulation conditional on reporting net assets just below the cut-o. Standard errors are
calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text. The exclusion
window ranges from -0.3 to +0.1 net assets / assets.            N = 2,182,693 (total sample), N =
625,241 within the range of estimation (-0.8 to +0.8 net assets/ assets).




                                                    33
                           Table 3: Characteristics of Bunchers

                                                            Bunching    Falls in Region   Dierence
                                                            Charities   of Missing Mass
                                                               (1)            (2)            (3)
 Type of Charity
 Arts, Culture, & Humanities                                 0.094           0.072        0.022**
                                                                                           (0.009)
 Education                                                   0.183           0.113        0.070**
                                                                                           (0.023)
 Health and Human Services                                   0.316           0.670        -0.353**
                                                                                           (0.047)
 Other                                                       0.407           0.146        0.262**
                                                                                           (0.026)
 Financial Characteristics
 Log Assets,   t-1                                            12.2           13.7          -1.55**
                                                                                           (0.153)
 Log Revenue,      t-1                                        13.3           13.8          -0.449
                                                                                           (0.275)
 Percent Revenue from Contributions,          t-1            0.746           0.398        0.348**
                                                                                           (0.024)
 Reported Program Revenue (Yes/No),            t-1           0.259           0.827        -0.568**
                                                                                           (0.041)
 Total Compensation as Percent of Expenses,           t-1    0.253           0.314         -0.061
                                                                                           (0.034)


Note:   ** p   <   0.01 and * p   <   0.05.   This table presents characteristics of the bunching
charities and compares these characteristics to all charities that fall just below the threshold
and thus also might have chosen to bunch. The characteristics of the bunching charities are
distinguished from the charities that otherwise fall above the threshold (the always-takers)
by using an estimated counterfactual to determine the characteristics of the always-takers. To
obtain the counterfactual estimates, we t polynomials to the observed distribution outside of
the manipulation region. Column 3 presents the dierence between the estimates. Charities
in the other" category include environmental, international, public benet, and religious
organizations.     Standard errors are calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure
described in the text.




                                                     34
  Table 4: Bunching by the Percent Revenues from Contributions (Quartiles)

                      First Quartile     Second Quartile   Third Quartile   Fourth Quartile
                            (1)                 (2)              (3)              (4)
    Excess Mass          5.40**               5.54**           9.54**           26.5**
                         (0.976)              (1.10)           (1.84)           (3.49)


    N                    529,013             529,010           529,007          529,003


Note: ** p   <   0.01 and * p   <   0.05. This table presents measurements of the excess mass by
quartiles of the percentage of revenue that charities receive from contributions. All estimates
reect in-range manipulation, i.e., the probability of manipulation conditional on reporting
net assets just below the cut-o. Standard errors are calculated using the parametric boot-
strap procedure described in the text. We remove observations with percentages less than
zero or greater than one.




                                                  35
    Table 5a: Reduced Form: Impact of Falling in Manipulation Region on
                          Contribution Revenue

                                                          Log Contributions
                                Year     t     Year    t+1      Year   t+2     Year     t+3    Year    t+4
                                   (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)


          Intent-to-Treat         0.025          0.070*          0.074*           0.073*         -0.037
                                (0.025)         (0.027)          (0.031)          (0.035)        (0.037)




        Table 5b: Impact of Bunching on Contribution Revenue (LATE)

                                                      Log Contributions
                         Year     t      Year   t+1       Year   t+2       Year   t+3     Year   t+4
                            (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)


                 LATE    0.306               0.868*        0.913*           0.904*          -0.460
                         (0.315)          (0.353)          (0.398)          (0.446)         (0.480)


Note: ** p   <   0.01 and * p     <   0.05. Table 5a presents estimates of the impact of falling in
the manipulation region on log contributions, while Table 5b presents estimates of the eect
of bunching on log contributions.             The counterfactual is estimated from linear regressions
of log contributions on net assets, estimated separately on both sides of the cut-o.                         The
counterfactual uses only data from outside the manipulation region.                           Standard errors are
calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text.




                                                          36
    Table 6a: Reduced Form: Impact of Falling in Manipulation Region on
                                Expenses

                                                                  Log Expenses
                            Year          t     Year    t+1        Year    t+2     Year     t+3     Year    t+4
                                    (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)


          Intent-to-Treat       0.004                0.025              0.055           0.067            0.073
                            (0.042)              (0.044)            (0.044)           (0.046)         (0.047)




                 Table 6b: Impact of Bunching on Expenses (LATE)


                                                            Log Expenses
                        Year    t     Year       t+1        Year    t+2        Year   t+3      Year   t+4
                          (1)                  (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)


                 LATE    0.048                0.304           0.682              0.830            0.907
                        (0.532)           (0.557)            (0.557)            (0.585)         (0.602)


Note: ** p   <   0.01 and * p    <    0.05.      Table 6a presents estimates of the impact of falling
in the manipulation region on log expenses, while Table 6b presents estimates of the eect
of bunching on log expenses. The counterfactual is estimated from linear regressions of log
expenses on net assets, estimated separately on both sides of the cut-o. The counterfactual
uses only data from outside the manipulation region. Standard errors are calculated using
the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text.




                                                             37
    Table 7a: Reduced Form: Impact of Falling in Manipulation Region on
                            Program Revenue

                                                            Log Program Revenue
                             Year         t     Year    t+1        Year    t+2     Year     t+3     Year    t+4
                                    (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)


          Intent-to-Treat       0.014                0.025              0.038           0.064            0.069
                             (0.059)             (0.059)            (0.059)           (0.060)         (0.065)




             Table 7b: Impact of Bunching on Program Revenue (LATE)


                                                     Log Program Revenue
                         Year   t     Year       t+1        Year    t+2        Year   t+3      Year   t+4
                          (1)                  (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)


                LATE     0.177                0.311           0.470              0.788            0.858
                        (0.747)           (0.753)            (0.748)            (0.766)         (0.832)


Note: ** p   < 0.01 and * p < 0.05.           Table 7a presents estimates of the impact of falling in the
manipulation region on log program revenue, while Table 7b presents estimates of the eect
of bunching on log program revenue. The counterfactual is estimated from linear regressions
of log program revenue, estimated separately on both sides of the cut-o. The counterfactual
uses only data from outside the manipulation region. Standard errors are calculated using
the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text.




                                                             38
Table 8a: Reduced Form: Impact of Falling in Manipulation Region on Sample
                                   Exit

                                       Permanently Missing from Sample, t+1
                                                              After Removing
                                       Full sample              Exact Zeroes
                                              (1)                     (2)


                   Intent-to-Treat       0.017**                  0.008**
                                            (0.002)               (0.002)




                 Table 8b: Impact of Bunching on Sample Exit (LATE)


                                Permanently Missing from Sample, t+1
                                                           After Removing
                                Full sample                 Exact Zeroes
                                       (1)                      (2)


                       LATE         0.211**                   0.114**
                                     (0.033)                  (0.030)


Note: ** p   <   0.01 and * p   <   0.05.    Table 8a presents estimates of the impact of falling
in the manipulation region on permanent exit from the sample, while Table 8b presents
estimates of the eect of bunching on permanent exit. The counterfactual is estimated from
linear regressions of charity exit, estimated separately on both sides of the cut-o.          The
counterfactual uses only data from outside the manipulation region.            Standard errors are
calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text.




                                                      39
                              Appendix Figure 1: Density Distribution by Age

                                     2                          4                          6                          8

                    3
                    2
                    1
                    0




                                     10                         12                         14                         16
                    3
          Density
                    2
                    1
                    0




                                     18                         20                         22                         24
                    3
                    2
                    1
                    0




                        -.4    -.2   0    .2   .4   -.4   -.2   0    .2   .4   -.4   -.2   0    .2   .4   -.4   -.2   0    .2   .4

                                                                Net Assets / Assets



Note: This gure presents the density distribution by net assets for charities of dierent ages.
The age of the charity is based on the year in which the IRS recognized the organization's
tax exempt status, as reported on the Form 990.




                                                                          40
                                                           Appendix Figure 2: Extensive Margin Responses

         Permanently Missing from Sample, Year t+1
                        .05  0              .1




                                                     -.8             -.4                  0                  .4   .8
                                                                           Net Assets / Total Assets, Year t



                                                           t ) against a measure of sample
Note: This gure plots the running variable (net assets in year
attrition (whether the rm permanently exited the sample in year t+1 ).




                                                                                      41
                       Appendix Table 1: Sample Restrictions

 Restriction                                                      Number of        Sample Size
                                                               Observations Lost


 Full Sample                                                                        3,485,306


 Exclude charity-year observations with missing assets,            -320,178         3,165,128
 reported assets of zero or 1, or charities with consecutive
 years of exactly zero net assets.


 Exclude charities in operation for less than ve years or          -491,616         2,673,512
 lacking data on year of IRS recognition.


 Exclude charities that report an average net income of            -165,993         2,507,519
 exactly zero or average contributions of exactly zero.


 Exclude supporting public charities                               -325,826         2,182,693




Note: The raw data consists of 3,485,306 observations and 578,282 charities and comes from
the National Center of Charitable Statistics' (NCCS) 2005-2015 core les for public charities.
The nal sample consists of 2,182,693 observations and 331,568 charities.




                                              42
             Appendix Table 2: BIC for Dierent Polynomial Choices
                               Polynomial Order      BIC
                               First              -203.0166
                               Second             -249.8154
                               Third              -254.8452
                               Fourth             -275.8825
                               Fifth              -275.5269
                               Sixth              -271.1752


Note:   The table reports the Bayesian Information Criteria for a series of regressions of
nonprot frequency on various polynomials of net assets.




                                            43
  Appendix Table 3: Sensitivity of Impact Estimates to Sample Restrictions
1. Exclude charity year observations with missing assets, reported assets of zero or one,
and charities with consecutive years of exactly zero net assets. This step cleans the data
and ensures that the bunching we observe is not the spurious result of data entry errors.



                              Year    t   Year   t+1   Year   t+2   Year   t+3   Year   t+4
                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)


        Log Contributions     0.039        0.068*       0.072*       0.056        -0.023
                             (0.026)       (0.027)      (0.031)      (0.033)      (0.037)




2. Exclude charities in operation for less than ve years or lacking data on year of IRS
recognition. As new organizations are more likely to report near-zero net assets, we limit
our sample to organizations in existence for at least ve years to ensure that the bunching
we observe is not caused by the entry of new charities.



                              Year    t   Year   t+1   Year   t+2   Year   t+3   Year   t+4
                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
        Log Contributions     0.030        0.073*       0.076*       0.060        -0.035
                             (0.026)       (0.028)      (0.032)      (0.034)      (0.036)




3. Exclude charities with zero average income or zero average contributions. We remove
charities that report zero average income so as to address the possibility that some
nonprots cluster at zero as a result of a deliberate strategy of spending down all of their
resources every year, as opposed to bunching in response to the zero net assets threshold.



                              Year    t   Year   t+1   Year   t+2   Year   t+3   Year   t+4
                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
        Log Contributions     0.034       0.076**       0.079*       0.063        -0.032
                             (0.026)       (0.028)      (0.032)      (0.034)      (0.036)




4. Exclude supporting public charities. This restrictions ensures that the bunching we
observe is not due to subsidiary organizations that transfer all of their fund balance at
year's end to a parent organization.




                                                 44
                               Year    t   Year   t+1   Year   t+2   Year   t+3   Year   t+4
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
         Log Contributions      0.025       0.070*       0.074*       0.073*       -0.037
                               (0.025)      (0.027)      (0.031)      (0.035)      (0.037)




Note: ** p   < 0.01 and * p < 0.05.   This table shows the sensitivity of our estimates in Table 5
to the sample restrictions detailed in Appendix Table 1. After each restriction, we re-estimate
the impact of falling in the manipulation region on log contributions. The last table shows
the results for the full sample, reproducing the results from Table 5a. The counterfactual is
estimated from linear regressions of log contributions on net assets, estimated separately on
both sides of the cut-o. The counterfactual uses only data from outside the manipulation
region. Standard errors are calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described
in the text.




                                                  45
                         Appendix Table 4: Characteristics of Bunchers

                                                                Estimated    Estimated    Dierence
                                                                from Above   from Below
                                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)
 Type of Charity
 Arts, Culture, & Humanities                                      0.094        0.098       -0.004
                                                                                           (0.020)
 Education                                                        0.183        0.337      -0.154**
                                                                                           (0.061)
 Health and Human Services                                        0.316        0.275       0.042
                                                                                           (0.118)
 Other                                                            0.407        0.291       0.116
                                                                                           (0.061)
 Financial Characteristics
 Log Assets,   t-1                                                 12.2         13.4       -1.28**
                                                                                           (0.324)
 Log Revenue,      t-1                                             13.3         16.8       -3.41**
                                                                                           (0.697)
 Percent Revenue from Contributions,          t-1                 0.746        0.767       -0.021
                                                                                           (0.066)
 Reported Program Revenue (Yes/No),            t-1                0.259        0.641      -0.382**
                                                                                           (0.084)
 Total Compensation as Percent of Expenses,               t-1     0.253        0.611      -0.359**
                                                                                           (0.083)


Note:   ** p   <   0.01 and * p   <   0.05.   This table presents characteristics of the bunching
charities. Column 1 reproduces the rst column of results from Table 3 in which we estimate
the characteristics of bunching charities using data above the threshold. Column 2 estimates
the characteristics of the bunching charities using data below the threshold.              Column 3
presents the dierence between the estimates.                Standard errors are calculated using the
parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text.




                                                     46
Appendix Table 5a: Reduced Form: Impact of Falling in Manipulation Region
     on Contribution Revenue with Imputation of Missing Outcomes

                                                       Log Contributions
                                     Year    t+1     Year     t+2     Year     t+3      Year   t+4
                                          (1)               (2)            (3)               (4)


                  Intent-to-Treat       0.067*            0.048          0.060*          -0.035
                                      (0.025)          (0.029)           (0.029)         (0.031)




  Appendix Table 5b: Impact of Bunching on Contribution Revenue (LATE)
                   with Imputation of Missing Outcomes

                                                 Log Contributions
                               Year   t+1       Year   t+2        Year   t+3     Year    t+4
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)


                       LATE     0.832*             0.590           0.749*            -0.440
                                (0.311)          (0.355)           (0.359)           (0.397)


Note: ** p     < 0.01 and * p < 0.05.     The tables reproduce the results from Table 5 except that
it imputes missing outcomes for charities that exit the sample. The imputation approach
assumes that organizations continue the growth trend that they were on prior to their exit.
For example, if a rm saw a 5 percent decrease between year                     t-1   and year t before exiting in
year   t+1,   then we assume contributions continued to decrease at a 5 percent rate in future
years.




                                                       47
