                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHY ARE AVERAGE HOURS WORKED LOWER IN RICHER COUNTRIES?

                                          Alexander Bick
                                      Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln
                                          David Lagakos
                                        Hitoshi Tsujiyama

                                        Working Paper 26554
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26554


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2019




We thank Nora Strecker and Peter Egger for providing us with percentile data on gross and net incomes
for different countries. For helpful comments we thank Per Krusell, Johanna Wallenius, and seminar
audiences at Athens University of Economics and Business, BI Norwegian Business School, Bocconi,
Bonn, Goethe University Frankfurt, the IFS, the IIES Stockholm, Melbourne, Monash, MOVE Barcelona,
Queensland, the Reserve Bank of Australia, Sciences Po, the University of Vienna, and the University
of Zurich, as well as conference participants at the 2019 T2M conference, the 2019 SED meetings,
and the 2019 CEPR Annual Macroeconomics and Growth Programme Meeting. Fuchs-Schündeln
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council under the ERC Consolidator
Grant No. 815378. All potential errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alexander Bick, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, David Lagakos, and Hitoshi Tsujiyama. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why are Average Hours Worked Lower in Richer Countries?
Alexander Bick, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, David Lagakos, and Hitoshi Tsujiyama
NBER Working Paper No. 26554
December 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E24,H2,O11

                                            ABSTRACT

Why are average hours worked per adult lower in rich countries than in poor countries? We consider
two natural explanations: income effects in preferences, in which leisure becomes more valuable when
income rises, and distortionary tax systems, which are more prevalent in richer countries. To assess
the importance of these two forces, we build a simple model of labor supply by heterogeneous individuals
and calibrate it to match international data on labor income taxation, government transfers relative
to GDP, and hours worked per adult. The model predicts that income effects are the main driving force
behind the decline of average hours worked with GDP per capita. We reach a similar conclusion in
an extended model that matches cross-country patterns of labor supply along the extensive and intensive
margins and of the prevalence of subsistence self-employment.


Alexander Bick                                     David Lagakos
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics, 0508
W. P. Carey School of Business                     University of California, San Diego
Arizona State University                           9500 Gilman Drive
P.O. Box 879801                                    La Jolla, CA 92093
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801                               and NBER
alexander.bick@asu.edu                             lagakos@ucsd.edu

Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln                             Hitoshi Tsujiyama
Goethe University Frankfurt                        Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance                                   House of Finance
60323 Frankfurt                                    60323 Frankfurt
Germany                                            Germany
fuchs@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de                        hitoshi.tsujiyama@hof.uni-frankfurt.de
1. Introduction
    Both time-series evidence and cross-country data on hours worked point to a pattern
of lower average hours per adult in economies with higher income per capita. At the
turn of the 20th century, U.S. adults worked an average of 28 hours per week, whereas
nowadays, hours per adult have fallen to 24 hours per week (Ramey and Francis, 2009).
Hours in European countries have also fallen systemically over the last century (Boppart
and Krusell, 2020). For example, German adults worked around 28 hours in the 1950s
compared to around 17 hours today (Ohanian et al., 2008). The cross-section of coun-
tries in the world today shows a remarkable similarity with these time-series trends. In
the bottom third of the world income distribution, adults work 29 hours per week on
average, while in the top third adults average just 19 hours per week (Bick et al., 2018).
    So why are average hours lower in richer countries? While there is no consensus
in the literature, two hypotheses are natural candidates to consider. The first is income
effects in preferences, which lead to an increase in the demand for leisure as individual
wages rise. This view dates back at least to Keynes (1930), who argued that declin-
ing hours around the turn of the 20th century were due to higher income levels (see
Ohanian, 2008, for a modern interpretation). Recently, the income-effects view has
been embraced by Boppart and Krusell (2020), who reconcile the decrease in aggregate
hours with the standard balanced growth facts using a new specification of preferences
in which income effects in labor supply dominate substitution effects. Similarly, Restuc-
cia and Vandenbroucke (2013) adopt Stone-Geary preferences to capture income effects
in labor supply and to explain the declining U.S. hours worked over the last century.
    The second hypothesis is tax-and-transfer systems, which are much more extensive
on average in richer economies (see e.g. Besley and Persson, 2014; Jensen, 2019). For
example, Ohanian et al. (2008) argue that the declining pattern of hours in Europe since
the 1950s is due almost entirely to rising tax rates. More generally, a large literature
argues that Europe-U.S. differences in average hours worked can be traced to differences
in taxation of labor income (e.g. Prescott, 2004; Rogerson, 2006, 2008; McDaniel, 2011;
Bick and Fuchs-Sch¨   undeln, 2017, 2018; Bick et al., 2019). In the cross-country context,
the idea is that the lower hours in richer countries may be explained at least in part by
their more distortionary labor taxes and more generous transfers, both of which reduce
incentives to supply labor.



                                            1
    In this paper we quantitatively assess the importance of income effects relative to
tax-and-transfer systems in driving the cross-country decline in average hours worked
in GDP per capita. To do so, we build a simple model of labor supply by heterogeneous
households with preferences in which income and substitution effects do not necessar-
ily offset each other. Households face marginal tax rates on consumption and on labor
income and receive lump-sum transfers from the government. Labor markets are com-
petitive and labor is the only factor of production. Countries differ exogenously in two
basic ways: first, in their levels of aggregate labor productivity, and second, in the size
of their tax-and-transfer systems.
    One key challenge in our quantitative analysis is that the literature does not have
an agreed-upon estimate of the size of income effects relative to substitution effects in
aggregate labor supply that we can take off the shelf to calibrate our preferences. Nor can
one directly infer preferences from time-series or cross-country variation in aggregate
hours worked, since features of tax-and-transfer systems also vary over time and across
countries. Our approach then is to calibrate our model using cross-country evidence on
statutory non-linear labor tax rates assembled by Egger et al. (2019). Given these labor
and consumption tax rates across countries of different GDP per capita levels, we then
calibrate the income effects in preferences and labor productivity differences to match
average hours worked per adult across countries.
    The model predicts that income effects explain the bulk ­ around three quarters
­ of the relationship between average hours worked and GDP per capita. Intuitively,
the reason is that differences in labor productivity between poor and rich countries,
and hence wage rates, are an order of magnitude larger than differences in tax rates.
Between the top and bottom terciles of the world income distribution, labor productivity
differs by a factor of over 16, whereas taxes as a fraction of GDP vary by a factor of
only around 2. Germans face more taxes than Ghanaians, in other words, but these
differences are dwarfed by the massive income gaps between Germany and Ghana. The
model's calibrated preferences feature income effects that dominate substitution effects
only modestly, with an implied Marshallian elasticity of labor supply of -0.10. In spite
of its simplicity, we show that the model is quantitatively consistent with another salient
feature of the data, namely the within-country hours-wage gradients, which are negative
for most countries but increase in income per capita.
    Still, given the stylized nature of our model, it is natural to wonder how credible


                                            2
its implications are for the importance of income effects and taxes in explaining aggre-
gate hours worked. In particular, the model abstracts away from the extensive margin
(employment rates) and intensive margin (hours per worker) of labor supply. Bick et al.
(2018) show that the behavior of the two margins over the development spectrum is strik-
ingly different. Employment rates fall rapidly between low- and middle-income coun-
tries, and then are flat or even slightly increasing towards the high-income countries.
Hours per worker, on the other hand, are concave in income per capita, with a slight
increase from poor to middle-income countries and then a marked decrease between
middle- and high-income countries. The model also ignores the structural transforma-
tion from self-employment to market work that occurs over the development process
(Gollin, 2008). Given that the self-employed may be constrained in how many produc-
tive hours they can work each day (Bandiera et al., 2017), this structural transformation
of labor supply is likely to be important for aggregate patterns of hours worked.1
     To address these concerns we extend the model to include an extensive margin and
an intensive margin of labor supply, as well as a "traditional sector" based on subsis-
tence self-employment characterized by a decreasing-returns production function. The
"modern sector" allows household members to work in competitive labor markets for as
many hours as they choose at the going wage. However, working in the modern sector
is associated with a fixed cost, as in Rogerson and Wallenius (2013), which captures the
idea that subsistence self-employment work is relatively easily available, while access-
ing the modern sector requires search and commuting time (Fields, 2009; Feng et al.,
2019). We allow this fixed cost to vary with the level of development, since search for
wage jobs may be especially difficult in poor countries (Poschke, 2019). Subsistence
self-employment is rarely taxed in practice (Jensen, 2019), so we assume that labor
income taxes are only levied on the modern sector.
     As before, we calibrate the extended model to match the cross-country data on aver-
age hours per adult in countries belonging to the poorest and richest third of the world
   1 The  movement from subsistence self-employment to market work is one of the most salient features
of development, though it has not been incorporated so far into the literature about the determinants of
aggregate hours worked. Ngai and Pissarides (2008) and Bridgman et al. (2018) distinguish between
market and non-market work, which is distinct but related, while most of the rest of the literature on
structural change has focused on how employment and value added move from agriculture to industry
and then to services as countries grow richer (see e.g. Herrendorf et al., 2014). Dividing the economy into
these three sectors is not important for our arguments, though, and in practice much of the work in each
of these three sectors is subsistence self-employment in poor countries (Gollin, 2008).



                                                    3
income distribution, taking tax rates and the size of transfers from the data. In addition,
we calibrate the fixed costs of working in the modern sector to match differences in em-
ployment rates in the richest and poorest countries. We show that the model replicates
the convex shape of the extensive margin and the concave shape of the intensive margin,
i.e. the facts for the middle-income countries, which we do not target. Sectoral reallo-
cation from the traditional into the modern sector is key to generate these shapes, as we
explain in detail below. Reassuringly, similar to the simple model, the extended model
also matches the individual-level hours-wage elasticities, which are not targeted at all.
Both of these successes in matching the data lend credence to the model's disaggregate
predictions.
     The extended model predicts that income effects explain roughly the entire decrease
in hours worked with GDP per capita. The reason income effects dominate here is
twofold. First, just as in the simple model, cross-country variations in tax rates are
dwarfed by the variation in labor productivity levels. Secondly, faster productivity
growth in the modern than in the traditional sector leads families to reallocate into the
modern sector, where employment rates are lower. The implied Marshallian elasticity
is now -0.18, as this sectoral reallocation strengthens the effects of increasing labor pro-
ductivity on hours worked. We conclude that while tax and transfer systems may be the
primary factor explaining differences in hours worked among advanced economies, the
decline in work hours that comes with development is accounted for by income effects.
Moreover, while structural transformation and a varying fixed cost of labor supply are
important for understanding the behavior of the extensive and intensive margins of labor
supply across countries, these features do not fundamentally alter our conclusions about
why average hours decline with income. While taxes and transfers are not behind the de-
crease in hours by development, they are crucial for explaining why the within-country
hours-wage elasticities turn from negative to positive with development.
     The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents our simple model of
labor supply, calibrates it to international data on taxes and hours worked, and explores
the relative roles of income effects and taxes and transfer systems in explaining why
hours decline with income. Section 3 reviews the cross-country facts about the extensive
and intensive margins of labor supply, subsistence self-employment, and other potential
determinants of hours worked. Section 4 presents the extended model that is enriched
to include two margins of labor supply and structural change, and Section 5 assesses the


                                             4
quantitative importance of income effects and taxes in this model. Section 6 concludes.

2. A Simple Model of Labor Supply
    In this section, we present a simple model of labor supply that we use to learn about
the roles of income effects and tax-and-transfer systems in explaining cross-country dif-
ferences in average hours worked per adult. The model features preferences in which
income effects and substitution effects in labor supply do not necessarily cancel out
when income rises, as in standard balanced-growth preferences. Households are het-
erogeneous in their individual productivity levels. Labor and consumption are taxed at
the margin and a portion of tax collections are returned to the households as transfers.
These features allow us to calibrate the model and quantify the sources of cross-country
differences in labor supply. Due to the within-country heterogeneity, the model gen-
erates predictions not only for the relationship of hours and income on the aggregate
level, but also for within-country hours-wage gradients. Moreover, heterogeneity gives
a meaningful role to progressive taxation, which varies systematically by development.

2.1. Environment
    Output is produced using a constant-returns production function with labor as the
sole input: Y = AL, where A represents aggregate labor productivity and L is aggregate
effective hours. Labor and output markets are perfectly competitive. Countries differ in
the level of aggregate labor productivity, A, though we leave off country subscripts for
convenience. In equilibrium, the market-clearing wage is given by w = A.
    Each country is populated by a measure one of heterogeneous households that differ
only in their productivity of labor z with log z  N (0, z2 ). We assume that the variance
of productivity across households, z2 , does not vary with aggregate productivity, based
on the evidence that the shape of the income distribution does not systematically vary
with GDP per capita (see e.g. Dollar and Kraay, 2002). Each household makes a labor-
leisure choice given the following preferences (MaCurdy, 1981):
                                                       1
                                         c1-   h1+ 
                              u (c, h) =     -     1
                                                     ,                                (1)
                                         1-    1+ 

where c and h are consumption and hours worked,   0, and   0. The parameter
 governs the strength of the income effects, and  the curvature of disutility in hours


                                           5
worked. In a dynamic setting,  represents the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, meaning
the percentage change in hours that comes from a one-percent increase in the wage
holding fixed the marginal utility of consumption. Boppart and Krusell (2020) show
that these preferences are consistent with balanced growth even if the income effect
dominates, i.e. if  > 1. As in Vandenbroucke (2009), the within-country heterogeneity
in our model generates predictions for how hours vary with income for different income
groups that can be tested in the data.
    The government applies a progressive income tax T (y) to household income y =
zwh, and a linear consumption tax c on consumption, c. The government spends G
on "government consumption expenditure," which does not enter the households' util-
ity function. The remaining government tax collections are redistributed as lump-sum
transfers  to households such that the budget is balanced. These transfers may repre-
sent direct transfers to households and/or public goods provided by the government that
are a substitute for private consumption expenditures.
    The government's budget constraint in equilibrium is given by:

                           G+ =        [T (y(z)) + c c(z)] dFz ,                      (2)

where Fz is the cumulative distribution function of z. The household's budget constraint
in turn is:
                             (1 + c )c = zwh - T (y) + .                             (3)

     Two sets of variables differ exogenously by development: (i) the aggregate produc-
tivity level, A; and (ii) the size of the tax-and-transfer system (c , T , G, ). We then
characterize the equilibrium over a range of A values, representing countries at different
levels of the development spectrum.

2.2. Tax-and-Transfer Systems
    To parameterize the model, we need to discipline the size of tax-and-transfer systems
across countries. We draw on two different data sets, and use available information for
as many countries as possible for each input.
    Our main data source is Egger et al. (2019), who have already assembled a compre-
hensive database of statutory tax rates across countries. To do so, they draw on official
data from the IMF, the World Bank, the OECD, other government sources from individ-


                                            6
ual countries, and data on taxation by private companies. To operationalize these data
for use in our quantitative analysis, we assume the functional form for a progressive tax
system put forth by B´ enabou (2002) with net income y ~ being given by

                           ~ = y - T (y) = y - y -  y1- =  y1- ,
                           y                                                                            (4)

where  is informative about the level of taxation and  about the progressivity. For
 = 0, 1 -  represents a proportional tax on income, whereas for  = 1, net income
is independent of gross income. We estimate  for each country based on the data set
compiled by Egger et al. (2019). Specifically, for each country they shared average
gross incomes at each percentile of the income distribution and the implied net income,
where the latter is calculated for a single individual without children using statutory
tax codes excluding any transfers that are not incorporated directly into the tax system.
Taking logs of Equation (4), we estimate  for each country from a regression of log
net earnings on log gross earnings. We then set  such that the equilibrium share of
government revenue coming from labor income taxes corresponds to the one in the data,
which we also obtain from Egger et al. (2019).2
    We set the consumption tax rate such that the equilibrium government revenue to
GDP ratio equals its data counterpart in the Egger et al. (2019) data, assuming a bal-
anced budget. Thus, consumption taxes in our calibration implicitly also contain rev-
enues coming from tariffs or corporate taxes, assuming that all these revenues are raised
as linear taxes on households. Finally, we redistribute only a fraction of government
revenues to households. Specifically, we set /Y equal to the share of social benefits
over GDP, which we obtain from the IMF government statistics.
    Figures 1a, 1b, and 1c plot the resulting components of the tax system that we use in
the calibration. In the calibration, we do a piecewise linear interpolation of the averages
for all variables over countries belonging to the poorest, middle, and richest terciles
of the world income distribution, as measured by GDP per adult in the Penn World
Tables. This simplification leaves the model ill-suited to explain differences in hours
worked within groups of countries of similar income levels, but makes it useful for
studying how hours change with income across countries of different GDP per capita
   2 We  take the sample of 62 countries with information on the share of government revenues coming
from labor income taxes also for the estimation of the progressivity parameter, i.e. the sample of countries
is consistent for the different fiscal inputs coming from Egger et al. (2019).


                                                     7
               Figure 1: Cross-Country Differences in the Tax-and-Transfer System

                      (a) Fiscal Progressivity                                                            (b) Share of Government Revenues
                                                                                                          Coming from Labor Income Taxation
                                                                                                              55
        0.25
                                                                                                              50

                                                                                                              45
         0.2
                                                                                                              40

                                                                                                              35




                                                                                               % of Revenue
        0.15

                                                                                                              30
    =




         0.1
                                                                                                              25

                                                                                                              20
        0.05
                                                                                                              15

           0                                                                                                  10

                                                                                                              5
        -0.05
            7.5   8      8.5     9     9.5              10          10.5         11                           0
                                                                                                              7.5       8      8.5      9     9.5   10    10.5   11
                               log GDP per adult                                                                                      log GDP per adult

                                                  (c) Government Revenue
                                             and Social Benefits Relative to GDP
                                                  50
                                                             Revenue
                                                             Social Benefit
                                                  45

                                                  40

                                                  35

                                                  30
                                       % of GDP




                                                  25

                                                  20

                                                  15

                                                  10

                                                  5

                                                  0
                                                  7.5           8          8.5        9       9.5                  10   10.5     11
                                                                                  log GDP per adult
Note: The small dots represent each country in our sample, and the large dots the averages by country-
income group. The lines show the piecewise linear interpolation.


levels, which is the goal of the paper. The estimate of progressivity is slightly U-shaped,
exhibiting a slight decrease from low- to middle-income countries and a substantial
increase from middle- to high-income countries (Figure 1a). The share of government
revenue coming from labor income taxes is small and almost flat from low- to middle-
income countries, but sharply increases from middle- to high-income countries (Figure
1b). The estimate of government revenue relative to GDP increases somewhat from

                                                                                          8
the poor to middle-income countries and then sharply from the middle to the richest
countries (Figure 1c). Similarly, the size of government transfers also increases over the
development spectrum.
    How does the overall burden of taxes vary by income across countries? Figure 1c
provides one answer to this question. In the poorest tercile countries in our data, taxes
are on average around 15 percent of GDP. In the richest tercile, in contrast, taxes are
about 33 percent of GDP. Thus, by this metric, the tax burden is about 2.2 times as high
in the richest countries as in the poorest. Since these taxes are distortionary, and because
redistribution of taxes is perceived as outside income by the households, this translates
qualitatively into lower hours worked in richer countries.

2.3. Calibration
    With the tax data in hand, we proceed with the calibration of the model, using av-
erage targets from the poorest and richest terciles of countries in the world income dis-
tribution. We first normalize the level of labor productivity in the richest tercile of
countries, Arich , to be one. We set the value of  = 1 which gives us an elasticity in
line with estimates for the extensive and intensive margin in the literature (see Keane,
2011). Last, we normalize  = 1. The distribution of individual labor productivity is
estimated using the panel component of the Current Population Survey (CPS), and is
assumed to capture permanent differences across households. We estimate a panel fixed
effect regression of log income per hour on individual fixed effects, following Lagakos
and Waugh (2013), and take the variance of the individual effects to be the variance of
the permanent productivity differences in our model.
    We then jointly calibrate  and the labor productivity level in the poorest tercile
of the world income distribution, A poor , to match average hours worked per adult and
GDP per adult in the average poor country relative to the average rich country. Thus, by
construction the model is calibrated to explain the entire decline in hours worked present
in the data. The parameter  determines the size of income effects in preferences, and
is identified from the hours differences between the poorest and richest countries not
explained by differences in tax systems.
    Table 1 shows the calibration targets and the calibrated parameters. We take the
data on hours worked from Bick et al. (2018), in which we carefully construct these
data for 49 countries, and also report averages by terciles of the world income distri-



                                             9
                    Table 1: Calibrated Parameters and Calibration Targets

                   Parameter            Value                 Target                 Data      Model
                  curvature of           1.23         avg. hours per adult            1.48      1.48
                  consumption                      in poor vs. rich countries
      A poor      productivity           0.06        avg. output per adult            0.09      0.09
               in poor countries                   in poor vs. rich countries



bution.3 Hours worked include any hours spent on producing output counted in NIPA;
especially, hours spent in informal work, self-employment, or production of goods for
self-consumption are also included in this measure. Data on output per adult come from
the Penn World Tables. Average hours worked per adult in the poorest tercile are 28.2
hours, and in the richest tercile 19.1 hours (see Table 3), such that the ratio of hours in
poor to rich countries amounts to 1.48. Average output per adult in the poorest tercile
is only 0.09 times of average output per adult in richest tercile. The resulting calibrated
parameter values are  = 1.23 and A poor = 0.062. The model's value of  is higher
than the standard value of 1 used to generate balanced growth with constant hours (King
et al., 1988). This points to a role for income effects in generating the decline in hours
present in the data.
    As shown by Keane (2011), an advantage of our simple preference specification is
that it allows for closed-form solutions for several common elasticities of labor supply
studied by the literature. Our analysis is most informative about the Marshallian elastic-
ity of labor supply, which summarizes how hours respond to a one-percent permanent
increase in wages. The Marshallian elasticity in our model is (1 -  )/(1/ +  ), which
is -0.10 at our calibrated parameter values.4 Thus, the overall effect of a 10 percent
increase in the wage rate is a decrease in labor supply of around 1 percent. Our estimate
lies within the large range of estimates reported in 22 papers studied by Keane (2011),
   3 There are two slight differences in the data used in this paper and in Bick et al. (2018). First, we drop
Laos, because it lacks information on self-employment, which we need for the calibration of the extended
model. Second, we define terciles of the world income distribution based on output per adult rather than
output per capita. We have data on 10 countries in the poorest tercile, 15 countries in the middle tercile,
and 23 countries in the richest tercile.
   4 We get exactly the same estimate for the Marshallian elasticity when regressing average predicted

hours from the "income effect" experiment in Table 2 on average wages on the country level. In the
extended model of Section 5, we calculate Marshallian elasticities based on such an estimation.


                                                     10
                                  Figure 2: Key Facts: Simple Model vs. Data
               (a) Average Hours per Adult                      (b) Within-Country Hours-Wage Gradients
         40                                                      0.15


         35                                                       0.1

                                                                 0.05
         30
                                                                   0
         25
                                                                -0.05
 Hours




                                                            -
         20
                                                                 -0.1

         15                                                     -0.15

         10                                                      -0.2

                                                                -0.25
         5

                                                                 -0.3
         0
         7.5   8    8.5       9     9.5   10   10.5   11            7.5   8   8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11
                          log GDP per adult                                         log GDP per adult
Note: The small red dots represent each country in our sample, and the large red dots the average by
country income group. The model predictions are displayed by the blue line. Targeted moments are
marked with a star. The red dots in the right panel are the beta-coefficients from the following regression,
run separately for each country on the sample of workers in paid employment: log (hi ) =  +  log (wi ) +
1 agei + 2 agei 2 + i .


which range from -0.47 to 0.51, and below his average of 0.06. None of these studies
use cross-country data on hours worked to measure a Marshallian elasticity, though, as
we do. Hence, our estimate might be more useful in the context of large productivity
differences.
    Figure 2a plots the model's predictions for average hours by income level against
the data (small red dots). The large red dots are average hours by income tercile, and
the stars are the calibration targets. Overall, the model matches the decline of hours per
adult in log GDP per adult well, as intended.
    One way to cross-check the model's income effect on labor supply is to compare its
predictions for the within-country gradients of hours worked to hourly wages to their
counterparts in the data. Bick et al. (2018) estimate these hours-wage gradients for 46
countries and document that they are negative in poorer countries and increase with GDP
per capita. Only some of the world's highest income countries, like the United States
and the United Kingdom, have positive gradients. In other words, within most countries
in the world, individuals with lower hourly wages work more hours than those with


                                                           11
higher wages. As countries get richer, the gap in hours between individuals with lower
and higher wages closes, and even reverses in some advanced economies. This reversal
has been documented in historical U.S. data as well; see e.g. Costa (2000), Aguiar and
Hurst (2007), and Heathcote et al. (2014).
    Figure 2b plots the model's predictions for hours-wage gradients by income level
(blue line) and in the cross-country data (red dots). The model does quite well in match-
ing the levels and cross-country variation in hours-wage gradients, even though we did
not target them in any way. The model's predicted gradient of -0.07 for the average of
the poorest tercile of countries is quite close to the empirical value (the thick red dot on
the left). For the middle tercile, the gradient is negative as in the data, but somewhat
higher than in the data. The richest tercile gradient is close to zero both in the model
and data, and the model accurately predicts the modestly positive gradients for the very
richest countries.
    The fact that the model reproduces the negative hours-wage gradients within most
countries provides some validation to the model's quantitative predictions for income
effects on labor supply. Perhaps more subtly, the increasing gradients with GDP per
capita help corroborate the model's calibrated tax and transfer systems. In the model,
the rising gradients with development come entirely from the rising and increasingly
progressive tax systems that come with development (highlighted in Figure 1). The main
reason is that less productive households respond to the larger government transfers by
lowering their hours more than those with higher productivity. In the richest countries,
transfers are so large relative to potential wage income for the least productive workers
that they work even less than those with higher productivity, in spite of strong income
effects in preferences. The increase in progressivity with development pushes towards a
lower hours-wage elasticity in richer countries, but is quantitatively less important than
the increase in transfers.

2.4. Decomposition
    The purpose of the calibrated model is that it can help decompose the importance
of income effects and tax-and-transfer systems in explaining the decrease in aggregate
hours. We decompose these two forces using two counterfactual exercises. The first
takes the tax-and-transfer system of the poorest countries and keeps that fixed while
raising aggregate labor productivity to the level of the richest countries. This counter-
factual simulates how hours worked would look across the world income distribution

                                            12
                 Table 2: Counterfactual Experiments in the Simple Model

                                               Poor     Rich     Diff.    % Expl.
                     Data                      28.2     19.1       9.1
                     Model                     28.2     19.1       9.1
                     Income Effect             28.2     21.2       7.0        77%
                     Taxes & Transfers         28.2     25.2       3.0        33%
             Note: This table reports average hours worked per adult in the poorest and rich-
             est terciles of the world income distribution in the data, the calibrated simple
             model, and two counterfactual experiments. The first, `Income Effect,' varies
             only labor productivity, A, across countries but holds fixed the size of tax-and-
             transfer systems. The second, `Taxes & Transfers,' holds fixed A and varies the
             size of the tax-and-transfer systems. The last column reports the percent of the
             difference in the data explained by the model under each counterfactual.


assuming only an income effect. The second takes the income level of the poorest
countries as fixed, but changes the size of the tax-and-transfer system with actual GDP
per adult. The purpose of the second counterfactual is to compute hypothetical hours
worked by income level assuming that tax systems are the only source of variation across
countries.5
    Table 2 shows the results of these counterfactuals. In the first two rows, the table
reports hours worked in the data and model for the average poor and the average rich
country, as well as their simple difference, which amounts to 9.1 hours. The following
two rows then provide the results from the decomposition exercise, with the third row
indicating the decrease in hours between the average poor and the average rich country
that can be attributed to income effects. The fourth row indicates this decrease for the
fiscal inputs. The columns state the predictions for the average low- and high-income
country from each decomposition, the predicted change between the average poor and
rich country, and the percent the respective decomposition contributes to the total pre-
dicted change in the model. By construction, average hours in the poor country are
always matched. Income effects alone explain 77 percent of the difference in hours be-
tween the poorest and richest tercile in the data. Taxes and transfers explain 33 percent
by themselves. Note that because the income effect and taxation interact non-linearly,
   5 Ourexperiments take into account that progressive tax codes are always defined relative to the aver-
age income of a country. Appendix B.1 provides the details of how we account for this feature.


                                                   13
the two numbers do not add up to 100 percent.
    Why do income effects explain more than taxes? The intuition comes from compar-
ing the magnitude of the productivity (and hence income) differences across countries to
the tax differences. Labor productivity differences between the richest tercile of coun-
tries and poorest tercile are a factor of 16.2 (= Arich /A poor = 1/0.062). As discussed in
Section 2.2, the overall tax burden is about 2.2 times larger in the richest tercile than the
poorest. The implied average consumption tax rate rises from 15.4 percent in the poorest
tercile to 27.2 percent in the richest, and the average labor income tax rate, measured as
labor income tax divided by income, from 1 percent to 7.6 percent. Nevertheless, even
these tax differences could in principle explain all of the hours difference leaving no
role for income effects if labor supply would be much more elastic than implied by our
calibration. However, for our parameter estimates, which are in line with conventional
elasticities of labor supply, the enormous changes in income are dominant in explain-
ing the decline in hours across the world GDP per adult distribution.6 As a robustness
check, we also calibrate an alternative version of the model in which we assume full
redistribution of government revenues. This maximizes the negative effect of taxes on
hours by maximizing the outside income provided by transfers. In this robustness check,
taxes and transfers explain 40 percent of the decrease in hours, and income effects 71
percent. Thus, the model robustly attributes the majority of the decrease in hours to
income effects.

3. Disaggregate Patterns of Labor Supply Across Countries
    While the model above provides a simple way to account for aggregate hours dif-
ferences across countries, it necessarily abstracts from the rich disaggregate patterns of
labor supply in the data. To start with, the extensive and intensive margins behave quite
differently along the development process (Bick et al., 2018). Moreover, labor supply
in developing countries is largely directed toward subsistence self-employment activi-
ties. As countries become richer, they undergo structural change which takes workers
out of self-employment and into market wage work. In this section we review these dis-
   6 For the evaluation of tax changes, the Hicksian elasticity, which summarizes how hours respond to
a change in wages holding the level of income fixed, is particularly relevant (see Keane, 2011). The
Hicksian elasticity in our model is given by 1/(1/ +  ), and is 0.45 at our calibrated parameter values.
This is well within the wide range of estimates from 22 studies summarized by Keane (2011), which run
from 0.02 to 1.32 with an average of 0.31, and comparable to the averages of 0.50 and 0.59 reported for
micro studies and macro studies by Chetty et al. (2012).

                                                  14
               Table 3: Extensive and Intensive Margins by Income Group

                                                        Low     Middle     High
                  Hours per Adult                       28.2      21.7      19.1
                  Employment Rate (Extensive)           74.5      52.4      54.6
                  Hours per Worker (Intensive)          38.4      41.3      35.1

Note: This table reports average weekly hours worked per adult, average employment rates, and average
weekly hours worked per worker by country income group. Source: Bick et al. (2018).



aggregate patterns of labor supply and discuss their potential roles in shaping aggregate
labor supply across countries. We also discuss cross-country differences in regulation of
hours worked, which helps guide our modeling choices in the extended model to follow.
     We begin with the cross-country patterns of labor supply along the extensive and in-
tensive margins, drawing on the findings from Bick et al. (2018). Table 3 reports average
employment rates (the extensive margin) and hours per worker (the intensive margin),
as well as average hours per adult, for three country income groups: those belonging to
the poorest, middle, and richest terciles of the world income distribution. While both
margins of labor supply show a decrease between low- and high-income countries, they
behave very differently over the entire development spectrum. Employment rates fall
strongly between low- and middle-income countries, namely by 22.1 percentage points,
but then slightly increase towards the high-income countries. Hours per worker, on the
other hand, show a slight increase between low- and middle-income countries, but then
fall by 6.2 hours per week between middle- and high-income countries. Last, Table 3
shows that the decrease in the employment rate between poor and rich countries is quan-
titatively more important than the decrease in hours per worker for the total decrease in
hours per adult: employment rates generate three quarters of the total decrease (see Bick
et al. (2018)).
     We turn next to subsistence self-employment rates across countries. Empirically,
we focus on self-employed individuals with low education, which is a close proxy for
subsistence work, though certainly not exact, and something we can measure in a com-
parable way across the countries in our data. For comparison with our model later,
we define these workers as the "traditional sector," and the balance to be the "modern
sector."

                                                 15
                       Table 4: Sectoral Hours Worked and Sectoral Shares

                                                        Country Income Group
                                                        Low Middle High
                         Traditional Sec. Hours         35.4       36.6       39.2
                         Modern Sec. Hours              46.3       42.3       35.0
                         Traditional Sec. Share         64.3       18.6        5.7



    Table 4 shows in the first two rows the average hours per worker in the traditional
and the modern sector, respectively, separately for the three country income groups.
Looking across columns, we find that hours worked per worker are 3.8 (39.2 - 35.4)
hours higher in rich than in poor countries in the traditional sector. By contrast, they
are 11.3 (35.4 - 46.3) hours lower in rich than in poor countries in the modern sector.
Thus, hours per worker are strongly decreasing in development in the modern sector,
and slightly increasing in the traditional sector. As a result, looking across rows, for
the poor and middle-income countries hours are markedly lower in the traditional than
in the modern sector, namely by 10.9 (46.3 - 35.4) and 5.7 (42.4 - 36.6) weekly hours,
respectively. Only for the rich countries are hours higher in the traditional sector, with a
difference of 4.2 hours. The last row of Table 4 shows the share of all workers working in
the traditional sector: In the poor countries, almost two thirds of workers (64.3 percent)
work in the traditional sector. This share rapidly decreases to 18.6 percent in the middle-
income countries, and only 5.7 percent in the high-income countries. Thus, over the
development process, there is a marked structural change in labor supply, as workers
move from subsistence self-employment to wage work.
    Taking the patterns of sectoral hours worked per worker and sectoral shares of work-
ers together, it becomes clear that the modest increase of 2.9 weekly hours worked per
worker between low- and middle-income countries documented in Table 3 does not arise
because of an increase in sectoral hours worked per worker, but is due to a compositional
effect: hours are markedly lower in the traditional than in the market sector in both low-
and middle-income countries, and the substantial decrease in the share working in the
traditional sector between low- and middle-income countries thus causes the small in-
crease in average hours worked per worker.7 Thus, the initial fairly flat part in hours
   7 The   small increase in hours per worker in the traditional sector marginally adds to this increase.


                                                      16
                     Figure 3: Cross-Country Differences in Hours Regulation
           (a) Legal Limits on Hours per Day                (b) Legal Limits on Days per Week


          24
                                                            7

          22


          20


          18
                                                            6
          16


          14


          12

                                                            5
          10

           7.5   8    8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11        7.5   8   8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11


Source: Doing Business 2005, World Bank. Note: The small dots represent each country with available
data, and the large dots the averages by country-income group. Legal limits on maximum hours worked
per day, depicted in panel (a), may be defined either as mandatory maximum regular and overtime working
hours per day or by mandatory minimum rest hours per day. If nothing is specified in the law, 24 hours
are used. Legal limits on the maximum number of work days per week, depicted in panel (b), may be
defined either by a number of mandatory rest days per week or by a mandatory minimum of consecutive
hours of rest. If nothing is specified, seven days are used.


worked per worker over development is driven by this compositional effect. The de-
creasing part between middle- and high-income countries, by contrast, is driven by the
strong decrease of 7.3 hours per worker in the modern sector between these two country
income groups, with the large majority of individuals working in the modern sector in
both country income groups.8
    Another factor that may be relevant for how average hours worked vary with income
per capita is regulation of work hours. Figure 3 plots data on the two main types of hours
regulation used in practice, taken from the World Bank's Doing Business Report, against
log GDP per capita. These are: legal limits on the number of hours that can be worked
per day, and legal limits on the number of days that can be worked per week. These are
reported to be 24 and 7, respectively, in countries with no legal limits on hours worked
per day or days worked per week. These regulations would be particularly relevant for
   8 We  abstract from age and sex in the model that follows because the patterns presented in Tables 3
and 4 are similar among men and women, and across broad age groups. See Appendix Tables A.1 to A.7.


                                                       17
the intensive margin, since they put caps on the number of hours a worker can supply
in a given week. As Figure 3 shows, however, none of these types of regulation is
correlated with income per capita. Thus, while differential regulation of hours may well
be important for explaining variation in hours across countries of similar income levels,
it is not a prime candidate for explaining why individuals in richer countries work less
on average than those in poorer countries. We therefore abstract from any regulations to
the intensive margin of hours worked in the model to follow other than distortionary tax
and transfer systems, which, in contrast to hours regulations, are substantially larger in
richer countries.

4. Extended Model of Aggregate and Disaggregate Labor Supply
    We now extend the aggregate model to feature the rich disaggregate patterns of labor
supply discussed in the section above. In particular, we add a household labor supply
decision that includes an extensive and intensive margin, and a traditional sector featur-
ing self-employment, in addition to the modern sector with labor supplied in competitive
markets. We model families as an informal insurance mechanism to generate the em-
ployment rates well below one in countries of all income levels. We calibrate the model
to match the aggregate and disaggregate patterns described above for the average poor
and average rich country, and show that it also replicates the facts for the middle-income
countries. We then use the model to re-assess the roles of income effects and taxes in
driving aggregate labor supply.

4.1. Environment
    There is a continuum of families of mass one in each country, and a continuum of in-
dividuals of mass one in each family. We assume perfect insurance within a family, and
no insurance across families (see Heathcote et al., 2014). Families are meant to capture
different kinds of informal insurance networks within a country, which might exist not
only within families, but also within villages or other groups (see e.g. Townsend, 1994,
and Fafchamps and Lund, 2003).
    Families differ in their modern sector productivity z with log z  N (0, z2 ).9 Indi-
viduals within a family differ only in their individual fixed disutility of work  . The
   9 Similarly,Caselli and Coleman (2001) and Porzio and Santangelo (2019) posit that human capital
does not matter in the agricultural sector, but only in non-agricultural work.



                                                18
instantaneous utility function of an individual is
                                                       1
                                    ~1-
                                    c     ~ 1+ 
                                          h
                         u c  ~
                           ~, h;  =     -        -u    ~ >0 ,
                                                  ¯S  Ih                                  (5)
                                    1-         1
                                          1+ 

where c ~ and h ~ are individual consumption and hours worked, u     ¯S is the utility cost of
working a positive number of hours, which depends on the sector the family is working
in, and Ih
         ~ >0 is an indicator equal to 1 if the individual works. In what follows, variables
c and h with a tilde refer to the individual level, and without a tilde to the family level.
With the exception of the fixed cost of working, individual preferences thus take the
same form as in the model described in Section 2.
    Each family is headed by a family head who maximizes the sum of the utility of
all family members with equal weight. The family can decide to work either in the
traditional or in the modern sector. In the modern sector, family income is equal to the
hourly wage w times effective family hours worked (i.e. family hours multiplied by mar-
ket productivity z). The modern sector features a constant returns to scale technology.
The traditional sector by contrast features a decreasing returns to scale technology, and
family income in the traditional sector equals yT = AT h with  < 1, where AT is the
traditional sector labor productivity. The decreasing returns to scale technology captures
the fact that land is fixed for most family farms and businesses, and markets for land,
labor and capital function poorly in most developing countries (see e.g. Jayachandran,
2006, or Karlan et al., 2014). Thus, the marginal product of labor is decreasing in labor
supply for those in the traditional sector, and the family is the residual claimant on all
profits earned in the traditional sector.

4.2. Equilibrium Analysis
Family's Problem The family head faces a two-stage maximization problem. In a
first stage, she chooses family hours h, consumption c, and the sector of employment S.
In a second stage, given family hours and consumption, she chooses individual hours h ~
and consumption c   ~. We solve the maximization problem by backward induction.




                                             19
   Given (c, h, S), the second stage maximization problem amounts to

                           max                   ~ ( ); S,  dF ( )
                                           ~( ), h
                                         u c
                         {c    ~ (·)}
                          ~(·),h
                            s.t.              c~( )dF ( ) = c                         (6)
                                              ~ ( )dF ( ) = h,
                                              h

where F is the CDF of  .
    The first order condition for consumption implies perfect consumption risk sharing
                        ~( ) = c for all  . Also, due to the separability of disutility
within the family, i.e. c
arising from working at the extensive and intensive margin, there is no variation within
the family in optimal hours worked conditional on working. The optimal hours function
thus can be expressed as

                                            ~  > 0 for    
                                            h
                             ~ ( ) =
                             h
                                              0      otherwise.

The family head's problem therefore reduces to determining a threshold level   (z): all
family members with a disutility of work below this threshold level work the same posi-
           ~  (  ) = h  , and all family members with a disutility above this threshold
tive hours h          F ( )
level do not work. Given family hours h, individual hours worked are decreasing in the
                 dh~
threshold level, d   < 0.
    Substituting the optimal decisions into the objective function of the problem (6)
gives the family utility:
                                               1
                           c1-   h1+             1                     
                 U (c, h)      -     1
                                       (F (  ))-  - u
                                                    ¯S                     dF.        (7)
                           1-    1+                                0


Note that the family utility looks different from the individual utility (5), see Constan-
tinides (1982). In the first stage, the family head solves the following maximization
problem of the family:

                          max                       U (c, h)
                       c,h,S{T ,M }
                           s.t.         (1 + c,S )c = yS - TS (yS ) + ,               (8)
                         where            yM = wzh and yT = AT h

                                               20
where the taxes paid may depend on the sector. We denote the solution to the family's
problem by {c(z), h(z), S(z)}zR++ .

Equilibrium Wage The competitive market sector clears such that

                                L=     zh(z) · 1{S(z)=M } dFz ,

where Fz is the CDF of z. In equilibrium, the market-clearing wage is given by w = AM .

Government Budget The government budget is balanced in equilibrium:

                 G+ =                 TS (y(z)) + c,S c(z) 1{S(z)=S} dFz .               (9)
                          S=T ,M


Equilibrium A stationary equilibrium consists of a set of decision rules {c(·), h(·),   (·), S(·)},
a wage rate w, and the government policies {c,T , TT (·), c,M , TM (·), G, } such that

  (i) given the price and policies, the decision rules solve families' problems (6) and
      (8),

 (ii) the marginal profit condition is satisfied: w = AM , and

 (iii) the government budget constraint (9) is satisfied.

4.3. The Process of Development
    We assume that three sets of variables differ exogenously by development: (i) the
aggregate productivity levels in the modern and traditional sector AM and AT ; (ii) the size
of the tax-and-transfer system (c,T , TT (·), c,M , TM (·), G, ), and (iii) the fixed cost of
working in the modern sector u ¯M , which captures the variation of accessibility of modern
sector jobs. We solve steady-states for each level of development.
    While differential labor productivity growth between sectors is a standard force of
structural change, a fixed cost of working in the modern sector that differs by develop-
ment is not. Why do we introduce this additional force of structural change? First, a
fixed cost of working in the modern sector is a plausible source of cross-country het-
erogeneity since the modern sector is mostly present in cities, making it very costly for
a large part of the population who live in rural areas to access it. Relatedly, Poschke

                                             21
(2019) argues that labor search costs are higher in poorer countries than in richer ones.
Second, as we explain in Section 4.4.3, without this extra degree of freedom, it is still
possible to replicate the decrease in hours worked per adult by development. However,
the model then fails to replicate the differential behavior of the two margins of labor
supply between the middle- and high-income countries.

4.4. Taking the Model to the Data
    We calibrate the model parameters to data coming from the countries belonging to
the poorest and richest third of the world income distribution. We then ask whether the
model can explain the patterns we see over the full development spectrum, both across
and within countries. In the baseline calibration, we assume that labor income taxes are
only raised on modern sector incomes, due to enforceability problems in the traditional
sector. At the end of Section 5, we show that our main results are robust to different
assumptions on sectoral taxation.

4.4.1. Exogenous Model Inputs
    We assume that the individual fixed utility cost of working is uniformly distributed
with   U (0, 1), which allows us to solve the second stage of the family head maxi-
mization problem in closed form (see Appendix B.2). The implementation of the tax-
and-transfer system and the estimation of the distribution of the family-level modern
sector productivity z follow the descriptions in Sections and 2.2 and 2.3.

4.4.2. Calibration
    We begin with a few normalizations. First, we normalize ArichM = 1, i.e. the average
modern sector productivity in countries belonging to the richest third of the world in-
come distribution is set to 1. Second, we normalize u ¯T = 0, i.e. there are no fixed cost
associated with working in the traditional sector. Last, we again normalize  = 1.
    Given these normalizations, all other parameters are jointly calibrated to replicate
key moments from the data. As in the simple model in Section 2, we construct our
calibration targets for the "average" poor and "average" rich country, not using any
targets from the middle-income countries.
    While all parameters are jointly calibrated, some moments are more informative for
some parameters than others. In the following, we provide some informal discussion,
acknowledging that these arguments are of course not a formal proof of identification.


                                           22
                Table 5: Calibrated Parameters and Calibration Targets

              Parameter           Value                 Target              Data    Model
   poor
 ¯M
 u        fixed cost of working    5.55                 avg. ER             74.5     72.6
            in M sector in poor                    in poor countries
 ¯rich
 u M      fixed cost of working    2.23                 avg. ER             54.6     54.6
            in M sector in rich                    in rich countries
  poor
 AT       T sector productivity    0.03         avg. % of workers           64.3     64.8
            in poor countries              in T sector in poor countries
 Arich
  T       T sector productivity    0.14          avg. % of workers           5.7      5.8
            in rich countries               in T sector in rich countries

            DRS parameter          0.72        avg. hours per worker        35.4     35.1
             in T sector                   in T sector in poor countries
              curvature of         0.45       avg. hours per worker         46.3     46.0
          disutility of working            in M sector in poor countries

              curvature of         1.23          avg. hours per worker      35.1     35.1
              consumption                          in rich countries
  poor
 AM       M sector productivity    0.08        avg. output per adult        0.09     0.09
           in poor countries                 in poor vs. rich countries


We have in total eight free parameters and choose eight moments to be replicated. The
fixed cost of working in the modern sector in poor and rich countries are crucial for
matching the employment rates. Productivities in the traditional sector in poor and rich
countries are (among other things) informative about the fraction of workers in the tra-
ditional sector. The decreasing returns to scale parameter in the production technology
in the traditional sector is crucial for determining optimal hours in this sector, and we
choose the corresponding hours per worker in the poor countries as a target. Obviously,
the curvature of the disutility of hours worked affects any hours choice, and thus also the
hours per worker in the modern sector in poor countries. The curvature of the consump-
tion function, i.e. the strength of the income effect, is chosen such that hours per worker
in rich countries, or respectively the decrease relative to poor countries, are replicated.
Finally, we set productivity in the modern sector in poor countries such that we match
output per adult in poor relative to rich countries. The choice of these moments ensures

                                            23
that both labor input and output in poor and rich countries are consistent with the data.10
     Table 5 states the targeted moments, which the model matches near perfectly, and
lists the calibrated parameter values. The fixed cost of working in the modern sector
is 2.5 times (5.55/2.23) higher in poor than in rich countries. The returns to scale pa-
rameter is with 0.72 close to the estimate of Guner et al. (2008), although the setups are
not fully comparable. In poor countries, productivity in the modern sector is around 3
times (0.08/0.03) larger than in the traditional sector. In rich countries, this difference is
more than twice as large (1/0.14). Comparing poor and rich countries, the productivity
gap amounts to a factor of over 12 in the modern sector, and less than 5 in the tradi-
tional sector. The calibrated curvature parameter for the disutility of working is with
0.45 consistent with the intensive-margin estimates surveyed in Blundell and MaCurdy
(1999), Domeij and Flod´   en (2006), and Keane (2011). Finally, our calibrated value of
the curvature of consumption is 1.23, exactly as in the simple model. It thus implies that
income effects dominate, but at the same time is not too far from the log specification.

4.4.3. Model Fit
    Before conducting the decomposition exercise, we analyze the model fit of the ex-
tended model. While we calibrate the model to aggregate moments from the average
low- and high-income countries, the shapes of different variables over the entire devel-
opment spectrum, especially the differential shapes of the two margins of labor supply,
are non-targeted moments.
    To construct country-specific model values for all variables, we proceed as follows.
First, we assume the logarithm of aggregate traditional sector productivity log(AT ) and
the fixed cost of working in the modern sector u   ¯M both change linearly in log(AM ).
Second, as in the simple model, we assume all fiscal inputs (i.e., tax progressivity, share
of government revenue coming from labor income taxes, ratio of government revenue
to GDP, share of government consumption) change piecewise linearly in log(AM ). For
each level of AM , we then solve for optimal hours.
    Figure 4 compares the model predictions against the data. The large dots denote
the averages by country groups in the data, and the stars mark the subset of targeted
moments. Figures 4a and 4b show that the model replicates the different behavior of the
  10 Note that the only non-targeted statistics in that regard are hours per worker separately by sector in
rich countries. We refrain from targeting them separately because aggregate hours per worker in rich
countries are effectively only determined by hours per worker in the modern sector.


                                                   24
                                  Figure 4: Key Facts: Extended Model vs. Data
                        (a) Employment Rate                                             (b) Hours per Worker
         100                                                                  50

                                                                              45
             90
                                                                              40
             80
                                                                              35
             70
                                                                              30




                                                                      Hours
     %




             60                                                               25

                                                                              20
             50
                                                                              15
             40
                                                                              10
             30
                                                                              5

             20                                                               0
              7.5   8     8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11                7.5   8     8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11
                                log GDP per adult                                               log GDP per adult

                        (c) Hours per Adult                       (d) Employment Share Traditional Sector
             50                                                           100

             45                                                               90

             40                                                               80

             35                                                               70

             30                                                               60
     Hours




                                                                  %




             25                                                               50

             20                                                               40

             15                                                               30

             10                                                               20

              5                                                               10

              0                                                               0
              7.5   8     8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11                7.5   8     8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11
                                log GDP per adult                                               log GDP per adult

             (e) Hours per Worker Modern Sector                        (f) Hours per Worker Traditional Sector
             60                                                               60



             50                                                               50



             40                                                               40
     Hours




                                                                      Hours




             30                                                               30



             20                                                               20



             10                                                               10



              0                                                               0
              7.5   8     8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11                7.5   8     8.5       9    9.5    10   10.5   11
                                log GDP per adult                                               log GDP per adult
                                                                 25
Note: The small red dots represent each country in our sample, and the large red dots the averages by
country income group. The model predictions are displayed by the blue line. Explicitly and implicitly
targeted moments are marked with a star.
two margins of hours per adult. Employment rates are decreasing strongly between low-
and middle-income countries, with a modest increase for the richest countries, while
hours per worker are similar between low- and middle-income countries on average, and
substantially lower in the richer countries. Thus, the model generates both the convex
decrease in the employment rates, and the concave decrease in hours per worker over
the development spectrum. As a result, hours per adult decrease at a similar rate as in
the data (see Figure 4c).
     The success behind generating the different shapes of the two margins of labor sup-
ply stems from structural change. Figure 4d shows the strong decrease of the employ-
ment share in the traditional sector, which is replicated well over the full range of devel-
opment. Because of the absence of an fixed cost in the traditional sector, the employment
rate in the traditional sector is always 1 in the model. By contrast, the employment rate
in the modern sector is significantly below 1, but increasing in development due to the
decrease in the fixed cost of working there, u ¯M . In the model, each family chooses a sec-
tor, and we can thus calculate sector-specific employment rates. These are however not
defined in the data, in which we cannot assign non-working individuals to a sector. The
strong decrease in the traditional sector share from 64 percent to less than 20 percent
between low- and middle-income countries generates the decrease in the employment
rate between these two country groups in Figure 4a. In both middle- and high-income
countries, by contrast, the large majority of families works in the modern sector, and the
decrease in the fixed cost in this sector generates the mild increase in the employment
rate. With a constant fixed cost across countries, employment rates would fall over the
full development spectrum (see Appendix Figure B.1).
     Besides the sectoral share, sectoral hours are important for aggregate hours per
worker. Hours per worker in the modern sector are higher than in the traditional sec-
tor in the low- and middle-income countries. In the model, they decrease at a slightly
faster pace than in the traditional sector (Figures 4e and 4f, respectively). With de-
creasing returns in the traditional sector, workers do not want to reduce their hours too
much because of the relatively high marginal product of an extra hour at low hours of
work. Yet, quantitatively, this effect is small, and thus the development of hours per
worker in the traditional sector is the only fact the model does not match well over the
development spectrum. Given that the large majority of workers works however in the
modern sector in both middle- and high-income countries, this does not significantly


                                            26
               Figure 5: Hours-Wage Elasticity in Data and Extended Model


                      0.2




                        0
                  -




                      -0.2




                      -0.4
                         7.5    8      8.5       9        9.5   10   10.5    11
                                             log GDP per adult
Note: The small red dots represent each country in our sample, and the large red dots the averages by
country income group. The model predictions are displayed by the blue line. The red dots are the beta-
coefficients from the following regression, run separately for each country on the sample of workers in
paid employment: log (hi ) =  +  log (wi ) + 1 agei + 2 agei 2 + i .


influence other model predictions. The sectoral reallocation from the traditional to the
modern sector generates the flat hours per worker in the aggregate between poor and
middle-income countries. The fall-off between the middle- and high-income countries
then largely mimics the decrease in hours per worker in the modern sector.
    Figure 5 compares the estimated hours-wage elasticity in each country from the data
with the predictions from the modern sector in the extended model. The modern sector
is the model equivalent of paid employment measured in the data. Similar to the sim-
ple model, the extended model endogenously generates the turning of the hours-wage
elasticity from negative in poor countries to positive in the richest countries. Quantita-
tively, the model is still somewhat off, but provides an even better match than the simple
model.




                                                     27
5. Decomposing Aggregate Hours Worked in the Extended Model
    In contrast to the simple model, we now have three fundamental driving forces for
the patterns in the data, namely income effects (we let both AM and AT vary), changes
in taxes and transfers, and changes in the fixed cost of working in the modern sector.
    We proceed as in Section 2: starting with the model inputs for the average low-
income country, we turn on different driving forces one by one (without recalibrating the
model). In each of these exercises, we then compute the predicted change in hours from
the average poor to the average rich country from this exercise only, as a percentage
of the total change in the model. Table 6 shows the results for these exercises and is
constructed in the same way as Table 2. In the first two rows, the table states hours
per worker in the average poor and the average rich country, as well as the difference
between both, in data and model. The following rows then provide the results from
the decomposition exercise. For each of the three driving forces, we first show results
without sectoral reallocation: in this exercise, we force families to remain working in the
same sector they optimally choose in the average low-income country. In a second step,
we allow families to optimally choose the sector of work. That way, we can directly
analyze which role sectoral reallocation plays for each of the driving forces of hours.
    Without allowing for sectoral reallocation, income effects explain 59 percent of the
decrease in hours between poor and rich countries, and taxes and transfers 22 percent.
These results are similar to the decomposition results of the simple model, which at-
tributed 77 percent of the decrease to income effects, and 33 percent to taxes and trans-
fers. They are slightly smaller because in the extended model the traditional sector
employment rate does not adjust and always stays at 1. Without sectoral reallocation, 64
percent of the families work in the traditional sector also in the rich country predictions,
and thus the absence of any adjustment in this margin matters quantitatively.
    Allowing for sectoral reallocation however changes these percentages significantly:
with sectoral reallocation, the model attributes more than the full decrease, namely 123
percent, to income effects, and essentially nothing, namely 1 percent, to taxes and trans-
fers. To understand the role of sectoral reallocation, it is key to remember that a move-
ment from the traditional to the modern sector implies a decrease in employment rates
and an increase in hours per worker, and that employment rates are quantitatively more
important for hours per adult. The faster increase in labor productivity in the modern
than in the traditional sector by development induces such a reallocation of families

                                            28
                              Table 6: Counterfactual Experiments

                                                Poor     Rich     Diff.   % Expl.
                      Data                      28.2     19.1      9.1
                      Model                     28.2     19.2      9.0
                      Income Effect
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     22.9      5.3        59%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     17.1     11.1       123%
                      Taxes & Transfers
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     26.2      2.0         22%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     28.1      0.1          1%
                      ¯M
                      u
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     31.9     -3.7        -41%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     30.9     -2.7        -30%
Note: By construction, the predictions for the average poor country are the same for all specifications.
The fraction explained (% Expl.) corresponds to dividing Diff. for a given specification with the Diff. for
the Model.


from the traditional to the modern sector in the income effect experiment. This implies
a strong decrease in the employment rate and thus hours per adult. This effect is even
larger than the income effect on hours without sectoral reallocation, and the combination
of both imply that the model predicts a decrease of 11.1 hours between poor and rich
countries solely caused by increasing labor productivities in both sectors, and the associ-
ated income effects and sectoral reallocation. We can estimate the implied Marshallian
elasticity of the extended model by regressing the logarithm of average predicted hours
on the country level from the income effect experiment on the logarithm of average
after-tax wages. The implied Marshallian elasticity is with -0.18 somewhat more nega-
tive than in the simple model, since sectoral reallocation exacerbates the effect of rising
aggregate labor productivities on hours.
    For taxes and transfers, sectoral reallocation works in the opposite direction: since
labor income is not taxed in the traditional sector, and level and progressivity of labor
income taxes both increase with development, the increase in taxes and transfers induces
an increase in the traditional sector share with development.11 This implies an increase
  11 Infact, we find the same, though somewhat muted, increase in the traditional sector share with
development if we assume full taxation of labor income also in the traditional sector: the increase in


                                                   29
in the employment rate and consequently in hours per adult. This increase almost ex-
actly counteracts the negative effect of taxes and transfers on hours without sectoral
reallocation. Thus, in net the increase in taxes and transfers predicts a decrease of only
0.1 hours per week between poor and rich countries, and thus explains only 1 percent of
the total decrease.
    The new factor of a decreasing fixed cost in the modern sector predicts an increase in
hours by development, namely by 3.7 hours per week without sectoral reallocation, and
2.7 hours per week with sectoral reallocation. It thus negatively contributes to the total
decrease in hours. Quite obviously, the decrease in the fixed cost in the modern sector in-
duces an increase in the modern sector employment rate and thus total hours. Allowing
for sectoral reallocation shifts families into the modern sector, somewhat counterbalanc-
ing this effect. Thus, while the decreasing fixed cost is crucial to generate the differential
shapes of the two margins of labor supply, it does not positively contribute to explaining
the decrease in hours worked by development.
    In Appendix Tables A.8 to A.10, we show decomposition results from three further
model variants with different assumptions about taxation. First, we assume that not only
labor income, but also consumption remains untaxed in the traditional sector (Bachas
et al., 2019). Second, we make the opposite assumption that both consumption and labor
income are taxed in the traditional sector the same way as in the modern sector. Third,
we keep the taxation assumptions as in the baseline model (no taxation of labor income,
but taxation of consumption in the traditional sector), but assume full redistribution of
government revenues to households, i.e. we set G = 0. For each specification, we
recalibrate the model. The importance of the income effect for explaining the decrease
in hours worked is almost completely unaffected by these different model assumptions:
income effects always explain 123 percent to 127 percent of the decrease in hours by
development. The implied Marshallian elasticities vary between -0.18 and -0.19. The
quantitative importance of taxes and transfers varies only slightly more between these
different set-ups, namely between explaining 1 percent to -10 percent of the decrease.
The decreasing fixed cost of working in the modern sector always predicts an increase
in hours by development, negatively contributing -26 to -36 percent to the decrease.
    Thus, the results of the decomposition exercise are very robust to different assump-
tions of taxation in the traditional sector and redistribution of government revenues.
progressivity then still induces more families to work in the traditional sector.


                                                     30
However, as in the simple model, taxes and transfers remain the sole driver of the turning
of the within-country hours-wage gradient from negative to positive, which the extended
model matches very well.

6. Conclusion
    This paper asks why average hours worked are lower in rich countries than in poor
countries. We consider two natural candidates: the more distortionary tax-and-transfer
systems present in rich countries, and income effects in preferences, which lead house-
holds to supply less labor when their income rises. We draw on detailed data on labor
and non-labor taxation from a large set of countries of all development levels. We then
use these data to discipline a simple model of labor supply, and we calibrate the model's
income effects to match the average differences in hours per adult across countries. The
calibrated model predicts that income effects are the dominant force in lowering hours
across the income spectrum. The reason is that cross-country differences in labor tax
rates are modest in comparison with cross-country differences in wage levels.
    The simple model, while being straightforward to interpret, sweeps aside several
salient disaggregate features of the cross-country data on labor supply. In particular, it
does not address the strikingly different patterns of the extensive and intensive margins
of hours worked with development, nor does it match the structural change of labor
out of subsistence self-employment and into wage work. To match these disaggregate
patterns, we extend the simple model to include a household labor supply decision with
an extensive and intensive margin of work, plus a subsistence self-employment sector,
which has decreasing marginal product of labor. We show that this model does a good
job at matching the extensive and intensive margins, as well as non-targeted moments,
in particular the within-country hours-wage gradient.
    We find that the extended model also predicts income effects to be the dominant
force behind the overall decline in hours per adult across countries, even more so than
the simple model. The reason for this is that sectoral reallocation exacerbates the income
effects, but attenuates the effects of increasing tax rates with development. We conclude
that while tax-and-transfer systems may be the main feature explaining differences in
hours worked across rich countries, and while they are the sole driver of within-country
hours-wage gradients over the development spectrum, they play at best a secondary role
in explaining hours differences across the full development spectrum. Similarly, while


                                           31
structural change in labor markets is crucial in explaining the extensive and intensive
margins of labor supply, matching these disaggregate features does not alter the conclu-
sion that income effects explain most of why average hours worked fall with GDP per
capita. The implied Marshallian elasticities lie between 0.10 in the simple model and
0.19 in the extended model.




                                          32
References
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2007). Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time
  Over Five Decades. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 969­1006.

Bachas, P., L. Gadenne, and A. Jensen (2019). Consumption Taxes with Informality:
  Theory and Cross-Country Evidence from Expenditure Diaries. Unpublished Work-
  ing Paper, Harvard University.

Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman (2017). Labor
  Markets and Poverty in Village Economies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2),
  811­870.

B´
 enabou, R. (2002). Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Econ-
  omy: What Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency? Economet-
  rica 70(2), 481­517.

Besley, T. and T. Persson (2014). Why Do Developing Countries Tax So Little? Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 28(4), 99­120.

Bick, A., B. Br¨
               uggemann, N. Fuchs-Sch¨  undeln, and H. Paule-Paludkiewicz (2019).
  Long-term Changes in Married Couples' Labor Supply and Taxes: Evidence from
  the U.S. and Europe Since the 1980s. Journal of International Economics 118, 44­
  62.

Bick, A. and N. Fuchs-Sch¨undeln (2017, May). Quantifying the Disincentive Effects
  of Joint Taxation on Married Women's Labor Supply. American Economic Review
  Papers & Proceedings 107 (5), 100­104.

Bick, A. and N. Fuchs-Sch¨undeln (2018). Taxation and Labor Supply of Married
  Couples Across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 85(3), 1543­1576.

Bick, A., N. Fuchs-Sch¨
                      undeln, and D. Lagakos (2018). How Do Hours Worked Vary
  with Income? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications. American Economic Re-
  view 108(1), 170­199.




                                         33
Blundell, R. and T. MaCurdy (1999). Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Ap-
  proaches. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics,
  Chapter 27, pp. 1559­1695. Elsevier Science B.V.

Boppart, T. and P. Krusell (2020). Labor Supply in the Past, Present, and Future: A
  Balanced-Growth Perspective. Journal of Political Economy 128(1), 118­157.

Bridgman, B., G. Duernecker, and B. Herrendorf (2018). Structural Transformation,
  Marketization and Household Production around the World. Journal of Development
  Economics 133, 102­126.

Caselli, F. and W. J. Coleman (2001). The U.S. Structural Transformation and Regional
  Convergence: A Reinterpretation. Journal of Political Economy 109(3), 584­616.

Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2012). Does Indivisible Labor Explain
  the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive
  Margin Elasticities. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 27, 1­56.

Constantinides, G. M. (1982). Intertemporal Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Con-
  sumers and without Demand Aggregation. Journal of Business 55, 253­267.

Costa, D. L. (2000). The Wage and the Length of the Work Day: From the 1890s to
  1991. Journal of Labor Economics 18(1), 156­181.

Dollar, D. and A. Kraay (2002). Growth is Good for the Poor. Journal of Economic
  Growth 7, 195­225.

Domeij, D. and M. Flod´ en (2006). The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Con-
  straints: Why Estimates are Biased. Review of Economic Dynamics 9, 242­262.

Egger, P. H., S. Nigai, and N. M. Strecker (2019). The Taxing Deed of Globalization.
  American Economic Review 109(2), 353­390.

Fafchamps, M. and S. Lund (2003). Risk Sharing Networks in Rural Philippines. Jour-
  nal of Development Economics 71, 261­287.

Feng, Y., D. Lagakos, and J. E. Rauch (2019). Unemployment and Development. Un-
  published Working Paper, University of California San Diego.


                                         34
Fields, G. S. (2009). Segmented Labor Market Models in Developing Countries. In
  H. Kincaid and D. Ross (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Oxford University
  Press.

Gollin, D. (2008). Nobody's Business But My Own: Self-Employment and Small En-
  terprise in Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(2), 219­233.

Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu (2008). Macroeconomic Implications of Size-
  Dependent Policies. Review of Economic Dynamics 11, 721­744.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. Violante (2014). Consumption and Labor Sup-
  ply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework. American Economic Re-
  view 104(7), 2075­2126.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi. (2014). Growth and Structural Trans-
  formation. In P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth,
  pp. 855­941. Elsevier.

Jayachandran, S. (2006). Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks
  in Developing Countries. Journal of Political Economy 114(3), 538­575.

Jensen, A. (2019). Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System.
  Unpublished Working Paper, Harvard University.

Karlan, D., R. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto, and C. Udry (2014). Agricultural Decisions After
  Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2), 597­
  652.

Keane, M. P. (2011). Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 49, 961­1075.

Keynes, J. (1930). Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren. New York: W. W.
  Norton. Reprinted in Essays in Persuasion.

King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, and S. T. Rebelo (1988). Production, Growth and Business
  Cycles I. The Basic Neoclassical Model. Journal of Monetary Economics 21(2-3),
  195­232.



                                        35
Lagakos, D. and M. E. Waugh (2013). Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Pro-
  ductivity Differences. American Economic Review 103(2), 948­980.

MaCurdy, T. E. (1981). An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting.
 Journal of Political Economy 89(6), 1059­1085.

McDaniel, C. (2011). Forces Shaping Hours Worked in the OECD, 1960-2004. Ameri-
 can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 27­52.

Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2008). Trends in Hours and Economic Growth. Review
  of Economic Dynamics 3(11), 239­256.

Ohanian, L., A. Raffo, and R. Rogerson (2008). Long-Term Changes in Labor Sup-
  ply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 55(8), 1353­1362.

Ohanian, L. E. (2008). Back to the Future with Keynes. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Minneapolis Quarterly Review 32(1), 10­16.

Porzio, T. and G. Santangelo (2019). Does Schooling Cause Structural Transformation?
  Unpublished Working Paper, Columbia University.

Poschke, M. (2019). Wage Employment, Unemployment and Self-Employment Across
  Countries. Unpublished Working Paper, McGill University.

Prescott, E. C. (2004). Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 28, 2­13.

Ramey, V. A. and N. Francis (2009). A Century of Work and Leisure. American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(2), 189­224.

Restuccia, D. and G. Vandenbroucke (2013). A Century of Human Capital and Hours.
  Economic Inquiry 51(3), 1849­1866.

Rogerson, R. (2006). Understanding Differences in Hours Worked. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 9, 365­409.

Rogerson, R. (2008). Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European La-
  bor Market Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116, 235­259.

                                        36
Rogerson, R. and J. Wallenius (2013). Nonconvexities, Retirement and the Elasticity of
  Labor Supply. American Economic Review 103(4), 1445­1462.

Townsend, R. M. (1994). Risk and Insurance in Village India. Econometrica 62(3),
  539­591.

Vandenbroucke, G. (2009). Trends in Hours: The U.S. from 1900 to 1950. Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control 33, 237­249.




                                         37
             Appendix (For Online Publication Only)

A. Appendix Figures and Tables

          Table A.1: Employment Rates by Country Income Group

                                 Country Income Group
                                 Low Middle High
                 All             74.5    52.4    54.6
                 Men             80.6    63.2    62.0
                 Women           68.5    42.1    47.7
                 Young (15-24)   57.4    32.4    37.9
                 Prime (25-54)   86.2    70.5    78.9
                 Old (55+)       69.8    30.5    24.0



       Table A.2: Average Hours per Worker by Country Income Group

                                 Country Income Group
                                 Low Middle High
                 All             38.4    41.3    35.1
                 Men             40.8    43.7    38.2
                 Women           35.0    37.0    31.5
                 Young (15-24)   36.1    39.8    32.6
                 Prime (25-54)   40.5    42.3    35.9
                 Old (55+)       32.6    37.5    33.6




                                   38
 Table A.3: Sectoral Hours Worked and Sectoral Shares: Men Only

                                   Country Income Group
                                   Low Middle High
         Traditional Sec. Hours    37.2   39.1    42.0
         Market Sec. Hours         47.4   44.4    38.0
         Traditional Sec. Share    54.9   17.3    6.4




Table A.4: Sectoral Hours Worked and Sectoral Shares: Women Only

                                   Country Income Group
                                   Low Middle High
         Traditional Sec. Hours    33.1   33.0    33.8
         Market Sec. Hours         43.0   38.2    31.4
         Traditional Sec. Share    75.7   20.8    4.8




                                  39
  Table A.5: Sectoral Hours Worked and Sectoral Shares: Young Only (15-24)

                                         Country Income Group
                                         Low Middle High
               Traditional Sec. Hours    32.8   33.0    31.1
               Market Sec. Hours         44.9   40.8    32.9
               Traditional Sec. Share    59.9   15.2    2.3




Table A.6: Sectoral Hours Worked and Sectoral Shares: Prime-Aged Only (25-54)

                                         Country Income Group
                                         Low Middle High
               Traditional Sec. Hours    37.3   38.7    41.9
               Market Sec. Hours         47.1   42.9    35.6
               Traditional Sec. Share    62.2   15.9    4.4




    Table A.7: Sectoral Hours Worked and Sectoral Shares: Old Only (55+)

                                         Country Income Group
                                         Low Middle High
               Traditional Sec. Hours    31.2   34.1    36.2
               Market Sec. Hours         43.0   40.2    33.3
               Traditional Sec. Share    83.0   41.4    16.3




                                        40
                 Table A.8: Robustness: No Taxation of Traditional Sector

                                               Poor     Rich    Diff.    % Expl.
                     Data                      28.2     19.1      9.1
                     Model                     28.2     19.2      9.0
                     Income Effect
                       No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     23.3      4.9        54%
                       Sect. Realloc.          28.2     17.0     11.2       124%
                     Taxes & Transfers
                       No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     26.4      1.8        20%
                       Sect. Realloc.          28.2     29.1     -0.9       -10%
                     ¯M
                     u
                       No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     31.6     -3.4       -38%
                       Sect. Realloc.          28.2     30.5     -2.3       -26%
Note: This table shows decomposition results for the model setup with no taxation of neither labor income
nor consumption in the traditional sector. By construction, the predictions for the average poor country
are the same for all specifications. The fraction explained (% Expl.) corresponds to dividing Diff. for a
given specification with the Diff. for the Model.




                                                  41
                 Table A.9: Robustness: Full Taxation of Traditional Sector

                                                Poor     Rich     Diff.   % Expl.
                      Data                      28.2     19.1      9.1
                      Model                     28.2     19.2      9.0
                      Income Effect
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     23.0      5.2        58%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     17.1     11.1       123%
                      Taxes & Transfers
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     26.0      2.2         24%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     28.2      0.0          0%
                      ¯M
                      u
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     31.8     -3.6        -40%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     30.8     -2.6        -29%
Note: This table shows decomposition results for the model setup with taxation of both labor income and
consumption in the traditional sector. By construction, the predictions for the average poor country are
the same for all specifications. The fraction explained (% Expl.) corresponds to dividing Diff. for a given
specification with the Diff. for the Model.




                                                   42
                         Table A.10: Robustnesss: Full Redistribution

                                                Poor     Rich     Diff.   % Expl.
                      Data                      28.2     19.1      9.1
                      Model                     28.2     19.2      9.0
                      Income Effect
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     22.8      5.4        60%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     16.8     11.4       127%
                      Taxes & Transfers
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     26.1      2.1         23%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     28.2      0.0          0%
                      ¯M
                      u
                        No Sect. Realloc.       28.2     32.3     -4.1        -46%
                        Sect. Realloc.          28.2     31.4     -3.2        -36%
Note: This table shows decomposition results for the model setup with only taxation of labor income,
but not of consumption in the traditional sector. In contrast to the baseline model, it assumes full redis-
tribution, i.e. G = 0. By construction, the predictions for the average poor country are the same for all
specifications. The fraction explained (% Expl.) corresponds to dividing Diff. for a given specification
with the Diff. for the Model.




                                                   43
                   Figure A.1: Model Fit: u
                                          ¯M Not Changing with Development
                   (a) Employment Rate                                 (b) Hours per Worker
       100                                                  50

                                                            45
        90
                                                            40
        80
                                                            35
        70
                                                            30

        60                                                  25

                                                            20
        50
                                                            15
        40
                                                            10
        30
                                                             5

        20                                                   0
         7.5   8     8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11          7.5   8     8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11



                    (c) Hours per Adult                (d) Employment Share Traditional Sector
        50                                                 100

        45                                                  90

        40                                                  80

        35                                                  70

        30                                                  60

        25                                                  50

        20                                                  40

        15                                                  30

        10                                                  20

         5                                                  10

         0                                                   0
         7.5   8     8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11          7.5   8     8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11



        (e) Hours per Worker Modern Sector                 (f) Hours per Worker Traditional Sector
        60                                                  60



        50                                                  50



        40                                                  40



        30                                                  30



        20                                                  20



        10                                                  10



         0                                                   0
         7.5   8     8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11          7.5   8     8.5   9   9.5   10   10.5   11

                                                      44
Note: These are the model results from a version of the model in which the extensive margin wedge in
the modern sector, u¯M , is not allowed to change by development. We thus need to calibrate one parameter
less, and the model is overidentified. The small red dots represent each country in our sample, and the
large red dots the averages by country income group. The model predictions are displayed by the blue
line. Explicitly and implicitly targeted moments are marked with a star.
B. Model Appendix
B.1. Counterfactual Experiments
    We use the model to decompose the importance of income effects and tax-and-
transfer systems in explaining the decrease in aggregate hours via two counterfactual
exercises. When doing so, we take into account that progressive tax systems are in some
way defined relative to the income level in a country. To best understand the issue, we
restate the expression for after-tax labor income in our simple model:

                                             Tc (Ac zh)
           Ac zh - Tc (Ac zh) = Ac zh 1 -                   = Ac zh (1 - c (Ac zh))   (B.1)
                                               Ac zh

where c (Ac zh) is the average tax rate the household pays at any hours choice in country
c. Using our specific functional form assumption for progressive taxation (4) yields

                         Tc (Ac zh) Ac zh - c (Ac zh)1-c
           c (Ac zh) =             =                     = 1 - c (Ac zh)-c .          (B.2)
                           Ac zh            Ac zh

    In our first experiment, we keep the tax-and-transfer system of the poorest coun-
tries fixed, while raising TFP to the level of the richest countries. Without any further
adjustment for any hours choice h, a household with productivity level z in this coun-
terfactual world would pay an average tax rate 1 -  poor (Arich zh)- poor . Since in our
calibration Arich /A poor = 16.7, this would imply that the household would face a much
higher marginal tax rate than the household with the same individual productivity level
and same hours given the poor country's TFP. This logic counteracts the idea of holding
the tax system fixed. We address this by calculating net labor income as follows:

                               Arich zh (1 -  poor (A poor zh)) .                     (B.3)

    In our second experiment, we take the income level of the poorest countries as fixed,
but change the size of the tax-and-transfer system with actual GDP per adult. Without
any further adjustment for any hours choice h, a household with productivity level z in
this counterfactual world would pay an average tax rate 1 - rich (A poor zh)-rich , and thus
would face a much lower marginal tax rate than the household with the same individual
productivity level and same hours given the rich country's TFP. This logic counteracts
the idea of varying the tax system. We address this by calculating net labor income as

                                              45
follows:
                                     A poor zh (1 - rich (Arich zh)) .                             (B.4)

   We use the same approach for the counterfactual exercises in the extended model.

B.2. Second-Stage Solution of Family Problem
   We solve the second stage family problem (6) as follows. Plugging the optimal
                        ~  (  ) into the objective function, the family head's problem
consumption c and hours h
becomes an unconstrained problem:

                                                       1
                                         ~  (  )1+                       
                         max
                          
                             - h            1+ 1           F (  ) + u
                                                                    ¯S   0  dF    .
                          


Taking the first order condition and applying the chain rule and the Leibniz rule leads to
                           1
               ~  (  )1+                                           ~ 
               h                                                 d h ( )
                                                          1
                                                    ~   
                          f (  ) + ¯
                                   u S   f (  ) = - h ( )   F ( )        ,
                  1+  1                                             d 

where f is the PDF of  . The first term on the LHS of this equation equals the marginal
disutility from working h  ~  hours for the new workers of mass f (  ) that start working if
the optimal threshold level   is marginally changed. The second term of the LHS adds
to this the fixed utility cost incurred by these workers. These marginal utility losses of
the new workers are equated with the marginal utility gain the already existing workers
of mass F (  ) enjoy because of their decrease in hours worked, which is expressed on
the RHS. The equation thus implicitly defines the optimal threshold level as a function
of family hours,   =  (h).
    Since h ~  (  ) = h  , we have
                       F ( )

                           1
                        1+ 
                  h                                                           1
               F (  )                                                   h          -h
                                       ¯S  f ( ) = -
                               f ( ) + u                                                 f (  ).
                 1+ 1                                                F (  )       F (  )

After straightforward algebra, we get

                                                   1          1  1+     1
                                   F (  )1+  =                        h   .
                                                              ¯S 1 + 
                                                              u



                                                           46
Case of Uniform Distribution To make further progress, we assume   U (0, 1) and
thus F ( ) =  . In this case, we can solve for the optimal cutoff  (h) in closed form:
                                                          
                                      1  1+     1       1+2
                             (h) =            h               .
                                      ¯S 1 + 
                                      u

    Notice that   must be bounded by one from above, so the maximum h for an interior
solution is                                     
                                         1 +  1+
                                h= u  ¯S          .
                                           
   We thus have two cases. First, if h is larger than this threshold, then   = 1 and the
family utility is simply given by
                                                    1
                                      c1-   h1+    ¯S
                                                   u
                           U (c, h) =     -     1
                                                  - .
                                      1-    1+     2

Second, if h is smaller than the threshold, then   =  (h) and equation (7) becomes

                              1                    -1                          2
             c1-     h1+   1  1+      1   1+2    ¯S 1  1+ 
                                                 u                1   1+2
  U (c, h) =      -      1
                                    h          -                h
             1-      1+    ¯S 1 + 
                           u                     2 u   ¯S 1 + 
                                                               2
                                                                  
                                       -1
             c1 -            1        1+2    u¯S 1            1+2   1+ 2
           =      -                        -                       h  1+2 .
             1-       1+ u   ¯S 1 +           2 u  ¯S 1 + 




                                          47
