                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MEDICAID EXPANSION AND THE UNEMPLOYED

                                    Thomas C. Buchmueller
                                       Helen G. Levy
                                      Robert G. Valletta

                                      Working Paper 26553
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26553


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




Prepared for presentation at "Defense against the Dark Arts: A labor economics conference in
honor of John E. DiNardo," University of Michigan, September 28-29, 2018. Financial support
for this project from the Russell Sage Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the Federal
Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Thomas C. Buchmueller, Helen G. Levy, and Robert G. Valletta. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medicaid Expansion and the Unemployed
Thomas C. Buchmueller, Helen G. Levy, and Robert G. Valletta
NBER Working Paper No. 26553
December 2019
JEL No. I13,I18,J18,J2,J6

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine how a key provision of the Affordable Care Act--the expansion of Medicaid
eligibility--affected health insurance coverage, access to care, and labor market transitions of
unemployed workers. Comparing trends in states that implemented the Medicaid expansion to
those that did not, we find that the ACA Medicaid expansion substantially increased insurance
coverage and improved access to health care among unemployed workers. We then test whether
this strengthening of the safety net affected transitions from unemployment to employment or out
of the labor force. We find no meaningful statistical evidence in support of moral hazard effects
that reduce job finding or labor force attachment.

Thomas C. Buchmueller                           Robert G. Valletta
Stephen M. Ross School of Business              Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
University of Michigan                          101 Market St.
701 Tappan                                      San Francisco, CA 94105
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                             rob.valletta@sf.frb.org
and NBER
tbuch@umich.edu

Helen G. Levy
University of Michigan
Institute for Social Research
426 Thompson St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48104 - 1248
and NBER
hlevy@umich.edu




Appendix Tables are available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26553
I. Introduction
       Job loss can be a catastrophic event for workers and their families. The Unemployment

Insurance (UI) program provides partial income replacement for some job losers, but UI does not

fully smooth consumption shocks associated with job loss (Gruber 1997; Browning and Crossley

2009). Job loss also leaves households at risk of a range of negative outcomes. In the short run,

these include reduced income and difficulty finding new work (Farber 2017), loss of health

insurance (Schaller and Stevens 2015; Jolly and Phelan 2017), and increased debt (Sullivan

2008). In the longer run, potential consequences include depleted savings and postponed

retirement (Chan and Stevens 1999), increased risk of mortality (Sullivan and von Wachter

2009), and adverse effects on children's well-being (Kalil and Wightman 2011).

       The Affordable Care Act (ACA) may have mitigated one consequence of unemployment

by creating new, subsidized health insurance options for individuals lacking access to employer-

sponsored coverage. This development is noteworthy at a time when the prevailing trend is to

shift work-related risks from employers and government to workers and their families (Hacker

2006; Morduch and Schneider 2017). Examples of this trend include the rise of contingent work

(Katz and Krueger 2016) and the shift from defined benefit to defined contribution retirement

plans. The ACA represents a rare movement in the other direction: an expansion of the safety net

(Buchmueller and Valletta 2017).

       Expanding the safety net and reducing exposure to risk may entail moral hazard. In the

context of unemployment, economists have long noted that UI, by softening the downside of

unemployment, likely increases the duration of unemployment spells (see, for example, Baily

1978; Krueger and Meyer 2002; Chetty 2008; Rothstein 2011; Farber and Valletta 2015; or

Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta 2015). Expanding access to health insurance for the unemployed

may have a similar effect. For example, Gruber and Madrian (1997) found that continuation-of-

                                                                                                    1
coverage mandates for private coverage -- that is, state laws requiring employers to offer what is

now commonly known as COBRA coverage -- increased the number of months workers spent

not employed, although at least some of this was productive search resulting in higher re-

employment wages. Existing evidence on the effect of Medicaid on labor supply is mixed, as we

discuss in detail below. Nonetheless, eleven states are in the process of imposing work

requirements on Medicaid recipients out of concern that eligibility expansions might otherwise

reduce labor supply (Garfield et al. 2018).

        In this paper we explore the implications of the ACA Medicaid expansion for

unemployed workers. Our general empirical strategy is a difference-in-differences approach that

compares outcomes for workers in states that implemented the Medicaid expansions and those in

states that did not. We begin by testing for an effect of the expansion on the insurance coverage

of unemployed workers using data from the American Community Survey (ACS) for the years

2008 to 2017. Prior to 2014, when the main coverage provisions of the ACA went into effect,

unemployed workers were roughly three times as likely to be uninsured as employed workers.

From 2008 to 2013 the percentage of unemployed and employed workers without insurance, as

well as the percent with Medicaid or different forms of private insurance, were trending in a

similar fashion in states that eventually chose to expand Medicaid under the ACA and those that

did not. After 2014, insurance coverage increased in both groups of states; the change was

roughly twice as large for unemployed workers in expansion states than for those in non-

expansion states. In expansion states, the fraction of unemployed workers without health

insurance was cut in half. We also find some evidence in data from the 2008 through 2017

Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS) that access to medical care improved more

for the unemployed in expansion states than in non-expansion states.



                                                                                                    2
       The insurance coverage and access to care results provide strong evidence that the ACA

Medicaid expansion substantially strengthened the safety net for unemployed workers in states

that implemented it. We next consider whether this greater access to health insurance affected

job search behavior, as reflected in the rates of transitions out of unemployment. Using basic

monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) data on unemployed individuals matched across

consecutive CPS survey months for the period 2007 through 2017, we estimate models similar to

those used to study the effect of extended unemployment insurance benefits, distinguishing

between unemployment exits to employment and out of the labor force. Our difference-in-

differences regression tests show no evidence of moral hazard--that is, no statistically

meaningful reduction in job-finding rates or labor force attachment in Medicaid expansion states

relative to non-expansion states after expansion occurred. To the contrary, we find that Medicaid

expansion reduced labor force exits for some groups (parents and the short-term unemployed),

indicating modest positive effects on labor force attachment.

       As we discuss in more detail in Section VII, this null result for job-finding may be

explained by the in-kind nature of Medicaid combined with the tendency for uninsured

households to have low health expenditures even when they use care. Thus, there is little scope

for Medicaid expansion to ease household budgets enough for an unemployed family member to

reduce job search intensity or decline job offers as a result.



II. Background and Previous Literature

A. The Safety Net, Job Search, and Employment

       Safety net programs are aimed at insuring against economic loss and maintaining living

standards at an acceptable level. This entails the potential downside of adverse incentive effects



                                                                                                     3
on related economic behaviors and outcomes. Optimal social insurance therefore balances such

"moral hazard" effects against consumption smoothing or other welfare benefits of the policy

(Bailey 1978; Chetty 2006).

       Past work on optimal social insurance has focused primarily on UI, which relates directly

to recipients' labor market status and hence has significant and readily observable moral hazard

effects. In particular, the increase in reservation wages prompted by UI income may reduce job

search intensity and the propensity to accept job offers. UI benefits generally are available for 26

weeks in the United States, but availability typically is extended during periods of economic

distress. Much of the existing research that assesses the impacts of unemployment benefits on

search behavior focuses on benefit generosity (weekly/monthly payment amounts), which

follows directly from the role of reservation wages in the underlying theory of optimal UI (e.g.,

Moffitt 1985, Solon 1985, Meyer 1990). Other studies that focused on benefit duration found

that an increase in the maximum duration of benefits leads to an increase in average UI spell

durations (notably Moffitt 1985, Katz and Meyer 1990, Card and Levine 2000, Jurajda and

Tannery 2003, and Schwartz 2013).

       A new generation of this literature emerged after the Great Recession of 2007-09, when

UI benefits were extended to an historically unprecedented maximum of 99 weeks. Despite the

large expansion of available benefit durations, papers that examined search responses to the

benefit expansions generally found relatively small effects on overall unemployment transitions

and durations (e.g., Rothstein 2011; Farber and Valletta 2015; Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta

2015; Valletta 2014). Moreover, most of the impact of the benefit extensions took the form of a

reduced tendency to exit the labor force--i.e., prolonged job search--rather than a reduction in

the rate of job finding. This finding was enabled by reliance on CPS survey data (matched across



                                                                                                    4
adjacent months) that distinguished between different exit routes from unemployment, as we use

later in this paper. The results from these papers suggest more limited moral hazard effects of

extended UI than did the earlier generation of research.1

        The relevance of this literature in our setting is heightened by the abrupt withdrawal of

extended benefit availability at the end of 2013, due to a congressional decision not to renew the

2008 Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) program at that time. The effect of this

abrupt loss of extended UI benefits corresponds exactly to when the ACA Medicaid expansions

first took effect (in January of 2014). The reduction in UI availability could offset and hence

bias the estimated impact of the expansion of Medicaid availability. This emphasizes the

importance of incorporating data on UI availability and the staggered timing of Medicaid

expansion into our analyses. We discuss our approach to this issue further in Sections V and VI.



B. Medicaid and Labor Supply: Pre-ACA Evidence

        Other safety net programs are less directly tied to employment and job search status than

is UI, but they nonetheless may have moral hazard effects of their own. Most safety net programs

are means-tested, requiring that income not exceed a specified threshold, and as such they may

reduce work incentives in general. The resulting reduction in labor supply can occur along the

intensive (hours) or extensive (participation) margins. The specific effects will depend on the

exact structure of any given program, in particular its own and family income thresholds, work

and job search requirements, etc. Disability insurance has been found to have substantial work


1
 This finding is consistent with other research suggesting that moral hazard effects of UI on job search
are largely offset by the favorable liquidity and social insurance effects (Chetty 2008; Card, Chetty, and
Weber 2007; Landais 2015). This may reflect reduced effects of UI on job search when labor market
conditions are especially weak, although the evidence on this point is mixed (see the discussion in section
2.2 of Valletta 2014). Other recent research using UI administrative data finds evidence of larger moral
hazard effects (Card et al. 2015; Johnston and Mas 2018). We discuss these issues further in Section VII.

                                                                                                          5
disincentive effects.2 These occur primarily along the labor force participation margin, since

program eligibility requires strong evidence of inability to work.

          Medicaid is another example of a means-tested program that may create a disincentive to

work and hence affect labor supply and job attachment. Research on the relationship between

Medicaid and labor supply in the years prior to the ACA has produced mixed results (for a

review, see Buchmueller, Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2016); more recent additions to this

literature include Pohl (2018) and Bradley and Sabik (2019)). Because very few non-disabled

childless adults were eligible for Medicaid prior to the ACA, most of this research focuses on

low-income parents. Several studies, however, analyzed the experiences of individual states that

changed eligibility for non-disabled, childless adults. Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo (2014)

examine the effect of a major contraction of Medicaid eligibility in Tennessee. Their analysis of

data from the March CPS suggests that the loss of Medicaid coverage led to large increases in

employment and private health insurance coverage. However, these results for Tennessee are not

evident in other data sources (DeLeire 2018; Ham and Ueda 2017). Dague, DeLeire, and

Leininger (2017) analyze the impact of a Medicaid enrollment cap in Wisconsin for non-

disabled, childless adults, finding that program enrollment is associated with a significant

reduction in employment. In contrast, Baicker et al. (2014), using administrative data from the

Social Security Administration linked to participants in the Oregon Health Insurance

Experiment, find no significant effect of Medicaid on earnings or employment.




2
    See Abraham and Kearney (2018) for a broad summary of this literature.

                                                                                                    6
C. The ACA and its Effect on Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply

       The ACA included provisions to expand both public and private health insurance. As it

was originally enacted in 2010, the law would have required all states to expand their Medicaid

programs to cover all individuals ages 19 through 64 in families with incomes below 138 percent

of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) beginning January 1, 2014. However, a Supreme Court

decision in 2012 allowed states to opt out of Medicaid expansion altogether.

       Table 1 summarizes state Medicaid expansion decisions and how we categorize states for

our analysis. Twenty-four states plus the District of Columbia chose to implement the ACA

expansion on or before January 1, 2014. Six states took advantage of a provision in the law

allowing them to begin expanding earlier, either shifting enrollees from state-funded programs

into Medicaid, gradually raising eligibility limits, or rolling out the new eligibility standard

incrementally by county. Overall, the coverage increases before 2014 in these early expansion

states were limited (Sommers et al. 2014). Moreover, all early expansion states experienced

significant coverage increases between 2013 and 2014. In light of these results, in our main

analysis we group the six early expansion states with the 18 states that implemented the

expansion in January 2014. (As a robustness check, we estimate models dropping these early

expansions states.) Seven states expanded later (2 in 2014, 3 in 2015 and 2 in 2016); most of

which expanded in the middle of the year and are coded, in our analyses relying annual data, as

having expanded coverage for the entire year. In our analyses of monthly data from the CPS

mid-year expanders are coded as having expanded coverage during the month in which they did

so. As of October 2019, five additional states ­ Maine, Virginia, Nebraska, Idaho, and Utah ­

are in the process of implementing expansion, but are considered non-expansion states for our




                                                                                                   7
purposes because our data extend only through 2017. The remaining 14 states have not begun to

expand their Medicaid programs.3

        The ACA also implemented private insurance market reforms beginning in January 2014,

such as prohibiting plans from denying coverage based on an applicant's health status. It

established new health insurance marketplaces, sometimes called "exchanges," to facilitate

shopping for individual coverage by providing a website where enrollees could easily compare

their plan options. Importantly, the law provides premium tax credits for families with income

between 100 and 400 percent of poverty to purchase coverage through the marketplaces,

provided that they do not already have access to Medicaid or coverage through an employer. Tax

credits are calculated on a sliding scale, with the family's share of the premium capped at

between 2 and 9.5 percent of family income. Premiums for marketplace plans cannot vary based

on health status, and the law limits allowable variation based on age, so that older enrollees

cannot be required to pay more than three times what a younger enrollee would be charged for

the same plan.

        It is estimated that nearly 20 million Americans gained health insurance coverage as a

result of the ACA (Courtemanche et al. 2017; Blumberg, Garrett, and Holahan 2016). Between

2013 and 2016, coverage increased for all age groups (under age 65) and in every U.S. state

(Barnett and Berchick 2017). Numerous studies have examined the effect of the Medicaid

expansion (see Antonisse et al (2018) for a comprehensive review). A general finding is that

3
  The non-expansion group includes Wisconsin, which prior to the ACA had a public insurance program,
BadgerCare, which provided coverage to parents with incomes up to 200 percent of the FPL. In 2014,
Wisconsin reduced the income eligibility limit for parents to 100 percent of the FPL and extended
BadgerCare eligibility to childless adults, who had been categorically ineligible. This makes Wisconsin
unique among states that rejected the ACA Medicaid expansion in that there is no "coverage gap" for
adults with incomes below the poverty line. Between 2013 and 2014, the percent uninsured in Wisconsin
fell by 1.8 percentage points, which is slightly less than the 2.3 percentage point decline observed in all
non-expansion states (Smith and Medalia 2015).


                                                                                                          8
coverage increased more in states that implemented the Medicaid expansion than in states that

did not, especially among low-income adults (Sommers et al 2015; Wherry and Miller 2016;

Miller and Wherry 2017), disadvantaged populations, such as racial and ethnic minorities

(McMorrow et al 2015; Buchmueller et al 2016), and states or local areas with higher baseline

rates of uninsurance (Courtemanche et al 2017; Duggan et al 2017). The effect of the Medicaid

expansion on insurance coverage was especially large for childless adults (Kaestner et al 2017),

who in most states were not eligible for Medicaid at all prior to 2014.

       The effect of the ACA coverage expansions on labor supply incentives is complex. The

increase in the Medicaid income eligibility threshold means that some individuals who were

previously covered can work and earn more without losing coverage because they are no longer

close to their state's eligibility cutoff. At the same time, workers who would have otherwise

earned slightly more than the new eligibility limit of 138 FPL may reduce their hours to qualify

for Medicaid. For individuals who gain Medicaid coverage as a result of the ACA, labor supply

may also fall as a result of an income effect. Above the poverty level, the phase-out of means-

tested subsidies for marketplace coverage increases the effective marginal tax rate on earnings,

which has the potential to reduce labor supply. However, in non-expansion states, workers with

incomes just below poverty have an incentive to work more (or report higher incomes (Kucko,

Rinz and Solow (2018)) in order to qualify for premium tax credits.

       In light of these theoretical considerations and a large literature finding significant effects

of employer-sponsored insurance on job mobility, hours and retirement (see Gruber and Madrian

(2002) for a review), the Congressional Budget Office projected that by 2024 the ACA would

reduce aggregate hours worked by roughly 2 percent (Harris and Mok 2015). Several recent

studies test for an immediate effect of the ACA Medicaid expansion on various measures of



                                                                                                     9
employment (Leung and Mas 2018; Gooptu et al 2016; Kaestner et al 2017; Duggan, Goda and

Jackson 2017; Fang 2017; Frisvold and Jung 2018; Levy, Buchmueller and Nikpay 2016; Peng

et al. 2018). Despite differences in the outcomes studied and research design choices, the results

of the various studies are quite consistent, finding no significant effect on employment, hours,

retirement or job mobility.

       To date, there have been no studies focusing on how Medicaid expansion may have

affected insurance coverage or re-employment among the unemployed. The unemployed

represent a particularly interesting subgroup for this purpose, both because they had low rates of

coverage to begin with and therefore stood to gain substantially from coverage expansions and

also because re-employment decisions may be more elastic than, for example, a decision of how

many hours to work for a worker who is already employed. In a nutshell: if anyone's labor

market decisions were distorted by Medicaid expansion, it seems likely that it would have been

the unemployed.



III. Analysis, Part 1: Insurance Coverage of the Unemployed

A. Data and Descriptive Analysis

       Our analysis of health insurance coverage uses data from the ACS, which includes annual

data on health insurance starting in 2008. Advantages of the ACS include consistent

measurement of health insurance over time and a very large sample: approximately 3 million

observations in all, including between 90,000 and 150,000 individuals in each year who are

unemployed at the time of the survey. The ACS asks one question about health insurance: "Is

this person CURRENTLY covered by any of the following types of health insurance or health




                                                                                                   10
coverage plans?" This question is followed by an 8-item checklist.4 We examine four insurance-

related outcomes of interest: uninsured, which is defined as having none of the sources of

coverage listed; Medicaid or other public coverage; employer-sponsored private coverage (which

would include both COBRA coverage through a former employer and coverage as a dependent

on a spouse's policy); and non-group private coverage.

        The ACA included a provision requiring insurers to allow parents with employer-

sponsored insurance to cover their adult children as dependents up to age 26, beginning in

September 2010. This provision led to a significant increase in insurance coverage among 19 to

25-year-olds (Sommers et al 2013; Akosa Antwi et al 2013, 2014; Barbaresco et al 2014).

Studies examining the effect of the policy on labor market outcomes yield mixed results (Antwi,

Moriya and Simon 2013; Heim, Lurie and Simon 2015; Coleman and Dave 2015; Bailey and

Chorniy 2016). To isolate the effect of the 2014 Medicaid expansion from this earlier ACA

provision, we limit our analysis sample to adults between the ages of 26 and 64.

        Table 2 presents pre-ACA data on the percent uninsured with additional breakdowns by

worker demographic characteristics. These descriptive results indicate dramatic differences in

insurance coverage between the employed and the unemployed. In 2008-2010, unemployed

workers were roughly three times as likely to be uninsured as those who are employed: 56 vs. 18

percent in non-expansion states and 44 versus 14 percent in expansion states.5 As would be

expected, this gap is driven by large differences in employer-sponsored coverage, which is partly


4
  The options are: (a) employer-sponsored insurance; (b) insurance purchased directly from an insurance
company; (c) Medicare; (d) Medicaid or other public insurance; (e) TRICARE/military health care; (f)
Veteran's Administration; (g) Indian Health Service; and (h) any other type of health plan. Respondents
are coded as uninsured if they answer no to all of these options.
5
  Note that these unadjusted differences should not be interpreted as a causal effect of unemployment on
insurance coverage. Research using recent longitudinal data suggests that job loss is associated with a
decline in insurance coverage of between 10 and 13 percentage points (Gruber and Madrian 1997;
Schaller and Stevens 2015).

                                                                                                       11
offset by higher rates of Medicaid coverage among the unemployed. Among both employed and

unemployed workers, the probability of being uninsured declines with age and education. As a

result, the employed/unemployed coverage gap is similar for older and younger workers and

those with higher and lower levels of education. The story is different when we cut the data by

parental status. Whereas parents and childless adults have similar coverage rates when employed,

among the unemployed childless adults are substantially more likely to be uninsured.

       Figure 1 presents unadjusted trends in four insurance coverage outcomes ­ Medicaid,

private non-group coverage, employer-sponsored coverage, and uninsured - for unemployed and

employed adults in expansion and non-expansion states. Note that for these figures, we drop data

from the seven states that expanded Medicaid after January 2014, although data from these states

is included in the trends presented in Appendix Table A1 and will be incorporated into our

regression analyses below.

       Prior to 2014, expansion and non-expansion states had similar rates of private coverage.

Expansion states had higher rates of Medicaid coverage, which translated to a lower percent

uninsured. All four types of coverage were trending in a similar fashion in expansion and non-

expansion states. For Medicaid, this changed substantially in 2014 when the ACA expansion

went into effect. In expansion states, Medicaid coverage increased sharply between 2013 and

2017, by 20 percentage points among unemployed workers and 5 percentage points among

employed individuals. In contrast, in non-expansion states there was no apparent break in trend

for Medicaid coverage. Rates of non-group coverage were also quite stable prior to 2014.

Beginning in 2014, non-group coverage increased for unemployed workers in both groups of

states, presumably reflecting the ACA programs implemented in every state, such as health




                                                                                                  12
insurance marketplaces and premium tax credits. Employer coverage, in contrast, shows no sharp

break in trend in 2014.

       The net effect of these trends is that the fraction uninsured dropped for all unemployed

workers starting in 2014. The drop was much larger for unemployed workers in expansion states,

who experienced a 22.8-percentage point drop in the percent uninsured between 2013 and 2017

(from 42.6 percent to 19.8 percent), compared with a drop of only 10.8 percentage points (from

54.9 percent to 44.1 percent) for unemployed individuals in non-expansion states. For employed

workers, the percent uninsured fell by smaller amounts: 7 percentage points in expansion states

and 5 percentage points in non-expansion states.



B. Regression Analysis

       For a closer look at changes in coverage, we estimate two sets of regression analyses. The

first set relies on a differences-in-differences (DD) specification of the following form:



               =  ·  +  +  + 
                               + 
                                   +                                                   (1)



The model is estimated separately for the four binary health insurance outcomes described

above: Medicaid coverage, private non-group coverage, employer coverage, and uninsured. The

variable treatmentst is 1 for any observation in a state/year in which Medicaid expansion is in

effect and is 0 otherwise. (This is analogous to the variable post x treatment in a standard

difference-in-differences framework, but accounts for the fact that expansion occurred at

different times in different states.) The coefficient  therefore measures the marginal effect of

Medicaid expansion on the outcome. The model also includes a full set of state and year

dummies (s and t , respectively). The vector Xist consists of individual-level controls: age (five

                                                                                                   13
categories), education (five categories), race/ethnicity (five categories), and gender by marital

status. The model also includes several state/year-level controls (Wst): cubics in the

unemployment rate and employment growth, and the annual average number of weeks of UI

benefits available. The model is estimated as a linear probability model weighted by the ACS

survey weights. Robust standard errors are clustered by state.

        A key advantage of this specification is that the coefficient  provides a concise estimate

of the effect of the Medicaid expansions. This basic DD model has two limitations, however.

First, it does not allow for a clear test of the critical parallel trends assumption. Second, it

imposes the assumption that the full impact of Medicaid expansion is realized immediately and is

the same over the post-implementation period; in fact, the effect may grow over time, as

consumer understanding of their insurance options grows. Therefore, we also estimate a second,

more flexible event history specification. In this model, the dummy treatmentst is replaced with a

vector of dummies 
                   indicating time relative to the year in which Medicaid expansion occurs:



               = 4                 
                 =-7   +  +  +   +   +                                                     (2)



The dummy D0 ­ which for most expansion states is equal to one in 2013 ­ is omitted, so that all

effects are being measured compared to the size of the expansion/non-expansion gap in the year

just before the expansion took effect.

        Table 3 reports the estimates of  from equation (1) for all four insurance outcomes.

Models were estimated separately for the unemployed (Panel A) and the employed (Panel B);




                                                                                                    14
each column contains results for a different subsample (low vs. high education, parent/non-

parent, duration of unemployment).6

        Overall, Medicaid expansion resulted in a 13-percentage point increase in Medicaid

recipiency among the unemployed. As shown in Figure 1, non-group coverage increased in both

expansion and non-expansion states, though more so in the latter. The explanation for this is that

in expansion states individuals with incomes between 100 and 138 percent of the FPL are

enrolled in Medicaid, whereas in non-expansion states they obtain subsidized private non-group

coverage through the ACA Marketplace. This results in a DD coefficient of -0.025 for non-group

coverage in the full unemployed sample. The point estimate for employer-sponsored coverage is

also negative and of a similar magnitude, also because of a larger increase in non-expansion

states. For unemployed workers, employer-sponsored coverage is likely through COBRA or a

spouse's employer. 7 Individuals in non-expansion states may have been induced by the ACA's

individual mandate to take up such coverage. These negative DD estimates for private coverage

can be seen to represent "crowd-out" relative to the counterfactual represented by non-expansion

states. However, these effects differ from common conceptions of crowd-out, i.e., people

dropping private coverage when they become eligible for Medicaid.8



6
  Appendix Table A2 lists the complete set of coefficients (with the exception of the state dummies) from
our estimation of equation (1) for the full sample.
7
  The ACS data do not include information on the source of employer-sponsored coverage (own coverage
vs. spouse's; current vs. former employer). The fact that COBRA is available retroactively for several
months after leaving a job complicates the interpretation of unemployed respondents' reports of either
employer-sponsored or no coverage. Note that the potential mismeasurement of coverage does not affect
our estimates of the effect of Medicaid expansion on transitions out of unemployment.
8
  Finkelstein et al (2012) find no evidence of crowd-out in the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. The
difference between that context and ours is that in the Oregon Experiment, the availability of private
coverage was not changing for the control group. Frean, Gruber and Sommers (2017) find no evidence of
crowd-out in their analysis of the first year of the ACA. The key difference between their analysis and
ours is that they explicitly modeled the effect of the premium tax credits and the individual mandate. In
our analysis, the effect of these policy elements are incorporated in the unexplained trend in non-
expansion states, which serves as the counterfactual for the changes observed in expansion states.

                                                                                                      15
        The net effect of Medicaid expansion on insurance coverage of the unemployed,

therefore, is an 8-percentage point decline in uninsurance. There are two ways to place the

magnitude of this effect in context. The first is to compare it to the baseline rate of uninsurance

among unemployed individuals in expansion states just prior to the implementation of the ACA

provisions. This rate was 42.6 percent in 2013, so an 8-percentage point decline represents a

reduction of nearly one-fifth of the baseline level. The second is to compare the estimated effect

of Medicaid expansion to the overall decline in the percent uninsured that occurred for

unemployed individuals in expansion states between 2013 and 2017, which also reflects the

effects of other ACA provisions affecting private coverage and the improving economy. The

overall decline over this period was 22.8 percentage points; so, the 8-percentage point decline

represents slightly over one-third of the total decline in uninsurance. Both of these comparisons

confirm that the coverage gain among the unemployed due to Medicaid was not only statistically

significant but also large in magnitude.

       Effects for employed adults, in contrast, are much smaller in magnitude (Panel B of Table

3). Medicaid expansion was associated with a 3.5-percentage point increase in Medicaid

coverage. However, this gain was almost fully offset by relative declines in private non-group

(1.5 percentage points) and employer-sponsored insurance (1.1 percentage points). In the case of

non-group insurance, coverage increased in both sets of states, but more so in non-expansion

states. Again, this difference is due largely to the fact that individuals with incomes between 100

and 138 percent of the FPL gained Medicaid in expansion states and gained private non-group

coverage through the marketplaces in non-expansion states. Employer-sponsored coverage had

been declining slightly prior to 2014 and continued to do so in expansion states, while increasing

very slightly in non-expansion states. The net effect of these offsetting changes is that there is no



                                                                                                   16
statistically significant difference in coverage gains between expansion and non-expansion states

for the employed.

        Looking at effects for different population subgroups among the unemployed (in the

other columns of Table 3) shows that the effects of Medicaid expansion were felt widely across

these groups, although results were somewhat larger for some groups than others; for example,

non-parents benefited more than parents from Medicaid expansion, very likely because some

very low-income parents already had access to Medicaid in some states.

        Turning to the results of the more flexible event study specification (equation 2 above),

the coefficients k on the time-to/since-event dummies are presented graphically in Figure 2 for

the four insurance coverage outcomes in the full sample of unemployed adults ages 26 through

64.9 These figures show two important things. First, there is no evidence of differential trends in

outcomes across the two groups of states prior to Medicaid expansion. For Medicaid and

uninsured, in particular, the event time dummies for t-6 (which is usually 2007) through t-1

(which is usually 2012) are not statistically different from zero (with the sole exception of t-4

coefficient in the Medicaid regression). Second, as expected, coverage effects were somewhat

smaller in the first year of implementation (2014 in most states), increased in the second and

third years of implementation, and then remained stable in the fourth year (2017 for most

expansion states). Thus, the treatment dummy from model 1 that was reported in Table 3 ­ which

averages the treatment effect across post-implementation years ­ somewhat understates the

steady-state impact of Medicaid expansion that is observed in the third and fourth years of

implementation. Similar results are obtained for each of the coverage outcomes for the sub-




9
 Appendix Table A2 lists the complete coefficient estimates (except for the state dummies) from the
event history models for the full sample.

                                                                                                      17
groups listed in Table 3: insignificant time coefficients prior to expansion and significant effects

in each year after expansion.10



IV. Analysis, Part 2: Access to Care

A. Data and Descriptive Analysis

        Next, we consider whether Medicaid expansion also improved access to care, using data

from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS) from 2008 through 2017. The

BRFSS is an annual cross-sectional survey conducted by states in conjunction with the Centers

for Disease Control (Silva 2014). The full sample includes approximately 400,000 individuals in

each year. After restriction to adults ages 26 through 64, the BRFSS has approximately 185,000

respondents in each year who are employed at the time of the survey and between 12,000 and

23,000 respondents who are unemployed at the time of the survey, depending on the year.11

        We analyze four measures of access to care: (1) uninsured at the time of the survey; (2)

needing to see a doctor at some point in the past 12 months but not doing so because of cost; (3)

not having a usual source of medical care at the time of the survey; (4) not having had a routine

checkup in the past 12 months. Access measures in the BRFSS generally benchmark well to

other surveys (Skopec et al. 2014). However, the BRFSS measure of insurance coverage is far

less detailed than the measures used in other surveys and does not distinguish between different

sources of coverage (e.g. private versus public coverage), instead asking only whether

respondents have any coverage. For this reason, we view our ACS analyses of uninsurance as

10
   Appendix Tables A3 through A6 list the estimated coefficients on the event history dummies for each
of the four coverage outcomes for the complete set of subgroups listed in Table 3. The finding of no
differential trends prior to expansion holds for all subgroups as well.
11
   The wording that the BRFSS uses to ask about employment status is "Are you currently employed for
wages, self-employed, out-of-work for 1 year or more, out of work for less than 1 year, a homemaker, a
student, retired, or unable to work?" We consider respondents who say that they are "out of work" to be
unemployed.

                                                                                                      18
preferable to the analogous BRFSS analyses, although in practice the results are quite similar.

Our empirical strategy for analyzing these outcomes is the same as our approach to analyze the

ACS, so we begin with descriptive trends and then discuss difference-in-differences and event

history models.

          Figure 3 presents trends from BRFSS in each of our four access outcomes for

unemployed and employed adults in expansion and non-expansion states.12 As with our analysis

of coverage, these simple trends omit the seven states that expanded Medicaid after January

2014. Prior to 2014, these outcomes were trending similarly in expansion and non-expansion

states. As in the ACS data, we see large declines in the fraction uninsured beginning in 2014 for

unemployed individuals. We also observe declines in care delays (top right panel of Figure 3)

and no usual source of care (lower left panel of Figure 3) that are particularly noticeable for the

unemployed in Medicaid expansion states. The fraction of the unemployed with no checkup in

the past 12 months had been declining since 2011, with no evident change in the trend beginning

in 2014. For employed individuals, there are no evident changes in trends beginning in 2014 for

any of these access measures.



B. Regression Analysis

          These descriptive patterns suggest that large gains in coverage for the unemployed in

Medicaid expansion states led to improvements in at least some measures of access to care, while

the smaller coverage gains for the unemployed in non-expansion states and for the employed in

all states did not yield measurable improvements in access. We test this hypothesis more

formally by estimating regression models based on equations (1) and (2) above with the access

measures as outcomes.
12
     Appendix Table A7 lists the numerical values.

                                                                                                  19
        Table 4 presents the estimated coefficients for the variable treatment from equation (1)

for the four access outcomes. The top panel contains coefficients from models estimated on

unemployed individuals. The results for the probability of being uninsured are generally similar

to those from the ACS, suggesting that Medicaid expansion caused an 8 percentage point drop in

the uninsured rate for the unemployed. Among employed adults, the BRFSS shows a small but

statistically significant decline in the probability of being uninsured of just less than one

percentage point (Panel B of Table 4).13

        Two of the other access outcomes also show statistically significant effects of Medicaid

expansion among the unemployed: a 4-percentage point drop in delayed/foregone care due to

cost and a 2-percentage point drop in not having a usual source of care. The effect of Medicaid

expansion on the probability of not having had a checkup in the past 12 months was negative

(one percentage point) but statistically insignificant. These results are generally consistent across

different population subgroups defined by education, parental status, etc., although the subgroup

results are not always significant in some cases where the full-sample result is (e.g. for parents).

Note that the BRFSS also includes self-reported health status (excellent, very good, good, fair,

poor) so we are able to estimate separate analyses for the subgroup of individuals in fair or poor

health, which is not possible in the ACS or basic monthly CPS. This group, like other relatively

disadvantaged population groups, experienced somewhat larger gains in coverage and reductions

in delayed care than other groups. Among employed workers, we find a small, significant

reduction in the fraction reporting no usual source of care, but no significant changes in any

other measure of access to care. These null results are not surprising given that we do not find a

large effect of Medicaid expansion on insurance coverage for this group.


13
  Appendix Table A8 lists complete coefficient estimates (except for the state dummies) for the full
sample, for the treatment and event study models.

                                                                                                       20
        The more flexible event study specification (Equation 2 above) for the access outcomes

suggests that the simple DD model masks notable variation across outcomes and over time.

Figure 4 plots the coefficients on event time dummies from each of these models estimated on

the sample of unemployed adults.14 While the pre-event dummies are mostly not statistically

significant ­ suggesting that the parallel trends assumption is satisfied ­ the post-event dummies

are somewhat inconsistent, in contrast with the clear and consistent patterns that were observed

for the ACS coverage results. For example, the "no usual source of care" post-event dummies are

individually not significantly different from zero. The "delayed care" dummies follow a pattern

that is most clearly consistent with the coverage results, with small and insignificant negative

values in the first two years of implementation and larger, significant negative values in years 3

and 4. Standard errors on most of these estimates are fairly large, probably because of the

relatively small sample size of unemployed people in each year in the BRFSS.



V. Analysis, Part 3: Transitions out of Unemployment
A. Labor Market Conditions in Expansion/Non-expansion States

        After establishing the effects of Medicaid expansion on insurance coverage and access to

care for the unemployed, we now turn to an examination of its effects on job search. Proper

design and interpretation of this analysis requires incorporation of state labor market conditions

and relevant elements of the state policy environment, other than Medicaid expansion status, that

may differ between expansion and non-expansion states.

        Figure 5 displays some key differences between expansion and non-expansion states,

using monthly data that extends from the beginning of 2007, just before the start of the Great


14
  Appendix Tables A9-A12 provide the numerical estimates of the event history coefficients for the sub-
groups listed in Table 4. The subgroup results are largely similar to the full sample results discussed here.

                                                                                                           21
Recession, into early 2018.15 Panel A shows that expansion states generally had higher

unemployment rates, reflecting weaker labor market conditions, throughout the sample frame.

Changes in the unemployment rate generally track each other across the two groups of states.

The exception is during the period just before and just after January 2014, exactly when the

Medicaid expansions came into effect. The unemployment rate gap grew during the few years

leading up to January 2014 and then shrank noticeably after January 2014.

        Panel B of Figure 5 illustrates one potential reason why the unemployment rate gap

between expansion and non-expansion states shrank after January 2014. This panel plots the

average number of total UI weeks available in the two groups of states. Changes over time in UI

availability reflect the legislative rollout, expansion, and eventual withdrawal of the extended

benefits during the Great Recession and recovery (see Valletta 2014 and Rothstein and Valletta

2017 for details). The expansion states had higher maximum UI weeks available during most of

the sample frame, reflecting their weaker labor market conditions. As the figure shows, this also

means that the expansion states experienced a larger withdrawal of available UI benefits when

the EUC program was terminated at the end of 2013. In addition, various non-expansion states

reduced their normal UI benefits below 26 weeks during 2011-forward, causing available UI

weeks in non-expansion states to remain below that of expansion states from 2014 forward.

        Accurate assessment of potential moral hazard effects of the Medicaid expansions ­i.e.,

reduced job finding or labor force attachment --requires drilling down beneath broad labor

market indicators such as the unemployment rate and unemployment duration. In particular,

recent research on the impact of the UI extensions that occurred during the Great Recession

distinguished between their impact on job-finding rates and labor force attachment or withdrawal

15
  The aggregate statistics for the separate groups of expansion and non-expansion states are weighted, as
described in the figure note. As in the earlier descriptive figures, we limit the set of Medicaid expansion
states to those that expanded by January 2014; subsequent regression models include all states.

                                                                                                         22
(Rothstein 2011; Valletta 2014; Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta 2015; Farber and Valletta 2015).

These papers generally find a limited impact of UI availability on job finding rates during this

timeframe. Instead, extended UI tends to increase the duration of job search and hence

unemployment durations via reduced labor force exit rates. This suggests limited moral hazard

effects on labor supply. However, an examination of unemployment rates or durations alone that

did not distinguish between these two types of transitions out of unemployment would suggest

adverse effects of UI on search behavior and labor supply.

        The Medicaid expansions may affect unemployment duration through two different

mechanisms. First, some unemployed individuals may withdraw from the labor force altogether

as a result of the availability of free health insurance that is not linked to employment. While this

would reduce both the prevalence and duration of unemployment, this labor force withdrawal

would represent a moral hazard effect ­ negative and unintended ­ of the policy. Second, some

unemployed individuals who receive Medicaid via the expansions may delay their return to

employment because, for example, Medicaid reduces the urgency of obtaining employer-

sponsored insurance. These individuals may find that Medicaid enables them to engage in

lengthier job search. This behavior will tend to increase measured unemployment rates and

durations, and would constitute evidence of moral hazard (although we note that the lengthier

search may ultimately result in higher-quality re-employment matches).16 Given these possible

alternative impacts of the Medicaid expansions on unemployed individuals, we focus our

analyses on transitions out of unemployment, distinguishing between exits via job finding and

labor force withdrawal. The regression framework and results are described in the next two sub-

sections.

16
  As discussed in Section IIA, the reduction in labor force exits induced by the recent UI extensions is
consistent with other research suggesting that UI has limited moral hazard effects (Chetty 2008; Card,
Chetty, and Weber 2007).

                                                                                                           23
B. Data and Empirical Strategy
        Given the close relationship between Medicaid expansions, available UI benefits, state

labor market conditions, and labor market outcomes, detailed microdata are required to assess

the independent effects of the Medicaid expansions. Such data allow us to isolate the effects of

the Medicaid expansions and obtain estimated impacts on job search that are uncontaminated by

the other changes in state labor markets and their policy environments.

        We use matched monthly data on individual labor force participants from the CPS. As

with our analysis of insurance coverage and access to care, we restrict the sample to individuals

age 26-64 in order to minimize the influence of the ACA dependent coverage provision. The

sample period is January 2007 through December 2017, which enables reliance on a pre-

recession year (2007) as a reference point. We include individuals unemployed as a result of job

loss/layoff, voluntary quits, and labor force re-entry. We exclude new entrants to the labor force;

their job search behavior is likely to differ from experienced labor force participants, and we do

not observe selected regression controls for them (industry of prior job). In addition to the

primary sample, we also discuss results from a sub-sample limited to job losers below.17

        Due to the rotating sampling scheme used for the CPS, surveyed households and

individuals are in the sample for two separate periods of 4 consecutive months (with an

intervening 8-month period spent out of the sample). This enables consecutive month-to-month

matching for about 70% of the sample.18 The monthly match is based on household identifiers

and validated by ensuring that the reported data on age, education, race, and gender do not

17
   See Valletta (2014) for more details on construction of a similar sample for an earlier timeframe (in
particular, Table 2 and the associated discussion in that paper).
18
   Most of the non-matched observations are from the "outgoing rotation groups" that are exiting the
sample for eight months or permanently (one quarter of each monthly sample). In addition, a modest
fraction of observations is lost because respondent households that move to different geographic locations
are not followed.

                                                                                                       24
conflict across matched observations. We identify labor market transitions by comparing an

individual's labor force status in month t to that in month t+1.

        A well-known concern regarding matched CPS data is the likelihood of spurious

transitions in labor force status arising from inconsistent or error-ridden survey responses rather

than meaningful changes (Abowd and Zellner 1985; Poterba and Summers 1986, 1995). Such

spurious transitions could impart a downward bias to the estimated effect of Medicaid on

unemployment exits and might also reduce the precision of the estimates. We therefore follow

past research by adjusting the data to minimize the incidence of spurious transitions (Rothstein

2011, Valletta 2014, Farber and Valletta 2015, Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta 2015). In

particular, for individuals identified as leaving unemployment one month, either through job

finding or labor force exit, and then returning to unemployment the next month, their records are

recoded to show no transition (and the newly created observations are retained). This correction

requires restriction of the final analysis sample to individuals who are observed to be in their first

or second month of a consecutive four-month span in the sample. We refer to these as "two-

month forward matches." All results reported below are based on these restricted matches and

corresponding measured transitions. The results are similar but less precisely estimated when this

restriction is not imposed (i.e., when the wider set of single-month matches and transitions are

used).19

        Our analyses of transitions out of unemployment parallels the earlier analyses of

insurance coverage and access to care, starting with descriptive analyses and proceeding to

difference-in-differences and event history regressions. Figure 6 presents simple trends in the

19
  This correction requires restriction of the final analysis sample to individuals who are observed to be in
their first or second month of a consecutive four-month span in the CPS sample, thereby reducing the
matched sample count by approximately one-third. Figure 2 in Valletta (2014) shows that the correction
reduces measured exit rates by about 5 to 10 percentage points across the distribution of unemployment
durations.

                                                                                                          25
probability of different transitions out of unemployment, for Medicaid expansion and non-

expansion states.20 Although the data are monthly, the figure depicts calendar year averages. As

in the earlier figure, we dropped the seven states that expanded Medicaid after January 2014;

these will be included in our regression analyses below. The figure shows that rates of both types

of transitions (exit to employment and exit to not in the labor force, or NILF) exhibit generally

similar trends both before and after 2014 for expansion and non-expansion states: year by year,

the confidence intervals for mean transition rates for the two groups of states always overlap.



C. Regression Specification and Results

          We estimate regressions of the following form using the monthly CPS matched data

corrected for spurious transitions:



      =  · (+1) +  +  +     
                          + (+1)  +  +  +                                                     (3)



The dependent variable E ("exit") is an indicator for whether an individual i living in state s who

is unemployed in the survey reference week in month t exits unemployment by month t+1 (i.e.,

reports no longer being unemployed in the reference week in the subsequent survey month).

Exits from unemployment can occur either through job finding (exit to employment) or labor

force withdrawal (exit to "not in labor force," or NILF); we estimate separate equations for each

exit route. Estimation is via a linear probability model. All estimates are weighted by the CPS

survey weights, and robust standard errors are provided (clustered by state, hence the disturbance

term  in equation 3 has underlying components).



20
     The corresponding numerical estimates are listed in Appendix Table A13.

                                                                                                    26
       Explanatory variables are defined as in equation 1, with three additional vectors of

controls: a set of indicator variables for broad industry of prior employment (14 categories);

indicators for the duration to date of the individual's unemployment spell (10 categories, with the

final category indicating duration of longer than one year); and a vector of calendar month

dummies Mt. The observation count for these regressions using the full available sample is

166,838 (see Table 5 for sub-group sample sizes). Treatment status and state labor market

conditions are measured in month t+1, to directly account for their potential effects on

transitions measured in that same month.

       As in the earlier estimates, in addition to state labor market conditions--cubics in the

unemployment rate and rate of payroll employment growth--the vector of state labor market

controls includes maximum available UI weeks. This is crucial for our estimation strategy. The

abrupt elimination of extended UI benefits at the end of 2013 corresponds closely to the main

Medicaid expansions in January 2014 and hence is a potential confounding element in our

estimation: the withdrawal of extended UI benefits may offset the expansion of Medicaid, with a

greater offset occurring in the Medicaid expansion states due to their larger loss of maximum UI

availability (discussed in the preceding sub-section). Our measure of maximum available UI

weeks, which differs across states and months, accounts for this abrupt change in UI availability.

It also accounts for monthly changes in each state's maximum UI availability that occurred at

any time during our sample frame, due to the tiered structure of the federal extended UI

legislation and also changes in state-specific regular UI weeks. Although not reported in the

tables, the estimated coefficients on the UI weeks variable in our regressions are consistent with




                                                                                                  27
the findings from past papers that focus on the effects of the UI extensions (e.g., Rothstein 2011,

Valletta 2014, Farber and Valletta 2015, Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta 2015).21

        Table 5 presents estimates of the treatment coefficient  from equation 3 for the full

sample of unemployed adults as well as subgroups defined as above by gender, education,

parental status, and duration of unemployment.22 These estimates provide no evidence in favor of

meaningful moral hazard effects of the Medicaid expansions. Although the estimates of the

difference-in-difference coefficient  in the employment exits equation are negative for the full

sample and some sub-samples, they are very small and statistically insignificant in all cases.

        In the full sample and 4 of the 6 subsamples, the estimated treatment 's for transitions

out of the labor force are not statistically significant. In the two cases where the coefficient

estimates are significantly different from zero--for parents and for individuals who were

unemployed for less than a year--the estimates are negative, indicating that the expansion of

Medicaid made unemployed workers less likely to drop out of the labor force. This is the

opposite of what we would find if the effect of the expansion was to reduce labor force

attachment, i.e., if there was a moral hazard effect. This pattern of results also does not line up

neatly with the evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects for insurance coverage. The ACA

Medicaid expansions led to smaller gains in insurance coverage for parents than for childless



21
   The estimated coefficients on UI weeks in our regressions indicate that longer maximum UI durations
are associated with reduced exits out of the labor force but no meaningful effect on job finding. The
earlier work cited relied on our UI duration variable and also availability measured at the individual level
(via comparisons between reported unemployment duration and available UI weeks, with samples
restricted to job losers who are likely eligible for UI). We do not use these individual comparisons in the
present work, to allow for more general effects of the UI extensions on state labor market conditions and
also because many individuals in our analysis samples are not eligible to receive UI.
22
   Estimation by duration of unemployment corresponds approximately to the estimation by "when last
worked" for the coverage and access outcomes in earlier sections. Because an individual may be
unemployed due to labor force re-entry, duration of unemployment will not necessarily correspond to the
time elapsed since leaving a prior job. The specific timeframe since prior employment is not available in
the monthly CPS data for all unemployed individuals.

                                                                                                          28
adults; the expansions had similar effects on individuals who were unemployed for more or less

than one year. Thus, while the explanation for these two statistically significant estimates is not

clear, they do not fit with the hypothesis that Medicaid expansion leads to reduced labor force

attachment.

        Figure 7 plots the event time dummies from models estimated using the full sample but

substituting these complete time effects for the single treatment dummy, as in our analyses of

coverage and access presented earlier. These event time dummies exhibit no clear pattern and

generally are not significantly different from zero.23 These results confirm both that there are no

significant differential trends in employment transitions prior to the implementation of Medicaid

and also that there is no clear pattern of changes in exit rates after the implementation of

Medicaid expansion.24



VI. Robustness checks

        In addition to the comparisons across sub-samples, we subjected our results to several

robustness checks. First, we dropped the six "early expansion" states that partially implemented

the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion prior to January 2014 (California, Connecticut,

Washington DC, Minnesota, New Jersey, and Washington State). The inclusion of these states

potentially biases our effects since the policy might have begun to have an effect prior to what

we are measuring as the implementation date of January 2014. Therefore, we drop the residents

of these six states, reducing our sample size by approximately one quarter, and re-estimate the

main results of our DD analysis of the unemployed: insurance coverage from ACS, access to

23
   The pattern of time effects generally supports the conventional parallel trends assumption that is
necessary to interpret the post-expansion changes as treatment effects.
24
   Appendix Table A14 lists the complete coefficient estimates (except on the state, calendar month, and
industry categories) for the treatment and event study results for the full sample. Appendix Table A15
lists the event history coefficients for the sub-samples listed in Table 5.

                                                                                                       29
care from BRFSS, and transitions out of unemployment from the CPS. Table 6 juxtaposes key

results from Tables 3, 4, and 5 that were estimated using the full sample of states (column 1)

with results estimated dropping the early expansion states (column 2). It is evident from this

comparison that dropping the early expansion states changes the results very little.

       A more serious threat to the validity our study design is the fact that the majority of state

Medicaid expansions occurred on January 1, 2014, immediately after the abrupt withdrawal of

extended benefit availability at the end of 2013. Although our analyses control for the UI

benefits available at the state-year level (for our analyses of coverage and access) or the state-

month level (for our analyses of employment transitions), this may not adequately control for the

effects of this policy change. If that is the case, our main results may underestimate any negative

effect of Medicaid on job search behavior. Therefore, we re-estimate our main analyses using

only the seven states that expanded Medicaid after January 2014: Michigan, New Hampshire,

Pennsylvania, Indiana, Alaska, Montana, and Louisiana (compared with all of the non-expansion

states). For these states, the timing of Medicaid expansion did not coincide with the elimination

of extended UI benefits. This reduces our sample of unemployed individuals by 60 percent (see

bottom row of Table 1). The "late expansion" states contained 7 percent of our original sample,

so the restricted sample, consisting of late expansion states and non-expansion states only, is

approximately 20 percent late expansion and 80 percent non-expansion.

       Column 3 of Table 6 contains results estimated using only the late expansion and non-

expansion states. The effects on insurance coverage, reported in the upper panel of Table 6, are

quite similar in both samples. The estimated effect of the expansion on the probability of being

uninsured is slightly lower in the late expander sample (-0.068 vs. -0.080), though the estimate

for the late expanders is more heavily weighted toward year 1 effects, which as shown in Figure



                                                                                                     30
2 tend to be smaller than effects in later years. Taking this into account, the results suggest that

late expansions were as effective as the January 2014 expansions at increasing coverage.

       The employment transition results are shown in the lower panel of Table 6. In the late

expansion sample, Medicaid expansion is associated with an increase in transitions from

unemployment to employment. This result is inconsistent with the hypothesis that the availability

of Medicaid coverage when unemployed reduces job search. However, like the results for the full

sample, where the point estimate is negative, the estimated coefficient for the late expansion

sample is not significantly different from zero. Similarly, we see no statistically significant

relationship between Medicaid expansion and labor force exits in the late expansion states.

       We conducted two more sets of analyses focusing on labor market transitions in order to

make sure we are not overlooking moral hazard effects. First, we restricted the sample to job

losers, who are likely to be most responsive to job-search incentives via UI eligibility and their

demonstrated labor force attachment (reflected in prior employment). As expected, the estimated

effects of UI availability in this sub-sample of likely UI eligibles were larger and more precisely

estimated than in the full sample. However, like the full sample results, the difference-in-

difference tests for the Medicaid expansions in this sub-sample yielded no statistically reliable

evidence of moral hazard effects as a result of Medicaid on job finding or labor force exit.

We also examined additional transitions along the labor force participation margin, specifically

transitions in both directions between employment and NILF, and also transitions from NILF

back to active job search (unemployment). These analyses address the possibility that the moral

hazard effects of Medicaid availability are not restricted to currently unemployed individuals.

Difference-in-difference tests that parallel those described above once again revealed no




                                                                                                       31
discernible impact of the Medicaid expansions on transition rates between labor force states

(results available on request).

        Finally, we examined a potential threat to the validity of the labor market transition

analysis. The event history results displayed in Figure 7 suggest similar pre-treatment trends in

expansion and non-expansion states. However, Medicaid expansion may have induced changes

in the composition of the unemployed that differ between expansion and non-expansion states--

for example, a shift in composition toward more skilled individuals, which could bias the

estimated treatment effects. This possibility is addressed in Appendix Figures A1 and A2, which

display the pattern over time in the fitted probabilities of unemployment exits based on the

observable individual controls used in our regressions. The predicted exits to employment and

NILF are consistently lower in expansion states. However, the plots show very small differences

between expansion and non-expansion states and no meaningful change in the relative predicted

exit rates after expansion (using 2014 as the post-expansion baseline for all non-expansion

states).25 While we cannot reject the possibility of systematic changes in unobservable

characteristics of workers between expansion and non-expansion states, the results based on

observables suggest that compositional changes are not a concern.



VII. Discussion

        What explains our finding that expanded Medicaid eligibility had minimal effects on

transitions out of unemployment, with the only detectable effect (for selected sub-groups) taking

25
  Figure A1 displays the separate predictions for expansion and non-expansion states, and Figure A2
displays the difference between them. There is an increase in the relative predicted probability of labor
force exits in expansion states around 2014, which is most evident in Figure A2. This may cause
understatement of the finding that Medicaid expansion reduced labor force exits for selected groups in
Table 5, but the magnitude of the composition effect is quite small. These results are similar when the
individual controls are expanded to include complete interactions between age, education, gender, and
marital status (80 categories) along with the other individual covariates.

                                                                                                            32
the form of reduced labor force withdrawal rather than reduced job finding? These results cannot

be attributed to a weak "first stage," given that we find that the expansion substantially increased

the health insurance coverage of unemployed workers. A more likely explanation is that the

value of this in-kind benefit to the average unemployed worker was not large. In 2014, average

annual Medicaid spending for non-disabled adult beneficiaries was just over $3,000.26 However,

much of this spending is on care that beneficiaries would have received for free if they were

uninsured. Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer (2019) conclude that roughly 60 percent of

Medicaid spending can be thought of as transfers to hospitals and other parties that subsidize the

care receive by the uninsured.27 Thus, the net transfer to beneficiaries is closer to $1,200 to

$1,400 per year. To put this in perspective, the typical monthly UI benefits during our sample

period were about $1,300. Moreover, research on UI benefit extensions over our sample period

finds only small effects of the extensions on transitions out of unemployment, with most of the

effect arising through reduced labor force exits rather than reduced job finding (e.g., Farber and

Valletta 2015). Our results showing no detectable effect on job finding but reduced labor force

withdrawals in response to Medicaid extensions for selected sub-groups (Table 5) are consistent

with these findings for the effects of UI extensions.28




26
   Source: Kaiser Family Foundation State Health Facts, https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-
indicator/medicaid-spending-per-enrollee/
27
   Hospitals are effectively "insurers of last resort" through the provision of uncompensated care
(Garthwaite et al 2018). Bankruptcy also represents a form of implicit insurance (Mahoney 2015). Recent
studies have found that the ACA Medicaid expansion led to a decrease in hospital uncompensated care
(Blavin 2016; Rhodes et al 2019) and an improvement in household financial well-being (Hu et al 2017).
Other research finds little impact of the Medicaid expansion on household expenditures (Levy,
Buchmueller and Nikpay 2018), which also suggests that the uninsured spend very little on medical care.
28
   Other recent quasi-experimental evidence finds substantial moral hazard effects of the UI extensions
(Card et al. 2015; Johnston and Mas 2018). However, this research is based on data for one state,
Missouri, and the findings may not generalize to the wider national sample that we examine to assess the
impacts of Medicaid expansions.

                                                                                                      33
       It is also important to keep in mind that our analysis identifies the effect of the

availability of Medicaid in the context of the other ACA reforms, which provide affordable

insurance options for individuals and families with incomes above the Medicaid eligibility

threshold. An unemployed worker who finds a job that raises their income above 138 percent of

poverty will be eligible for tax credits that defray much of the cost of private insurance. This will

further reduce any possible work disincentives.

       Even if it is not surprising, the null effect of Medicaid eligibility on the job search

behavior of unemployed workers is highly relevant to ongoing policy debates. Beginning in

2017, several states have sought waivers to introduce work requirements to their Medicaid

programs (Musumeci et al 2018). In pushing for their greater use in all non-cash safety net

programs, the Trump administration has argued that work requirements will increase

employment, thereby improving "self-sufficiency" (Council of Economic Advisers 2018). Our

results, along with those of other recent studies finding no employment effects of the ACA

Medicaid expansion, are at odds with this assertion. Our results are more consistent with a recent

study of Arkansas, which in June 2018 became the first state to implement Medicaid work

requirements. Sommers et al (2019) found that the introduction of work requirements led to

roughly a 6-percentage point reduction in insurance coverage in Arkansas relative to changes in

three control states, but no significant change in employment.



VIII. Conclusions

       Because employer-sponsored insurance is the predominant source of health coverage in

the United States, many workers who lose their jobs not only suffer a loss of income but also

lose health insurance. By creating new affordable insurance options that are not tied to



                                                                                                  34
employment, the Affordable Care Act was intended to strengthen the safety net for unemployed

workers and other Americans with limited access to employer-sponsored insurance. The effect of

the ACA on increasing insurance coverage was limited by the decision of some states to not

implement the expansion of the Medicaid program as intended by the law.

       Our analysis of health insurance coverage trends over a ten-year period finds that the

ACA Medicaid expansion significantly expanded the safety net for unemployed workers.

Difference-in-differences estimates indicate that after the law went into effect, the percent

uninsured among the unemployed fell by an additional 8 percentage points in states that

implemented the Medicaid expansion compared to states that did not. Increases in insurance

coverage were particularly large for demographic groups that prior to 2014 had limited access to

public insurance coverage. We also find greater improvements in access to care for the

unemployed in expansion states compared to non-expansion states.

       A full evaluation of the ACA requires accounting for possible market distortions arising

from incentives created by the program. Before the main coverage provisions of the law went

into effect, much attention was given to potential labor market distortions. In the case of

unemployed workers, access to Medicaid might have reduced the intensity of job search, thereby

reducing exit from unemployment to employment; at the same time, access to Medicaid may

have led unemployed individuals to exit the labor force altogether. Our analysis distinguishes

between exits via job finding and exits out of the labor force, which may move in opposite

directions in response to the Medicaid expansions and hence have offsetting effects on measured

unemployment. Our difference-in-difference tests show no meaningful effects of the Medicaid

expansions on job finding but a reduction in labor force exits for some groups (parents and the




                                                                                                  35
short-term unemployed). This suggests no moral hazard effects on labor market behavior arising

from the expansions, and in fact modest positive effects on labor force attachment.

       Overall, our results suggest that the expansions of Medicaid availability to unemployed

individuals under the ACA achieved their intended effect of expanding coverage without causing

adverse unintended consequences via moral hazard effects on job search and labor force

attachment. Our findings do not preclude more general negative labor supply effects of the ACA,

as assumed in CBO analyses (Harris and Mok 2015). However, our findings suggest that such

labor supply effects as a result of the ACA Medicaid expansions have been minimal.




                                                                                                 36
References
Abraham, Katharine G., and Melissa S. Kearney. 2018. "Explaining the Decline in the U.S.
      Employment-to-Population Ratio: A Review of the Evidence." NBER Working Paper
      No. 24333, February. http://www.nber.org/papers/w24333

Akosa Antwi, Y., Moriya, A.S., and Simon, K., 2013. "Effects of Federal Policy to Insure Young
      Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act's Dependent-Coverage Mandate,"
      American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 1-28.

Antonisse, Larisa, Rachel Garfield, Robin Rudowitz, and Samantha Artiga. 2017. The Effects of
       Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: Updated Findings from a Literature Review. Kaiser
       Family Foundation Issue Brief.

Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A., Song, J. and Taubman, S., 2014. The impact of Medicaid on labor
       market activity and program participation: evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance
       Experiment. American Economic Review, 104(5), pp.322-28.

Bailey, J. and Chorniy, A., 2016. "Employer-Provided Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Did
        the Affordable Care Act Reduce Job Lock?" Contemporary Economic Policy, 34(1): 173-
        83.

Baily, Martin N. 1978. "Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance." Journal of Public
       Economics. 10 (December): 379­402.

Barbaresco, S., Courtemanche, C., and Qi, Y., 2015. "Impacts of the Affordable Care Act
       Dependent Coverage Provision on Health-Related Outcomes of Young Adults," Journal
       of Health Economics, 40(1)): 54-68.

Barnett, J.C. and Berchick, E.R., 2017. "Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2016,"
       Current Population Reports, P60-260(September).

Blumberg, Linda J. Bowen Garrett, and John Holahan. 2016. "Estimating the Counterfactual:
      How Many Uninsured Adults Would There Be Today Without the ACA?" Inquiry 53(3):
      1-13.

Bradley, C.J. and L.M Sabik. forthcoming. "Medicaid Expansions and Labor Supply Among
       Low-Income Childless Adults: Evidence from 2000 to 2013." International Journal of
       Health Economics and Management 19 (3-4): 235-272.

Browning, M. and Crossley, T.F., 2009. Shocks, stocks, and socks: Smoothing consumption over
      a temporary income loss. Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(6), pp.1169-
      1192.

Buchmueller, T.C., Ham, J and Shore-Sheppard, L. 2016. "The Medicaid Program," in The
     Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs edited by Robert Moffit, Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.

                                                                                                37
Buchmueller, T.C., Levinson, Z.M., Levy, H.G. and Wolfe, B.L., 2016. Effect of the Affordable
     Care Act on racial and ethnic disparities in health insurance coverage. American Journal
     of Public Health, 106(8), pp.1416-1421.

Buchmueller, T.C. and Valletta, R.G., 2017. Work, Health, and Insurance: A Shifting Landscape
     for Employers and Workers Alike. Health Affairs, 36(2), pp.214-221.

Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. 2007. "The Spike at Benefit Exhaustion: Leaving
       the Unemployment System or Starting a New Job?" American Economic Review 97(2):
       113-118.

Card, David, and Phillip B. Levine. 2000. "Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells:
       evidence from the New Jersey extended benefit program." Journal of Public Economics
       78: 107-138.

Card, David, Andrew Johnston, Pauline Leung, Alexandre Mas, and Zhuan Pei. 2015. "The
       Effect of Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment Insurance Receipt:
       New Evidence from a Regression Kink Design in Missouri, 2003­2013." American
       Economic Review 105 (5): 126­30.

Chan, S. and Stevens, A.H., 1999. Employment and retirement following a late-career job loss.
       The American Economic Review, 89(2), pp.211-216.

Chetty, R. (2006). A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance. Journal of
       Public Economics, 90, 1879­1901.

Chetty, R., 2008. Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of
       Political Economy, 116(2), pp.173-234.

Coleman, G. and Dave, D., 2018. "It's About Time: Effects of the Affordable Care Act
      Dependent Coverage Mandate on Time Use," Contemporary Economic Policy 36(1):44-
      58.

Courtemanche, C., Marton, J., Ukert, B., Yelowitz, A., and Zapata, D., 2017. "Early Impacts of
      the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Expansion and Non-Expansion
      States," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(1): 178-210.

Dague, L., DeLeire, T. and Leininger, L., 2017. The effect of public insurance coverage for
       childless adults on labor supply. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(2),
       pp.124-54.

Deleire, T., 2018, "The Effect of Disenrollment from Medicaid on Employment, Insurance
       Coverage, Health and Health Care Utilization," NBER Working Paper No. 24899.




                                                                                              38
Duggan, M., Goda, G.S. and Jackson, E., 2017. "The Effects of the Affordable Care Act on
      Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes," NBER Working Paper No.
      23607 (July).

Fang, C., 2017. "The Effect of Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion on Post-Displacement
       Labor Supply among the Near-Elderly." Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
       Retirement Research Center (MRRC) Working Paper, WP 2017-370.
       http://mrrc.isr.umich.edu/wp370/.

Farber, H.S., 2017. Employment, hours, and earnings consequences of job loss: US evidence
        from the displaced workers survey. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(S1), pp. S235-S272.

Farber, H.S. and Valletta, R.G., 2015. Do extended unemployment benefits lengthen
        unemployment spells? Evidence from recent cycles in the US labor market. Journal of
        Human Resources, 50(4), pp.873-909.

Farber, H.S., Rothstein, J. and Valletta, R.G., 2015. "The Effect of Extended Unemployment
        Insurance Benefits: Evidence from the 2012-2013 Phase-Out," American Economic
        Review, 105(5): 171-176.

Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. Forthcoming. The Value of
       Medicaid: Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. Journal of
       Political Economy.

Frisvold, D.E., and Jung, Y., 2018. "The Impact of Expanding Medicaid on Health Insurance
       Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes," International Journal of Health Economics and
       Management, 18(2): 99-121.

Garfield, R., Rudowitz, R., Musumeci, M.B., and Damico, A., 2018. "Implications of Work
       Requirements in Medicaid: What Does the Data Say?" Kaiser Family Foundation Issue
       Brief, available at http://files.kff.org/attachment/Issue-Brief-Implications-of-Work-
       Requirements-in-Medicaid-What-Does-the-Data-Say

Garthwaite, C., Gross, T. and Notowididgo, M., 2014. "Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply
      and Employment Lock," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2): 653-696.

Gooptu, A., Moriya, A.S., Simon, K.I. and Sommers, B.D., 2016. Medicaid expansion did not
      result in significant employment changes or job reductions in 2014. Health Affairs, 35(1),
      pp.111-118.

Gruber, J., 1997. The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance. The
       American Economic Review, 87(1), pp.192-205.

Gruber, J. and Madrian, B.C., 1997. Employment separation and health insurance coverage.
       Journal of Public Economics, 66(3), pp.349-382.



                                                                                               39
Gruber, J. and Madrian, B.C., 2002. "Health Insurance, Labor Supply and Job Mobility: A
       Critical Review of the Literature," NBER Working Paper No. 8817 (February).

Hacker, J.S., 2006. The Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and the Decline of the
      American Dream. Oxford University Press.

Ham, J.C. and Ueda, K., The Perils of Relying Solely on the March CPS: The Case of Estimating
       the Effect on Employment of the TennCare Public Insurance Contraction.

Harris, E., Mok, S., 2015. "How CBO Estimates the Effects of the Affordable Care Act on the
        Labor Market," Congressional Budget Office Working Paper Series No. 2015-09
        (December).

Heim, B., Lurie, I., and Simon, K., 2015. "The Impact of the Affordable Care Act Young Adult
      Provision on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Tax Data," in Tax Policy and the
      Economy, 29(1): 133-157.

Johnston Andrew C., and Alexandre Mas 2018. "Potential Unemployment Insurance Duration
       and Labor Supply: The Individual and Market-Level Response to a Benefit Cut." Journal
       of Political Economy 126(6): 2480-2522.

Jolly, N.A. and Phelan, B.J., 2017. The Long-Run Effects of Job Displacement on Sources of
        Health Insurance Coverage. Journal of Labor Research, pp.1-19.

Jurajda, S. and F.J. Tannery. 2003. "Unemployment Durations and Extended Unemployment
       Benefits in Local Labor Markets." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(2): 324-
       348.

Kaestner, R., Garrett, B., Chen, J., Gangopadhyaya, A. and Fleming, C., 2017. Effects of ACA
       Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply. Journal of Policy
       Analysis and Management, 36(3), pp.608-642.

Kalil, A. and Wightman, P., 2011. Parental Job Loss and Children's Educational Attainment in
        Black and White MiddleClass Families. Social Science Quarterly, 92(1), pp.57-78.

Katz, L. and Krueger, A.B. 2016. "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in
       the United States, 1995-2015," NBER Working Paper No. 22667.

Katz, L., and Meyer, B. 1990. "The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemployment Benefits
       on the Duration of Unemployment." Journal of Public Economics 41 (Feb.): 45-72.

Kreuger, A. and B. Meyer., 2002. "Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance," Handbook of
      Public Economics,

Kucko, K., Rinz, K. and Solow, B. 2018. "Labor Market Effects of the Affordable Care Act:
      Evidence from a Tax Notch." Unpublished working paper.

                                                                                               40
Landais, Camille. 2015. "Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Insurance Using the
       Regression Kink Design." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4): 243­78.

Leung, P. and Mas, A., 2018. "Employment effects of the ACA Medicaid expansions." Industrial
       Relations, 57(2): 206-234.

Levy, H., Buchmueller, T.C. and Nikpay, S., 2016. Health reform and retirement. Journals of
       Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, p.gbw115.

Levy, H., Buchmueller, T.C. and Nikpay, S., 2018. The Impact of Medicaid Expansion on
       Household Consumption. Eastern Economic Journal pp. 1-24.

McMorrow, S., Long, S.K., Kenney, G.M. and Anderson, N., 2015, "Uninsured Disparities Have
     Narrowed for Black and Hispanic Adults under the Affordable Care Act," Health Affairs,
     34(10):1774-1778.

Meyer, B.D. 1990. "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells." Econometrica 58:
       757-782.

Moffitt, R. 1985. "Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment Spells."
       Journal of Econometrics 28: 85-101.

Morduch, J. and Schneider, R., 2017. The Financial Diaries: How American Families Cope in a
      World of Uncertainty. Princeton University Press.

Musumeci, M., Garfield, R. and Rudowitz, R. 2018. "Medicaid and Work Requirements: new
     Guidance, State Waiver Details and Key Issues," Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief
     (January).

Pohl, R.V. 2018. "Medicaid and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers: Implications for Health
       Care Reform." International Economic Review, 59(3): 1283-1313.

Rothstein, J. 2011. "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession."
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall):143­96.

Rothstein, J. and Valletta, R.G., 2017. Scraping by: Income and program participation after the
       loss of extended unemployment benefits. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
       36(4), pp.880-908.

Schaller J, Stevens AH (2015) Short-run effects of job loss on health conditions, health
       insurance, and health Care utilization. Journal of Health Economics, 43, pp.190­203.

Schwartz, J. 2013. "Do Temporary Extensions to Unemployment Insurance Benefits Matter?
      The Effects of the US Standby Extended Benefit Program." Applied Economics 45
      (March): 1167-83.



                                                                                                  41
Silva, N.M., 2014. The behavioral risk factor surveillance system. The International Journal of
        Aging and Human Development, 79(4), pp.336-338.

Skopec, L., Musco, T. and Sommers, B.D., 2014, July. A potential new data source for assessing
      the impacts of health reform: evaluating the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index. In
      Healthcare (Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 113-120). Elsevier.

Smith, J.C. and C. Medalia. 2015. "Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2014." 2015.
       Current Population Reports, P60-253.

Solon, G. 1985. "Work Incentive Effects of Taxing Unemployment Benefits." Econometrica 53:
       295-306. Miller, S. and Wherry, L.R., 2017. "Health and Access to Care During the First
       2 Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions," New England Journal of Medicine, 376 (10):
       947-956.

Sommers, B.D., Buchmueller, T., Decker, S.L., Carey, C. and Kronick, R., 2013. "The
     Affordable Care Act Has Led to Significant Gains in Health Insurance and Access to
     Care for Young Adults," Health Affairs, 32(1): 165-174.

Sommers, B.D., Gunja, M.Z., Finegold, K. and others. 2015. "Changes in Self-Reported
     Insurance Coverage, Access to Care and Health Under the Affordable Care Act," JAMA,
     314(4): 366-374.

Sommers, B.D., Kenney, G.M. and Epstein, A.M. 2014. New evidence on the Affordable Care
     Act: coverage impacts of early Medicaid expansions. Health Affairs, 33(1), pp.78-87.

Sommers, B.D., Goldman, A.L., Blendon, R.J., Orav, E.J., and Epstein, A.M. 2019. "Medicaid
     Work Requirements--Results from the First Year in Arkansas," New England Journal of
     Medicine, 381(11): 1073-1082.

Sullivan, D. and Von Wachter, T., 2009. Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using
       administrative data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), pp.1265-1306.

Sullivan, J.X., 2008. Borrowing during unemployment unsecured debt as a safety net. Journal of
       Human Resources, 43(2), pp.383-412.

Valletta, R.G. 2014. "Recent Extensions of U.S. Unemployment Benefits: Search Responses in
        Alternative Labor Market States." IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 3, pp. 1­25.

Wherry, L.R. and Miller, S., 2016. Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects
      Associated With the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-experimental
      Study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 164(12), pp.795-803.

Wooldridge, J.M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
      MA: MIT Press.



                                                                                                  42
                                                    Figure 1
Trends in insurance coverage by employment status, in states that did and did not expand Medicaid under the ACA




                                                                                                                  43
Figure 2: Event history results for insurance coverage outcomes: Unemployed adults




                                                                                     44
                                                    Figure 3
Trends in insurance coverage by employment status, in states that did and did not expand Medicaid under the ACA




                                                                                                                  45
Figure 4: Event history results for access to care outcomes: Unemployed adults




                                                                                 46
                                              Figure 5


                  Unemployment rates and UI availability
                  (by Medicaid expansion status in January 2014)

                                   Panel A: Unemployment rates
          12




                                                                                   Exp states
                                                                                   Nonexp states
          10




                                                                Dec. 2013
          8
Percent
          6
          4
          2




           2007        2009            2011              2013               2015      2017



                       Panel B: UI availability (mean maximum eligibility)
          99




                                                                                   Exp states
          86




                                                                                   Nonexp states
          73




                                                                Dec. 2013
Weeks
          54
          40
          26
          12




           2007        2009            2011              2013               2015      2017

     Note: Authors' calculations from BLS data in Panel A, CPS data in Panel B (unemployed excl.
     new entrants, weighted), merged with U.S. DOL data on UI availability and Kaiser Family
     Foundation data on Medicaid expansion status (states that expanded after January 2014
     are excluded). Temporary suspensions of extended UI programs (Apr, Jun/Jul, and Dec 2010)
     ignored. Gray areas denote NBER recession dates.




                                                                                                   47
                                       Figure 6

                 Unemployment Exit Rates (unadjusted)
             Medicaid Expansion (2014 only) vs. Non-expansion States

                                    To employment
.25
.2
.15




                                                                            Non-expansion
                                                                            Expansion
.1




      2007     2008   2009   2010    2011   2012    2013    2014     2015    2016       2017



                                       To NILF
.18
.16
.14
.12
.1




                                                                            Non-expansion
                                                                            Expansion
.08




      2007     2008   2009   2010    2011   2012    2013    2014     2015    2016       2017

 Note: Estimated from monthly CPS data on unemployed individuals ages 26-64, matched across
 months (corrected for UNU & UEU transitions). States that expanded Medicaid after 2014 are
 excluded. Vertical line segments show 95% confidence intervals for annual differences.




                                                                                               48
                                                               Figure 7

                 Unemployment Exit Rates (adjusted): All (ages 26-64)
                                    All Medicaid Expansion vs. Non-expansion States

                                                      Unemployed to employed
             0.040  0.020
    Event time dummies




                            0.012            0.014
                                                     0.005                    0.004            0.004
                                                             0.001
            0.000




                                                                                                       -0.000
                                    -0.004                                            -0.005                    -0.006

                                                                     -0.014
-0.020       -0.040




                             t-7      t-6     t-5     t-4      t-3     t-2     t-1     t+1      t+2     t+3      t+4




                                                            Unemployed to NILF
             0.040




                            0.022
              0.020
Event time dummies




                                    0.016
                                             0.011                   0.010
                                                     0.006                                     0.008
                                                                              0.004
                                                             0.000
0.000




                                                                                      -0.001           -0.000
                                                                                                                -0.002
             -0.020




                             t-7      t-6     t-5     t-4      t-3     t-2     t-1     t+1      t+2     t+3      t+4


       Note: From regressions using monthly CPS data on unemployed individuals ages 26-64, matched
       across months (corrected for UNU & UEU transitions). Time=0, corresponding to the calendar
       year just before implementation of Medicaid expansion, is omitted. Vertical lines show 95%
       confidence intervals for annual differences.




                                                                                                                         49
  Table 1: Summary of State Medicaid Expansion Decisions as of 1/1/2017 and UI Benefit
                                       Policy



                      Expansion States                        Non-Expansion States (19)
   By January 2014 (25)       After January 2014 (7)
   Arizona                    4/14: Michigan                  Alabama
   Arkansas                   8/14: New Hampshire             Florida
   California*                1/15: Pennsylvania              Georgia
   Colorado                   2/15: Indiana                   Idaho
   Connecticut*               9/15: Alaska                    Kansas
   Delaware                   1/16: Montana                   Maine
   District of Columbia*      7/16: Louisiana                 Mississippi
   Hawaii                                                     Missouri
   Illinois                                                   Nebraska
   Iowa                                                       North Carolina
   Kentucky                                                   Oklahoma
   Maryland                                                   South Carolina
   Massachusetts                                              South Dakota
   Minnesota*                                                 Tennessee
   Nevada                                                     Texas
   New Jersey*                                                Utah
   New Mexico                                                 Virginia
   New York                                                   Wisconsin
   North Dakota                                               Wyoming
   Ohio
   Oregon
   Rhode Island
   Vermont
   Washington*
   West Virginia
                   Mean possible Weeks of UI Benefits: Dec. 2013/Jan. 2014
            60.8/25.8                  60.7/26.1                        46.5/22.6

                     Fraction of unemployed worker sample in each group

              0.598                        0.079                             0.323
Notes: * denotes state began implementing Medicaid expansion before January 2014. Federal
extended UI benefits expired in January 2014. Figures represent mean weeks for each category
of states weighted by non-farm payroll employment in each state.




                                                                                               50
           Table 2: Percent Uninsured by Employment and State Medicaid Expansion Status, 2008-2010

                            Non-Expansion States                        Expansion States
                      Employed Unemployed Difference           Employed Unemployed Difference
All Adults 26-64         0.183        0.561      0.378            0.138         0.443    0.304

By Age
26 to 39                   0.241         0.613       0.372          0.186         0.499         0.312
40 to 54                   0.162         0.561       0.398          0.120         0.432         0.312
55 to 64                   0.112         0.415       0.303          0.084         0.324         0.240

By Education
Ed: HS or less             0.110         0.461       0.351          0.084         0.365         0.281
Ed: More than HS           0.312         0.646       0.334          0.244         0.520         0.276

By Race/Ethnicity
White non-Hispanic         0.125         0.500       0.375          0.095         0.398         0.303
Black non-Hispanic         0.201         0.594       0.393          0.156         0.462         0.306
Asian non-Hispanic         0.187         0.457       0.270          0.128         0.403         0.276
Other non-Hispanic         0.236         0.604       0.368          0.185         0.478         0.293
Hispanic (any race)        0.434         0.733       0.299          0.335         0.576         0.241

By Gender
Women                      0.158         0.500       0.342          0.116         0.370         0.254
Men                        0.205         0.611       0.406          0.159         0.499         0.341

By Parental Status
Non-Parent                 0.182         0.596       0.414          0.141         0.490         0.349
Parent                     0.184         0.497       0.313          0.138         0.443         0.304

Sample n               1,267,071        90,231                  2,122,630       162,950
       Notes: Estimates are for employed and unemployed adults between the ages of 26 and 64.
       Individuals not in the labor force are excluded.




                                                                                                     51
                Table 3: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansion on the Probability of Being Uninsured (ACS)
                                                            All Expansion States vs. Non-Expansion States

                                                                     Education                Parental status             When last worked
                                               Full sample   HS or less       > HS         Parent       Non-parent     < 1 year       1 year
                      A. Unemployed Adults
                      Dependent variable:
                         Uninsured             -0.080***     -0.109***     -0.056***     -0.030*       -0.105***     -0.076***     -0.085***
                                               (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.012)
                         Medicaid               0.133***      0.143***      0.126***      0.068***      0.163***      0.127***      0.141***
                                               (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.010)       (0.012)
                         Private non-group     -0.025***     -0.016*       -0.035***     -0.014*       -0.030***     -0.024***     -0.027***
                                               (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
                         Employer              -0.025***     -0.017***     -0.032***     -0.028***     -0.023***     -0.028***     -0.023***
                                               (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.005)
                      N                          739,821       357,447       382,374       247,479       480,240       413,86        328,435
                      B. Employed Adults
                      Dependent variable:
                         Uninsured             -0.008        -0.021*       -0.003        -0.005        -0.009
                                               (0.006)       (0.009)       (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.006)
                         Medicaid               0.035***      0.058***      0.025***      0.036***      0.035***
                                               (0.003)       (0.006)       (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.003)
                         Private non-group     -0.015***     -0.019**      -0.012***     -0.015***     -0.015***
                                               (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)
                         Employer              -0.011*       -0.018**      -0.008*       -0.015**      -0.009
                                               (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.005)       (0.004)
                       N                       11,298,996     3,619,312     7,679,684     4,372,618     6,885,983
Notes: *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; *p < 0.05




                                                                                                                                                        52
           Table 4: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansion on Access to Care (BRFSS)
                                               All Expansion States vs. Non-Expansion States

                                                       Education             Parental status       When last worked       Health is
                                Full Sample     HS or less       >HS      Parent     Non-Parent   <1 year      1 year      fair/poor
     A. Unemployed Adults
     Dependent variable:
     Uninsured                   -0.075***      -0.077***    -0.073***   -0.022     -0.116***     -0.068***   -0.082***   -0.108***
                                 (0.014)        (0.016)      (0.014)     (0.014)    (0.019)       (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.023)
     Delayed Care                -0.043***      -0.054***    -0.031**    -0.015     -0.067***     -0.030**    -0.057***   -0.091***
                                 (0.009)        (0.012)      (0.011)     (0.014)    (0.011)       (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.015)
     No usual source of care     -0.022*        -0.022*      -0.019      -0.017     -0.027*       -0.010      -0.034      -0.024
                                 (0.008)        (0.011)      (0.010)     (0.009)    (0.012)       (0.008)     (0.019)     (0.020)
     No checkup in past year     -0.011         -0.009       -0.014      -0.006     -0.016        -0.007      -0.016      -0.017
                                 (0.010)        (0.015)      (0.009)     (0.014)    (0.010)       (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.016)
     N                             175,295        80,718       94,257     64,051     111,244       85,216      90,079      46,233
     B. Employed Adults
     Dependent variable:
     Uninsured                   -0.008*        -0.009       -0.007*     -0.007     -0.010**                              -0.014
                                 (0.004)        (0.007)      (0.003)     (0.005)    (0.003)                               (0.012)
    Delayed Care                 -0.002         -0.005       -0.001      -0.001     -0.003                                -0.004
                                 (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.003)                               (0.010)
    No usual source of care      -0.017**       -0.025**     -0.011*     -0.017*    -0.017*                               -0.031*
                                 (0.006)        (0.009)      (0.005)     (0.007)    (0.007)                               (0.012)
    No checkup in past year      -0.004         -0.006       -0.002      -0.001     -0.007                                -0.011
                                 (0.007)        (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.009)    (0.006)                               (0.013)
    N                             1,864,865      523,909     1,337,908    781,249    1,083,616                             167,982
Notes: *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; *p < 0.05,




                                                                                                                                       53
Table 5: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansion on Unemployment Exits (CPS)

                                                                                                 Duration of
                                                   Education           Parental status          unemployment
                              Full sample   HS or less     >HS      Parent     Non-Parent    <1 year     1 year

       Dependent Variable

       Exit to employment      -0.0023        0.0030    -0.0072     0.0006     -0.0040      -0.0033     -0.0009
                               (0.0037)      (0.0041)   (0.0062)   (0.0075)    (0.0063)     (0.0048)    (0.0073)

       Exit to NILF            -0.0043       -0.0060    -0.0022    -0.0163*     0.0025      -0.0116*     0.0210
                               (0.0050)      (0.0071)   (0.0057)   (0.0071)    (0.0073)     (0.0051)    (0.0111)

      N                          166838         83095    83743      61069        105769      124912      41926
      Notes: *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; *p < 0.05




                                                                                                                        54
                                     Table 6: Robustness checks
                               Alternate definitions of expansion states


                           All expanders vs         2014, 2015 & 2016      2015 & 2016 expanders
                            non-expanders       expanders vs non-expanders    vs non-expanders
                                  (1)                        (2)                      (3)
                         A. Insurance coverage outcomes (ACS)
 Uninsured                    -0.080***              -0.078***                  -0.068***
                              (0.011)                (0.014)                    (0.009)
 Medicaid                      0.133***               0.134***                   0.118***
                              (0.010)                (0.013)                    (0.011)
 Private non-group            -0.025***              -0.025***                  -0.020***
                              (0.006)                (0.006)                    (0.005)
 Employer                     -0.025***              -0.029***                  -0.029***
                              (0.005)                (0.005)                    (0.006)
N                              739,821               569,867                       348,827
                         B. Access to care outcomes (BRFSS)
Uninsured                     -0.075***              -0.084***                  -0.100***
                              (0.014)                (0.019)                    (0.013)
Delayed care                  -0.043***              -0.038***                  -0.022
                              (0.009)                (0.010)                    (0.012)
No usual                      -0.022*                -0.014                     -0.016
  source of care              (0.008)                (0.008)                    (0.012)
No checkup                    -0.011                 -0.012                     -0.013
  in past 12 months           (0.010)                (0.011)                    (0.015)
N                              175,295              143,958                         85,817
                          C. Transitions out of unemployment (CPS)
 Exits to employment          -0.0023                -0.0010                     0.0078
                              (0.0037)               (0.0038)                   (0.0055)

 Exits to NILF                 -0.0043               -0.0044                   -0.0095
                               (0.0050)              (0.0058)                  (0.0121)

N                               166,849                120,933                    75,248
    Notes: *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; *p < 0.05




                                                                                           55
