                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ABANDONED BY COAL, SWALLOWED BY OPIOIDS?

                                       Gilbert E. Metcalf
                                         Qitong Wang

                                      Working Paper 26551
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26551


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




We thank Melissa McInerney and Jeff Zabel for helpful comments and the National Center for
Health Statistics for access to county level mortality data. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gilbert E. Metcalf and Qitong Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Abandoned by Coal, Swallowed by Opioids?
Gilbert E. Metcalf and Qitong Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 26551
December 2019
JEL No. I1,Q32,Q35

                                          ABSTRACT

Opioid addiction and mortality skyrocketed over the past decade. A casual look at the geographic
incidence of opioid mortality shows sharply higher mortality rates in the Appalachian region,
especially in coal-mining areas. This has led observers to make a link that was characterized by
one newspaper as "abandoned by coal, swallowed by opioids." We test that theory using
restricted death data and mine level coal production data. Specifically, we examine whether
higher reliance on coal mining in a county's economy leads to higher or lower opioid mortality.
We find a positive relationship between the share of coal miners among total local labor force and
county-level opioid mortality rates. This contradicts the "abandoned by coal, swallowed by
opioids" story. Rather our results suggest that the higher rates of injury in underground coal
mining (in particular) lead to greater amounts of opioid consumption and mortality. An
implication is that the decline in coal mining in the United States may have a positive spillover in
the form of reduced mortality from opioid use.


Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu

Qitong Wang
Department of Economics
3620 South Vermont Ave. Kaprielian (KAP) Hall, 300
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0253
USA
qitongwa@usc.edu
    I.   Introduction

         Opioid use has become a major health crisis in the United States affecting all sectors of society.

Deaths from drug overdoses have increased more than fourfold since 1999, rising from just under 17,000

in 1999 to over 70,000 in 2017 (Hedegaard et al., 2018). Death rates from opioid overdoses have risen

especially rapidly as shown in Figure 1. Recently, synthetic opioid drugs (like Fentanyl) have become

especially lethal. These artificial drugs are designed to mimic the effect of natural opioid-like codeine or

morphine and to provide additional solutions to pain issues. These substances are normally highly potent

and can achieve the same effect at low doses, which means they are also much more dangerous when

misused. For example, Fentanyl, one of the most common synthetic opioids, has been mixed with heroin

when sold in black market and caused many deaths in the United States.

         Opioid mortality is geographically concentrated in certain regions of the country including the

East coast, Rust Belt regions, and the Southwest (figure 2). Within the East, the Appalachian region, has

been especially hard hit. This is a region whose economies, coincidently or not, are heavily dependent on

coal mining.

         At the same time that opioid death rates have been sharply rising, the U.S. energy market has

been undergoing a massive transformation. Coal, once the dominant fuel source for electricity

generation, has been replaced by natural gas as the largest fuel source for electricity production. This is

the result of major technological advances in natural gas production. Hydraulic fracking and advances in

horizontal drilling technology have led to an explosion in domestic natural gas production. Domestic

natural gas production has risen by over fifty percent since 2006, according to data from the U.S. Energy

Information Administration. The result has been a sharp fall in the price of natural gas. EIA data tell the

story: the price of natural gas supplied to electric power plants fell by fifty percent over this period while

coal prices were essentially unchanged. Figure 3 shows the transition away from coal towards natural gas

in electricity generation with the share of coal among electricity sector fuel usage dropping from 51% in

2000 to 30% in 2017. Since over 90% of the coal produced in the United States has been used in



                                                                                                        Page 1
 
electricity generation, this fall in demand has contributed to a 28% decrease in total production and a 34%

decline in coal-related employment.

        The fall in employment is due to more than the overall decline in demand. Coal production in the

United States has been shifting from Eastern coal mines, e.g. mines in the Appalachian regions to

Western regions, like the Powder River Basin, in part because of the lower sulfur content of Western coal

and in part due to higher productivity of Western coal mines. Because Western coal is primarily surface

mined coal as opposed to underground mined coal, the productivity of Western coal miners is much

higher. In 2016, for example, the mean productivity of workers in mines in the Powder River basin was

27.5 tons per worker hour versus 3.4 tons per hour in Appalachian coal mines.

        Figure 4 shows the decline in coal mining employment since 2000. While both surface mines and

underground mines have shed workers, the job loss in underground mines is much larger. Moreover, there

are more layoffs of coal miners from both surface and underground mines in the Appalachian regions

relative to other areas.

        It is widely believed that the opioid epidemic is associated with a worsening economic

environment. Research suggests that people facing stressful economic and social conditions are more

likely to abuse drugs (Sinha, 2008). Or, in the coal mining context as an article in The Guardian put it,

Eastern coal miners have been "abandoned by coal, swallowed by opioids." If it is true that decreasing

coal mining activity has contributed to the drug crisis, then this is a factor that policy makers should take

into consideration when designing climate policies and any transitional assistance associated with those

policies.

        On the other hand, coal mining is extremely difficult work with a high injury rate. Perhaps the

correlation between opioid use and coal mining is due more to opioid use in response to the arduous

work. In that case, policies to reduce reliance on coal could indirectly help reduce opioid addiction and

mortality.

        This paper examines the relationship between the decline of the coal industry and the death rate

from opioid overdose. We combine county-level death record data from the National Center for Health

                                                                                                       Page 2
 
Statistics with mine-level coal production data from Energy Information Administration (EIA) to conduct

a county-level empirical analysis on the relationship between opioid death rates and county coal mining

activity.

            We estimate models with the opioid overdose death rate as the dependent variable and the share

of coal miners in the county labor force as the key independent variable while controlling for other

factors. We also consider potential endogeneity in the labor share by constructing a Bartik-style variable

to instrument for coal mining employment.

            Our results indicate that a lower dependency of the local economy on coal mining is associated

with lower opioid death rates. Specifically, a one percent increase among the coal-producing counties in

the share of coal miners in the workforce increases the opioid mortality by 0.192 percent. To better

understand the magnitude of the impact, if coal mining activity in 2016 were at its 2011 peak level, the

opioid death rate would have been fifteen percent higher. The impact is stronger among underground than

surface coal mines. Impacts are also larger when instrumenting for the labor share variable. Based on

these results, we argue that the shift from coal to natural gas not only has produced environmental

benefits but also has helped to blunt damages from the opioid epidemic. We explore several possible

mechanisms. One possible channel is that increasing coal mining activity leads to more workplace

injuries and more opioid prescriptions in the community; the increased access to drugs leads to higher

opioid death rates, according to this theory.

    II.     Background

            As noted at the outset, overdose death rates have risen dramatically over the past two decades.

The increase in opioid related deaths is even more striking, rising from 8,407 in 2000 to 47,600 in 2017

(Hedegaard et al., 2018). A strong driver in the sharply rising opioid death rate is the substantial increase

of opioid prescribing rates (Dart et al., 2015). This was driven, in part, by a heightened focus on pain

management beginning in the 1990s (Levy et al., 2015). But it is also clear that aggressive marketing by

drug companies also contributed to the crisis (Van Zee, 2009). Compounding the problem is the


                                                                                                        Page 3
 
proliferation of powerful synthetic opioids including Fentanyl that can be prescribed legally but also have

shown up in street heroin. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that prescription

opioid misuse cost the United States nearly $80 billion annually in costs of treatment, lost productivity,

and criminal justice costs in 2013 (Florence et al., 2016). Efforts to control the use of opioid or overdose

with laws to date have not been effective (Meara et al, 2016).

        At the same time that the opioid crisis was taking off, the coal industry has experienced the most

severe decline in the history of mining in the United States. Driving the decline, among other factors, is

the sharp drop of natural gas price resulting from the fracking revolution that has brought large quantities

of natural gas into the market and made the United States the largest producer of natural gas in the world.

Natural gas has driven out a considerable amount of coal-fired electricity and is one of the most important

factors that caused coal mine closures (Coglianese, 2017). Other factors are the rise of wind generation

(Fell and Kaffine, 2018) and the decline of electricity consumption (Linn and McCormack, 2017). Jordan

et al. (2018) also argue that the increasing costs of production contributed the most for the closure of

Appalachian coal mines.

        We are interested in the question of how changes in coal mining rates may affect opioid mortality

as opposed to a simple correlation between coal mining activity and mortality. One possible response to a

decline in Eastern coal mining and the resulting economic decline is an increase in opioid addiction and

mortality as suggested by the work of Case and Deaton (2015) and their idea of "deaths of despair." They

argued that poor economic conditions for less-educated middle-aged white Americans have induced an

increase in the prevalence of death due to suicide, alcohol, and drug addiction. Deaths of despair suggests

that sharply rising unemployment and declining economic conditions in Appalachian coal mining

communities could lead to higher rates of opioid addiction and death.

        In a subsequent paper, Case and Deaton (2017) argued that "deaths of despair" cannot be solely

explained by declining economic conditions. They noted that the death rate for less-educated middle-aged

white Americans actually started to rise in the early 2000s prior to the financial crisis; moreover, the death

rate for this group continued to rise as the economy began to recover from the Great Recession. Case and

                                                                                                       Page 4
 
Deaton attributed the rising death rate for this group to more general social problems including stagnating

real wages. Focusing more specifically on drug overdoses, Ruhm (2018) examined whether the increase

in drug mortality is due more to stagnating economic opportunities ("death by despair") or just one of the

consequences of a worsening "drug environment." He concludes that it is inappropriate to attribute the

rise in drug overdose to the "deaths of despair" framing but rather more a function of the drug

environment.


        Case and Deaton's work builds on earlier work on the relationship between general

macroeconomic conditions and personal health. Results in that literature are mixed. Smith (1999) found

that declining economic conditions are bad for the health of the elderly. Ruhm (2000) found total

mortality to be strongly procyclical to macroeconomic conditions. He argued that a strong economy

contributed to unhealthy diets and more cardiovascular disease and transport accidents. Ruhm

(2015) revisited this idea and found that the procyclical pattern of total mortality have been weaken

recently. Although cardiovascular disease and transport accident continue to be procyclical, cancer has

shown a strong countercyclical pattern. It is worth noticing that Lindo (2015) found different results when

the analysis is done at a lower level of aggregation. Specifically, when aggregated at county level, he

found smaller results comparing to state-level analysis.


        Focusing on pain killers, recent research has found that declining economic conditions, especially

the decline of manufacturing, will increase the prescription of pain killers, such as opioids, and lead to

more opioid deaths (Carpenter et al. 2017, Charles et al. 2018). These effects are more concentrated on

working white-males with low educational attainment. Hollingsworth et al. (2017) analyzed the

relationship between a worsening economic situation and opioid death rates, as well as Emergency

Department (ED) visits with a 16-year panel and county fixed effect regression. They also considered the

impacts of state-specific policies, such as Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) and reached the

conclusion that opioid-related deaths and ED visits increase during an economic downturn. Precisely, a

one percent point increase in local unemployment rate leads to 3.6% increase in opioid deaths. Results are

                                                                                                        Page 5
 
stronger when regressions are run at the state rather than county level, a result attributed by Lindo (2015)

to spillover effects across counties within a state.


         Betz and Jones (2018) examined the heterogeneous effect of employment growth and wage

changes on opioid overdoses in different industries. They used average earnings as a proxy for working

skills and divided industries into four skill-level tiers. The results implied that wage and employment

growth in low-skill industries can decrease opioid overdose of rural, white males. The same improvement

is also helpful for black and female population. On the other hand, higher employment was associated

with more opioid overdose in population within high-paying industries. These results suggest that the

mechanism driving opioid overdoes can be different depending on the natural of the occupation.

         While increased opioid use may be driven in part by worsening economic conditions, it is also

possible that work related injuries could also drive increased opioid use. Underground coal mining is an

especially hazardous occupation requiring workers to spend long periods of time in cramped working

conditions. In Figure 5, we rank industries at the same NAICS level according to their incident rate of

non-fatal injuries and illnesses.

         Coal mining activity is above the 60th percentile in the ranking of incident rate of non-fatal

workplace injuries and illness among all the industries at the same NAICS level recorded by Bureau of

Labor Statistics in 2017, while underground coal mining is above the 90th percentile whereas surface coal

mining is at the 20th percentile. Coal mining, especially underground coal mining, is one of the most

dangerous professions in the United States. Thus, these coal miners may experience injuries leading to a

higher rate of use of painkillers. This conjecture is supported by the abnormally high prescription rate of

opioid drugs in Appalachian regions. From Figure 6, we can see that the prescription rate of opioid in the

Appalachian region is almost double the prescription rate in other regions. Starting from 2013, the

prescription rate of opioids has been decreasing dramatically. This is because states began to review

Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) data and implement pain clinic regulation (Guy Jr et al.,

2017).


                                                                                                          Page 6
 
        Coal mining has never been a safe profession. Coleman and Kerkering (2007), Margolis (2010)

and Komljenovic et al. (2008) used several estimation methods to measure the risk of injury in coal mining

activity. They reached the conclusion that even though the risk of injury has decreased compared to past

years, coal mining is still one of the most dangerous occupations in the United States. Margolis (2007) also

found that the risk of injury may increase with an increase in workers' age.


        Thumula et al. (2017) used 26 workers' compensation jurisdictions covering data from October

2009 through March 2015 to study the trends in the use of opioids and prescribing patterns of pain

medication. They found that in the 2013 - 2015 period, over half of the injured workers with pain

medications were prescribed with opioids. These conclusions echo with the observation of Havens et al.

(2007) and McDonald et al. (2012) that Appalachian region had abnormally high opioid death rates.

        The difficult working environment may contribute to injuries or chronic pain that leads to

increased reliance on painkillers, including opioids. In addition, the culture of coal mining may make it

difficult for injured coal miners to take time off from work, especially as jobs are being cut back due to

reduced demand for Appalachian coal. According to a documentary done by PBS (Public Broadcasting

Service), miners are reluctant to take time off from work from a fear of being replaced by other miners.

These facts make coal miners more exposed to opioids than other occupations.


        The relationship between opioid use and labor force participation is complex. Using American

Time Use Survey (ATUS), Krueger (2017) estimates that over 40 percent of the decline in male labor

force participation may be attributed to increases in opioid use. His research is the first to consider the

reverse relationship - from opioids to unemployment. Currie et al. (2018) further investigated this topic by

allowing mutual effects between employment and opioid usage. Their research employed opioid

prescription rate data from 2006 to 2014 and county-level employment data to regress employment to

population ratio on opioid prescription to population ratio and vice versa. The authors find a positive

relationship between opioid prescribing and employment. Specifically, a 100% increase in opioid

prescribing would result in increases in employment of 3.8% for women with education levels higher than

                                                                                                        Page 7
 
mean, and 5.2% for women with education lower than mean. This effect was, however, not significant for

men. These results indicated that although dangerous and addictive, opioids may help women stay in the

labor force. For the other direction, they found that higher employment can reduce opioid prescription

among young workers in counties with education levels above the median.

III.     Conceptual Framework

         The total number of underground coal miners dropped from 50,312 in 2011 to 27,604 in 2016, a

decline of 45 percent. In the same period, the number of surface coal miners dropped from 34,585 to

20,345, a decline of 41 percent. This negative employment shock was predominantly concentrated on

male workers with educational outcomes of high school degree or less. Data from the Current Population

Survey (CPS) indicate that over 90% of coal miners are male. Roughly 10% of miners in the sample have

a college degree and 70% of the coal miners are between 25 and 50 years old (Figure 7).

         Moreover, the decline of the local coal mining industry may have spillover effects on people

other than coal miners. As one of the main industries of the Appalachian region, the coal mining industry

provides support for various local businesses and declining coal production has spillover economic

impacts. Following Bowen et al. (2018), we show the trend of employment in the Appalachian region,

with or without coal production and the rest of the U.S. (Figure 8). After 2010, employment has been

trending up across the whole country expect for those Appalachian counties where coal is no longer

produced (or was never produced).1 The research concluded and we quote: "This evidence suggests that

the loss in coal employment has led to broader spillover effects which have suppressed overall economic

growth in the relevant regions". The "deaths of despair" hypothesis suggests that declining coal

production could lead to higher rates of opioid use and mortality.




1
  In Figure 8, coal producing counties are counties with positive coal output in the given year. The number of coal
producing counties is changing over time and a county that stops producing coal will be moved from the graph of
mining counties to the graph of non-mining counties The sharp drop in employment in Appalachian non-mining
counties reflects the loss of jobs as coal mining declines in the region.

                                                                                                              Page 8
 
         As discussed above, however, a competing hypothesis states that if opioid use is driven, in part,

by the prevalence of coal mining activity, the decline of coal employment may decrease the demand for

pain killers and so mitigate the impact of the opioid epidemic.2 According to the same documentary by

PBS, the Appalachian region is suffering from the problem that doctors often prescribe more opioid than

patients actually need. This increases the prevalence of opioids in the illegal market since these patients

(no matter real or not) can sell their exceeded prescription to addicts. When former coal miners no longer

need to take opioid painkillers to stay in their position, the prevalence of opioid in the local community is

going to decrease, hence, lead to less opioid death. These results combined should induce a positive

relationship between coal mining activity and opioid death.

         Whether the steep decline in coal mining exacerbated or mitigated the opioid crisis is an empirical

question. We turn to the data in the next section.



IV.      Empirical Methods

1. Baseline Model


         This paper employs a simple fixed-effect model to examine the relationship between coal mining

activity and opioid death at the county level.3 We regress the opioid mortality rate on measures of coal

mining activity along with other covariates. To account both for variation in the size of individual mines

in counties as well as the size of counties themselves, our measure of coal mining activity is the share of

coal miners among the local total workforce. A higher share indicates coal mining plays a bigger role in

the local economy. We include lagged employment share terms in the model to allow for gradual

responses of opioid mortality arising from changes in employment patterns. These elements suggest a

regression model with the following form:



2
  This assumes, of course, that new jobs that replace the lost coal mining jobs are not equally or more dangerous.
Given how dangerous underground coal mining is, as illustrated in Figure 5, this seems a reasonable assumption.
3
  Using the county rather than state as the unit of observation will likely lead to conservative estimates assuming
spillover effects across counties as suggested by Lindo (2015).

                                                                                                               Page 9
 
    (1)                                                                                      


where  is the death rate of opioid (death per 100,000 residents) in county  in year ,  is the share of

coal miners among total local employment,  is a vector of covariates,  are time fixed effects,  are

county fixed effects, and  are state-by-year fixed effects. We include as covariates the county

unemployment rate and median household income to account for local economic conditions, and

population density as a proxy for urbanization. We also include country demographic variables for gender

and age distribution as well as educational attainment.


          Hollingsworth et al. (2017) discuss how local policies that influence the death rate of opioid over

time are possibly correlated with the economic condition. These policies, e.g. Prescription Drug Monitoring

Program (PDMP) and Medicaid policies, often are set at the state-level. We include state-by-year fixed

effect to capture these policies. Although PDMP is conducted at the state-level, there are variations among

states as the detailed progresses of implementing PDMP can be different for different counties. A more

detailed approach, such as county-specific time trend, may be helpful when considering the different

relationship between coal mining and opioid death on county-level, but it dramatically reduces the degree

of freedom and so affects the ability to obtain precisely estimated coefficients.


          Krueger (2017) and Currie et al. (2018) considered the effect of pain and opioid usage on local

employment. This suggests a possible bias with OLS estimation due to correlation between the error term

and coal mining employment shares. We argue that any effect of shocks to opioid death rates are likely to

affect the overall labor market rather than coal mining in particular. If true, the coal mining employment

share should be uncorrelated with the error term in the regression. But since we have no a priori evidence

to support this argument, we also run IV regressions using Bartik-style instruments as we discuss below.




                                                                                                    Page 10
 
2. Subgroup Analysis


         In order to further investigate the mechanism of how changes in coal mining activity affect opioid

mortality, we will present regression results for subgroups to explore heterogeneous effects that can be used

to reveal more information on the channels of such relationship.


         Men have predominated in the coal mining business. This may be caused by the high demand for

physical strength in the mining operation or historical reasons. We don't want to limit our analysis to male

death rates, however, since increased access to opioids could have indirect effects on female death rates in

the county. Therefore, we estimate the effect of coal mining activity on male and female death rate

separately to investigate the heterogeneous effects by gender. Since most coal miners are men, we expect

opioid mortality rates for men to be more sensitive to changes in coal mining activity than female death

rates.


         We also estimate the heterogeneous relationships across different age groups. More specifically,

we allow for differential impacts for these age groups: population under 20 years old, between 20 and 39,

between 40 and 59, and above 60 years old. Since coal miners are mostly prime-age workers, we expect to

see a larger impact on the death rate of the population between 20 and 59 years old than other age groups.


         If coal mining only contributes to opioid mortality directly, we would not expect to see a

relationship between coal mining and mortality for females and the elderly. Any relationship for these

two groups could suggests an indirect effect, perhaps through increased prescriptions in the community

contributing to greater availability of opioids in general in the community.


         We also explore differential impacts between underground coal mining and surface mining.

According to our conceptual model, the relationship between coal mining activity and opioid death comes

from the dangerous working environment in the mines. Since underground miners generally face harsher

conditions than their colleagues on the surface, they are more likely to get injured, thus more exposed to

opioid painkillers. Following this conjecture, underground coal mining should have a stronger


                                                                                                      Page 11
 
relationship with opioid death than surface coal mining. More specifically, more underground coal mining

will induce more workplace injuries, and more opioid prescriptions, thereby increasing opioid access in

the community.


    V.   Data

         We merge restricted mortality data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

with coal production data from Energy Information Administration (EIA) to produce a data set covering

over 3,100 counties in the United States over the time period 2000 to 2016. To these data, we add various

socioeconomic and demographic information.


1.       Mortality Data


         The mortality data used in our analysis are the Mortality ­ All County Micro data compiled by

the National Center for Health Statistics from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions

through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program based on data reported on death certificates for U.S.

residents. The death certificate in the United States asks the medical practitioner or the registrar to fill out

basic demographic information, one underlying cause of death (UCOD), as well as up to 20 multiple

causes of death (MCOD).4 Public use mortality data can be found on CDC Wide-ranging Online Data for

Epidemiologic Research (WONDER). Public use data, however, have results suppressed if there are

fewer than ten records at one location in a year. Because the public data withhold data when there are

fewer than ten deaths in a county, there can be significant underreporting. In 2016, for example, there

were 42,249 opioid related deaths in the United States. When aggregating up from the public dataset,

however, there are only 37,526 deaths reported. In that year, there were opioid deaths reported in 2,773

counties in the United States. The public use data set only reports deaths in 701 counties. The data



4
 The underlying cause of death is "(a) the disease or injury which initiated the train of events leading directly to
death, or (b) the circumstances of the accident or violence which produced the fatal injury" (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 2004, p. 12). The multiple causes of death are based on coroner entries on the death
certificate.

                                                                                                              Page 12
 
withholding problem is more severe when looking at finer cuts of the data. If a county experienced

eleven deaths, for example, with five being male and six female, the public use data would report the

county statistic for overall deaths. But when pulling data on deaths among males (or females), deaths

from this county would be withheld. All of our statistical results are based on the restricted data.


        Over the time period from 2000 to 2016, there were 615,070 overdose deaths recorded, with

343,339 of those deaths attributed to opioids. For each county, we aggregate death data to annual rates.

Figure 9 shows the increase in deaths due to overdoses over this period and the sharp increase in the

proportion due to opioids. Opioid deaths include overdose deaths from heroin, natural and semisynthetic

opioids (e.g. oxycodone and hydrocodone), methadone, and other synthetic drugs (e.g. fentanyl and

tramadol). These categories aren't mutually exclusive. Following the approach of Hedegaard et al.

(2018), we use the following codes to extract records of death by overdose and death by opioid: for death

by overdose, select records with UCOD as X40-X44, X60-X64, X85, and Y10-Y14. Among records with

UCOD as overdose, the following MCOD codes indicate the drug type(s): T40.0-T40.4, T40.6. Detailed

definition of these codes can be found in the appendix. If the only cause of death is opioid overdose, then

both the direct cause and underlying cause will be opioid overdose.

        From Figure 10, we can see that there are two waves of dramatic increase of opioid death, one was

led by heroin from 2010, and the other was synthetic opioids other than methadone since 2013. Death rates

from natural and semi-synthetic opioids have experienced a consistent increase over the last decade.

Methadone was once a fatal opioid drug, but recently it has been used to treat heroin addiction.


        The rich information in CDC's death dataset provides an opportunity to break down national total

death records into different subgroups to understand how this opioid epidemic affects people with

different gender and age differently. Table 1 breaks out opioid deaths and death rates by gender and

illustrates higher mortality rates for men than women. The death rate, however, for women has been

growing at a more rapid pace than for men. Between 2000 and 2016, the rate grew at an annual rate of




                                                                                                       Page 13
 
9.3 percent for men and 10.6 percent for women. Figure 11 shows the opioid death rate broken down by

age groups and shows the rapid increase in the death rate since 2010 for adults in the 20 to 59 age range.


2.      Coal Production Data

        Individual coal mine production and employment data covering the years 2000-2016 are taken

form the Energy Information Administration (EIA) form 7A. There are six coal-producing regions in the

United States: Appalachia, Illinois Basin, Interior, Powder River Basin, Uinta Basin, and Western Region.

Detailed definition of these regions can be found in the appendix. Among these regions, the Appalachian

region covers between 80 and 90 percent of the producing coal mines in the United States for any given

year.

        Although Powder River Basin (PRB) has fewer coal mines than other regions (two percent of the

total number of operating coal mines), the surface mines there are highly productive and account for over

40 percent of annual coal production. Coal mines in the Powder River Basin produced 27.6 short tons of

coal per labor hour in 2016. In contrast Appalachian coal mines produced 3.1 tons per hour. The higher

productivity of PRB mines follows from the ability to use large mechanized machinery to remove coal

from very thick veins of coal just under the soil surface (Metcalf, 2019).

        Coal is predominantly produced from surface and underground mines.5 Table 2 shows output and

employment for surface and underground mines over the period of our sample. In 2016, surface mines

were more than 2.5 as productive as underground mines (23.4 tons per hour versus 9.1 tons per hour).

Production from surface mines is nearly double that of underground mines despite their hiring fewer

workers.


3.      Other Data Sources




5
  EIA also records production from auger mines separately from the other two categories. Auger mining activity is
done by portable augers that drill into the overburden of previously worked mines. Auger mining production is less
than one percent of surface mining production and we exclude these mines from our analysis. We also exclude
refuse mines, mines where coal is extracted from the waste material from previously mined sites. These too account
for a trivial share of U.S. coal production (less than one percent).

                                                                                                         Page 14
 
          We augment data on opioid mortality and coal production with county level data on household

median income and educational attainment from the American Community Survey (ACS). Annual data

are not available at the county level between 2001 and 2005 and data from 2006 to 2008 cover only

around half of the counties in the United States. To fill in missing data, we linearly interpolate using

county data on income and educational attainment from the 2000 Census. We also include data on

population from the Census Bureau and employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).


          Table 3 provides summary statistics for variables in the regressions. We separate counties into

coal and non-coal producing counties. Coal producing counties are defined as counties in our dataset that

produced coal in any of the years of our sample. The mean opioid death rate in coal-producing counties is

nearly twice that of non-coal-producing counties. Opioid prescription rates are also substantially higher.

Coal producing counties have a higher unemployment rate, lower population density, and lower income,

on average. Educational attainment rates are slightly lower as well.


VI.       Results

          Table 4 presents results from OLS regressions of opioid death rates on various regressors

including the share of coal miners in the county labor force. To allow for gradual impacts of changes in

coal mining activity on the death rate, we include the contemporary labor share and three lags. We report

the cumulative impact (sum of coefficient estimates) in this and subsequent tables. (Full regression

results are reported in the Appendix to the paper.) In addition to reporting the estimated coefficient, we

report the elasticity of the death rate with respect to the labor share and the interquartile range impact

(IQR Impact) measured as follows:


                                                                              
    (2)                                         
                                                                     


The IQR Impact shows the percentage change in the median death rate across counties                   when

moving from the 25th percentile of labor share for coal mining to the 75th percentile (for the subset of


                                                                                                       Page 15
 
counties with coal production). For regression sub-samples where the median opioid death rate is zero,

the IQR Impact is not defined.


         The top panel of Table 4 provides results focusing on the share of all coal miners in the labor

force. We find that a higher share of coal miners in the labor force leads to more opioid deaths, after

controlling for various socioeconomic variables, county and year fixed effects, as well as state-by-year

fixed effects. Specifically, a one percentage point increase in the share of coal miners is associated with

an increase in the mortality rate of 0.52 per 100,000. This corresponds to an elasticity of 0.192 and is

statistically significant at one percent level. This effect is comparable between men and women, as shown

in the next two columns though the elasticity of the response is higher among women than men. The

impact is estimated more precisely for women than for men. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile

in labor force share increases the opioid mortality rate by one-third for men and four-fifths for women, or

roughly two-fifths for the population as a whole.


         The next panel focuses on the share of underground miners in the labor force. The estimated

effect is now larger and statistically significant for both men and for women (and the population as a

whole). The elasticities and IQR impacts, however, are smaller for underground miners than for miners

as a group.6 The final panel shows results for surface miners. The estimates are only precisely estimated

for women and the whole population.


         That increased mining activity increases the female opioid death rate suggests an indirect impact

of coal mining on mortality given the very small number of women coal miners.7 We conjecture that coal




6
   It is not surprising that the elasticities are lower since the share of miners in the population is the sum of the shares
of underground and surface miners. The elasticities for the overall mining share regressions equals, to an
approximation,                    , where T indicates a regression on all mines, s indicates a surface mine regression
and u, a underground mine regression and  is an estimated coefficient and  an elasticity.
7
  According to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (2012), less than 4 percent of employees in
the coal mining sector were female.

                                                                                                                   Page 16
 
mining induces more workplace injuries, which, in turn, increases opioid usage. The increased usage

could lead to higher rates of access in the community thereby driving up opioid usage more generally.


          In Figure 5 above, we documented higher rates of injuries in underground than surface mines.

The larger impacts of a one percentage point increase in the share of underground coal miners on opioid

mortality relative to surface miners combined with the higher injury rates for underground miners

suggests the role of workplace injuries as the mechanism linking higher coal mining labor shares in a

county to higher opioid mortality rates.


          We next estimate the effects of the share of coal miners on the opioid death rate by various age

groups. As shown in Table 5, the change in coal mining activity has heterogeneous effects on population

with different ages, as expected. Generally speaking, the effect on population between 20 and 39 is the

largest among all four. Specifically, the estimated elasticity when focusing on all mines for death rates of

the population in the 20-39 age bracket is 0.190 and is statistically significant at the ten percent level. The

impact is large as well. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile in coal mining labor shares among

counties with positive shares is associated with a roughly one-half increase in mortality. We also see a

large and statistically significant effect for the age group 40 to 59. The death rate among other age groups

is not materially affected by changes in the labor share. Results are slightly larger when focused on

underground mines (and statistically significant for the age 20 to 39 group) but smaller and not

statistically significant within the same group for surface mines. For the age 40 ­ 59 population group,

surface coal mining activity has a statistically significant effect on opioid death rates.


VII.      Further Results

1.     Instrumental Variable Approach with a Bartik Instrument


          A concern with the OLS regressions is that the local opioid epidemic may have negative impacts

on the labor pool of coal mines in the region and so affect the employment of local coal miners. For this

to be a problem, it would have to be the case that shocks to opioid mortality differentially affect coal


                                                                                                       Page 17
 
mining employment, as opposed to general employment. We address this potential problem by

employing a Bartik instrument for employment. Following Currie et al. (2018), we construct the Bartik-

style variable for coal employment as:


                                          1                             \   
                                                  
                                                                        \   


where  is the instrumental variable for county , in year  and  indexes the type of coal mine (surface

or underground).        is the national employment level of type  coal mines in year ,  is the

population of county  in year , and            is coal mining employment in county j of type k mine in year

t0, our base year (2006).8 The instrument captures changes in local employment correlated with national

employment changes but uncorrelated with local shocks. This assumes that the national coal mining

employment level is not affected by the local shocks in opioid mortality. This Bartik-style instrumental

variable provides an exogenous demand shock to local coal mining employment. Instead of using the

share among total local workforce, we use the ratio between constructed employment level and local

population to avoid endogeneity between employment and opioid crisis. This variable gives an analogous

representation of the county's dependence on coal mining activity scaled by the size of the county.


         Table 6 shows the results with IV estimation. The pattern of results is similar to the OLS

regressions with more significant impact among men than women.              If anything, the impact is now larger

suggesting a negative correlation between local opioid mortality shocks and coal mining labor shares and

suggests a negative correlation between the error term in the OLS regressions and coal mining labor

shares. This would be consistent with shocks to opioid death rates in a county disproportionately

impacting coal miners and leading to lower coal mining activity in the country. That we get statistically

significant coefficient estimates in the OLS regressions despite this negative correlation also suggest that



8
  Counties vary in mining activity over time so some counties with active mines in some years that are not active in
2006 are dropped from the analysis. Our results are robust to different choices of the base year for constructing the
Bartik variable.

                                                                                                            Page 18
 
the OLS regressions provide a conservative estimate of the impact of coal mining on opioid death rates.

Detailed regression results can be found in Appendix Table A1.


        Table 7 shows IV regressions across age groups as in Table 5. As in Table 6, the estimated

effects are uniformly larger with the exception of the under 20 age group. The estimated coefficients for

this group are now uniformly negative in contrast to the OLS results, and they are statistically significant.


2. Underlying Mechanism


        Our results so far suggest that higher death rates from opioid use may be caused by higher rates of

usage by coal miners due to job-related injuries. We explore that potential mechanism here by regressing

opioid prescription rates on our measure of coal mining activity. A positive coefficient on the coal

mining labor share is consistent with our hypothesis that job-related injuries are increasing the prevalence

of opioid use in the county. Results are shown in Table 8 (and full regression results in the Appendix).

The results are suggestive. In all regressions, whether OLS or IV, the estimated total impact of coal

mining activity (cumulated over three lags) is positive. In the IV regressions, the IQR impact is on the

order of 5 to 6 percent of the median prescription rate. The estimated coefficients, however, are not

statistically significant for the most part. While suggestive, we would not want to argue that we have

found a smoking gun mechanism.


3. Contrasting Coal Mining with Retailing


        To ensure we're not picking up a spurious correlation between coal mining activity and opioid

mortality, we run similar regressions substituting the labor share in retailing for the labor share in coal

mining. To the extent that the mechanism for opioid mortality is greater use of these drugs in response to

the stressful and injury-prone nature of coal mining, we'd expect to see a smaller marginal impact of

retailing labor share on opioid mortality rates. We focus on retailing since it has a similar wage scale but

is less physically demanding work.




                                                                                                       Page 19
 
         Results are reported in Table 9. We see that there is a negative correlation among male

 population between the retail worker share in the county labor force and opioid deaths with more

 precisely estimated results for males than females. The negative correlation also shows up in age group

 regressions (Table 10) with the strongest result for deaths in the 20 to 39 age group. To the extent that a

 stronger retailing sector (as evidenced by a higher labor force share) is a proxy for a stronger economy,

 the negative correlation suggests an underlying "Death by Despair" relationship with lower economic

 activity associated with higher opioid mortality rates. If so, the positive relationship between coal mining

 activity and opioid mortality indicates an even stronger health and employment relationship in the coal

 mining industry, given the need to overcome any underlying economic driver of opioid use.


VIII.    Discussion

         This paper focuses on the relationship between coal mining activity and opioid mortality. Using

 restricted death records and coal production data, we are able to construct a county-level panel data and

 carry out fixed effect regressions to estimate the impact of changes in coal mining activity on local opioid

 death. Because of the rich information of both datasets, we are able to explore the extent to which results

 differ for men and women, underground coal mining and surface coal mining, and different age groups.


         The estimated effects of share of coal miners among total local labor force are consistent with

 different subgroups and suggest that there are positive relationships for both men and women,

 underground mining and surface mining after controlling for various socioeconomic variables, county and

 year fixed effect, as well as state-by-year fixed effect. More specifically, a one percent increase in the

 share of coal miners will result in a 0.192 percent increase in local opioid death rates, based on the OLS

 regression in Table 4 while the IV regression suggests a 0.42 percent increase (Table 6). The impacts are

 similar when focusing on underground mines only and suggest that the decline of underground coal

 mining could help alleviate the opioid epidemic in this region.




                                                                                                       Page 20
  
        Recall the two competing hypotheses mentioned in the conceptual framework section. The

positive relationship between coal mining activity and opioid death supports the hypothesis that more coal

mining activity leads to more workplace injuries. More injuries lead to the prevalence of opioid

painkillers in the community, then results in more opioid overdose. The comparison between underground

coal mining and surface coal mining also supports this conjecture. Since we control other socioeconomic

factors, county fixed effect and year fixed effect, the gap between the impact of underground coal mining

and surface coal mining can be traced to the difference in the natures of these two kinds of mining.

Because underground miners suffer from more severe working conditions than surface miners, they are

more likely to get injured and be prescribed with opioids. The greater impact from underground mining

on male mortality rates suggests that when considering the consequences of dangerous mining activity,

men are more likely to be affected because of the higher participation rate. However, we are not able to

further examine this claim due to data limitations. It is also worth noticing that a higher share of coal

miners among the total workforce also increases the opioid death rate of women, who seldom participate

in mining activity. This could be explained as a spillover effect with higher prescription rates among men

leading to greater amounts of opioids in the county some of which are used by women.


        Since this study analyzes the relationship between coal mining activity and opioid mortality, one

reasonable concern is that a severe opioid epidemic may affect local labor market and so affect coal mine

employment. This is a reasonable concern and suggests a negative bias in OLS regressions of mortality

on coal mining labor force shares. That we still estimate positive and statistically significant coefficients

on the labor force share variable in the OLS regressions suggests that the positive correlation is real and

that increased coal mining activity (especially underground coal mining) leads to higher opioid mortality

rates. We test that directly by running IV regressions using a Bartik instrument. That the estimated

coefficients are more positive supports the conjecture of a positive feedback from mortality to labor force

participation in coal mining.




                                                                                                      Page 21
 
        We want to be cautious in this conclusion for a couple of reasons. First, Currie et al. (2018)

directly examined the impact of opioid usage on employment and fail to identify any significant

correlation between employment and opioid prescription, except for low-educated women. Second, even

if there were a negative effect of opioid mortality on the local labor market, a decrease in the local

workforce will not necessarily change the share of coal miners among local workforce. In order to cause

endogeneity in the model, opioid epidemic has to impact the coal mining industry disproportionately

more than other sectors (to affect the share). There is no a priori reason to believe this would be the case

though the change in results from the IV regressions suggest some underlying relation causing bias in the

OLS regressions.


        Another source of endogeneity is the presence of local opioid policies. With state-by-year fixed

effect in the model, we are able to capture the state-specific policies, such as the Prescription Drug

Monitoring Program. However, the implementation of some policies may vary within the state. Then, the

state-by-year fixed effect is not adequately accounted for these variations. Moreover, the coal mining

activity may have increased (or decreased) in locations that were on different trajectories in terms of drug

mortality because of unknown reason (Hollingsworth et al., 2017). In these cases, the model presented

above could still incorrectly attribute a pre-existing trend in mortality to changes in coal mining activity.

Ideally, a model with county-by-year fixed effect should be constructed. However, it is infeasible since

there is no much variation in the model once we specify all three types of fixed effects: county-year fixed

effect, county fixed effect, and year fixed effect.


        As a check on our results, we also estimate the relationship between retailing activity and opioid

mortality. The results are the opposite to what we find with coal mining. Both coal mining and retailing

are industries dominated by low-educated workers. The difference is that coal mining is generally more

physically demanding and has higher injury rates. The difference in the results supports the conjecture of

workplace injury being the main driving factor behind the positive relationship between coal mining and




                                                                                                         Page 22
 
opioid mortality. Moreover, the negative relationship between retailing and opioid mortality backs the

idea of "Deaths of Despair," with a worsening economic environment leading to more opioid abuse.


        Even if the results here do not align with the "Deaths of Despair" hypothesis, our results do not

necessarily contradict the idea. "Deaths of Despair" idea attributes the increase in opioid death rate in the

twenty-first century to the worsening social and economic situation of older and less-educated workers in

the United States. This can still be true for coal miners since most of these workers don't have a college

degree. However, because of the dangerous nature of mining activity, the positive relationship between

coal mining and opioid mortality may simply outweigh the benefits of better economic condition and

stable employment.


IX.     Conclusion

        Overall, this study uses restricted mortality data and coal production data to investigate the

relationship between coal mining and opioid mortality. The results suggest that a higher share of coal

miners among the local total workforce is associated with a higher opioid death rate. This conclusion is

the opposite of what mainstream media would claim. Results are strongest for underground coal mining

activity and for miners in the 20 to 39 age group. We also use a Bartik-style instrumental variable to

control for potential endogeneity between employment and opioid abuse. Estimates from the IV

regressions are larger and more statistically significant than those of OLS for men.

        What explains this positive relationship? One possible channel is that increasing coal mining

activity leads to more workplace injuries, higher opioid prescription rates, and a consequent greater

prevalence of opioids in the community. This in turn leads to more opioid deaths. The larger estimation

with physically prime-age population supports this explanation. Results from prescription rate

regressions are consistent with this hypothesized channel but are not statistically significant.

        This study does not further investigate the mechanism behind this positive relationship between

coal mining activity and opioid mortality due to data limitation. More thorough analysis can be carried


                                                                                                     Page 23
 
out in the future if individual level data is available. Louie and Pearce (2016) conjecture that laid-off coal

miners have been absorbed by other industries. It would be interesting to see if regions with more

substitute industries for coal miners exhibit different relationship between coal mining activity and opioid

morality.




                                                                                                      Page 24
 
Reference
Betz, M. R., & Jones, L. E. (2018). Wage and Employment Growth in America's Drug Epidemic: Is All
     Growth Created Equal? American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 16(1), 19.
     http://doi.org/10.1093/ajae/aay069
Brett Jordan, I. L. A. J. L. (2018). Coal Demand, Market Forces, and US Coal Mine Closures, 1­65.
Bowen, E., Christiadi, J. Deskins, and B. Lego. (2018) An Overview of the Coal Economy in Appalachia,
     Appalachian Regional Commission.
Carpenter, C. S., McClellan, C. B., & Rees, D. I. (2017). Economic conditions, illicit drug use, and
     substance use disorders in the United States. Journal of Health Economics, 52, 63­73.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.12.009
Case, A., & Deaton, A. (2015). Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic
     Americans in the 21st century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(49), 15078­
     15083. http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518393112
Case, A., & Deaton, A. (2017). Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century. Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 2017(1), 397­476. http://doi.org/10.1353/eca.2017.0005
Charles, K. K., Hurst, E., & Schwartz, M. (2018). The Transformation of Manufacturing and the Decline
     in U.S. Employment. NBER Working Paper No. 24468. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Coglianese, J., Gerarden, T., & Stock, J. H. (2017). The Effects of Fuel Prices, Regulations, and Other
     Factors on U.S. Coal Production, 2008-2016 (pp. 1­24).
Coleman, P. J., & Kerkering, J. C. (2007). Measuring mining safety with injury statistics: Lost workdays
     as indicators of risk. Journal of Safety Research, 38(5), 523­533.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsr.2007.06.005
Currie, J., Jin, J. Y., & Schnell, M. (2018). US employment and opioids: Is there a connection? NBER
     Working Paper No. 24440. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
     http://doi.org/10.3386/w24440
Dart, R. C., Surratt, H. L., Cicero, T. J., Parrino, M. W., Severtson, S. G., Bucher-Bartelson, B., & Green,
     J. L. (2015). Trends in Opioid Analgesic Abuse and Mortality in the United States. New England
     Journal of Medicine, 372(3), 241­248. http://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1406143
Fell, H., & Kaffine, D. T. (2018). The Fall of Coal: Joint Impacts of Fuel Prices and Renewables on
     Generation and Emissions. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(2), 90­116.
     http://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20150321
Florence, C. F. Luo, L Xu, and C Zhou (2016). The Economic Burden of Prescription Opioid Overdose,
     Abuse and Dependence in the United States, 2013. Med Care 54(10): 901-06.
     http://doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000000625.
Guy, G. P., Jr, Zhang, K., Bohm, M. K., and, J. L. M. M., & Hoffmann, T. (2017). Vital signs: changes in
     opioid prescribing in the United States, 2006­2015. Ncbi.Nlm.Nih.Gov, 66(26), 697­704.
     http://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6626a4
Havens, J. R., Walker, R., & Leukefeld, C. G. (2007). Prevalence of opioid analgesic injection among
     rural nonmedical opioid analgesic users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 87(1), 98­102.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2006.07.008
Hedegaard, H., Miniño, A. M., & Warner, M. (2018). Drug Overdose Deaths in the United States, 1999­
     2017. NCHS Data Brief, 329(5152), 1­8. http://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm675152e1

                                                                                                    Page 25
 
Hollingsworth, A., Ruhm, C. J., & Simon, K. (2017). Macroeconomic conditions and opioid abuse.
     Journal of Health Economics, 56, 222­233. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.07.009
Katherine A. Margolis. (2010). Underground coal mining injury: A look at how age and experience relate
     to days lost from work following an injury. Safety Science, 48(4), 417­421.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2009.12.015
Komljenovic, D., Groves, W. A., & Kecojevic, V. J. (2008). Injuries in U.S. mining operations ­ A
     preliminary risk analysis. Safety Science, 46(5), 792­801. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2007.01.012
Krueger, A. B. (2017). Where Have All the Workers Gone?: An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S.
     Labor Force Participation Rate. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017(2), 1­87.
     http://doi.org/10.1353/eca.2017.0012
Levy, B., Paulozzi, L., Mack, K. A., & Jones, C. M. (2015). Trends in Opioid Analgesic­Prescribing
     Rates by Specialty, U.S., 2007­2012. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 49(3), 409­413.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2015.02.020
Lindo, J. M. (2015). Aggregation and the estimated effects of economic conditions on health. Journal of
     Health Economics, 40, 83­96. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.11.009
Louie, E. P., & Pearce, J. M. (2016). Retraining investment for U.S. transition from coal to solar
     photovoltaic employment. Energy Economics, 57(C), 295­302.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2016.05.016
McCormack, J. L. A. K. (2017). The Roles of Energy Markets and Environmental Regulation in
     Reducing Coal-Fired Plant Profits and Electricity Sector Emissions, 1­44.
McDonald, D. C., Carlson, K., & Izrael, D. (2012). Geographic Variation in Opioid Prescribing in the
     U.S. The Journal of Pain, 13(10), 988­996. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2012.07.007
Meara, E., Horwitz, J. R., Powell, W., McClelland, L., Zhou, W., O'Malley, A. J., & Morden, N. E.
     (2016). State Legal Restrictions and Prescription-Opioid Use among Disabled Adults. New England
     Journal of Medicine, 375(1), 44­53. http://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1514387
Metcalf, G. (2019) Paying for Pollution: Why a Carbon Tax is Good for America. New York: Oxford
     University Press.
National Center for Health Statistics. Mortality Data ­ All County Micro Data, 1999 ­ 2016.
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. (2012), National Survey of the Mining Population,
     Part I: Employees, Washington, DC: NIOSH, IC 9527.
Ruhm, C. J. (2000). Are Recessions Good for Your Health? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2),
     617­650. http://doi.org/10.2307/2587005?refreqid=search-
     gateway:d2525ec045cbeb4bc80098d490bae93c
Ruhm, C. J. (2015). Recessions, healthy no more? Journal of Health Economics, 42, 17­28.
     http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.03.004
Ruhm, C. J. (2018). Drivers of the Fatal Drug Epidemic. Journal of Health Economics, 64:25-42
http://doi.org/10.1162/ajhe_a_00113
Sinha, R. (2008). Chronic Stress, Drug Use, and Vulnerability to Addiction. Annals of the New York
     Academy of Sciences, 1141(1), 105­130. http://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1441.030
Smith, J. P. (1999). Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and Economic
     Status. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2), 145­166. http://doi.org/10.1257/jep.13.2.145
Thumula, V., Wang, D., & Liu, T.-C. (2017). Interstate Variation In Use of Opioids. Workers
     Compensation Research Institute, 1­129.



                                                                                                 Page 26
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2004) Technical Appendix from Vital Statistics of
    United States 1999 Mortality, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
    Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD.
Van Zee, A. (2009). The Promotion and Marketing of OxyContin: Commercial Triumph, Public Health
    Tragedy. American Journal of Public Health, 99(2): 221-227.




                                                                                            Page 27
 
                                    Figure 1: Death Rate by Opioid Types




Data Source: Center of Disease Control Mean weighted by population
Death Code: Any opioid (T40.0-T40.4, T40.6), opium (T40.0), heroin (T40.1), natural and semisynthetic opioids (T40.2),
methadone (T40.3), and synthetic opioids other than methadone (T40.4)
Non-Opioid: Include other records with underlying cause of death being identified as overdose death, e.g. Cocaine (T40.5)




                                                                                                               Page 28
 
                          Figure 2: Geographical Distribution of Opioid Mortality




Data Source: Center of Disease Control
County level data taken in year 2016. Map created by authors.

                 Figure 3: Energy Consumption In Electricity Sector, by Energy Source




Data Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration



                                                                                        Page 29
 
                       Figure 4: Employment Change by Regions and Mine Types




Data Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration




                                                                               Page 30
 
            Figure 5: Incident Rate Non-fatal Injuries and Illness of Coal Industry in 2017




Data Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, in cooperation
with participating state agencies.
NAICS Code: Coal mining, 2121, Underground coal mining, 212112, Surface coal mining 212111.
All comparison between same NAICS level.
The incidence rates represent the number of injuries and illnesses per 100 full-time workers and were calculated as:
(N/EH)x200,000 where :
N : number of injuries and illnesses.
EH : total hours worked by all employees during the calendar year.
200,000: base for 100 equivalent full-time workers (working 40 hours per week, 50 weeks per year).




                                                                                                                      Page 31
 
                      Figure 6: Prescription Rate in Appalachian and Other Regions




Data Source: CDC Opioid Prescription Map.
Prescription Rate: Opioid prescriptions written for every 100 Americans


                                   Figure 7: Age Distribution of Coal Miners




Data Source: Current Population Survey.




                                                                                     Page 32
 
                         Figure 8: Employment Level Change In the United States




Data Source: Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW)
Index shows the employment level relative to year 2000.


                             Figure 9: Death By Overdose In The United States




Data Source: Center of Disease Control.




                                                                                  Page 33
 
                            Figure 10: Drug Overdose Death, by Opioid Category




Data Source: CDC Mortality data.
Death Code: Any opioid (T40.0-T40.4, T40.6), heroin (T40.1), natural and semisynthetic opioids (T40.2), methadone (T40.3), and
synthetic opioids other than methadone (T40.4).




                                                                                                                    Page 34
 
                           Figure 11: Opioid Overdose Death Rate, by Age Group




Data Source: CDC Mortality data.
Death Code: Any opioid (T40.0-T40.4, T40.6), heroin (T40.1), natural and semisynthetic opioids (T40.2), methadone (T40.3), and
synthetic opioids other than methadone (T40.4).




                                                                                                                    Page 35
 
                           Table 1: Summary Statistics of Opioid Death by Gender

                                  Total                             Male                           Female
                                      Deaths per                          Deaths per                        Deaths per
      Year            Number            100,000          Number             100,000       Number             100,000
      2000              8342              1.60             6092               2.39          2250               0.85
      2001              9420              1.77             6677               2.56          2743              1.01
      2002             11842              2.19             8103               3.05          3739              1.36
      2003             12938              2.33             8801               3.24          4137              1.47
      2004             13756              2.44             9113               3.30          4643              1.62
      2005             14918              2.65             9757               3.53          5161              1.80
      2006             17545             3.02             11600               4.06          5945              2.01
      2007             18516             3.15             11935               4.13          6581              2.20
      2008             19580             3.30             12761               4.37          6819              2.26
      2009             20421             3.41             13134               4.46          7287              2.39
      2010             21086             3.48             13355               4.49          7731              2.51
      2011             22782             3.73             14459               4.81          8323              2.68
      2012             23166             3.77             14734               4.87          8432              2.70
      2013             25051             4.04             15997               5.24          9054              2.87
      2014             28647             4.57             18420               5.98         10227              3.21
      2015             33089             5.24             21671               6.97         11418              3.56
      2016             42249             6.63             28498               9.09         13751              4.25
Data Source: Center of Disease Control (CDC) Mortality data.
Deaths per 100,000: average county opioid death rate weighted by total population.




                                Table 2: Output and Employment by Mine Type

                                  Total                                 Surface                Underground
      Year             Output             Employees          Output           Employees    Output      Employees
      2001             1125.9               70.4             745.3              29.7       380.6          40.7
      2002             1093.3               68.8             735.9              29.9       357.4          38.9
      2003             1070.8               64.8             718.0              28.3       352.8          36.4
      2004             1111.1               67.5             743.5              29.3       367.6          38.2
      2005             1130.8               72.6             762.2              31.0       368.6          41.5
      2006             1162.0               76.0             803.0              32.7       359.0          43.3
      2007             1145.5               74.3             793.7              31.6       351.8          42.7
      2008             1170.4               80.3             813.3              34.8       357.1          45.5
      2009             1072.2               81.2             740.2              35.0       332.1          46.2
      2010             1082.5               79.6             745.4              33.1       337.2          46.5
      2011             1094.0               84.9             748.4              34.6       345.6          50.3
      2012             1015.1               83.3             672.7              32.9       342.4          50.4
      2013             982.9                74.6             641.2              28.7       341.7          45.9
      2014             998.4                69.6             643.7              26.6       354.7          43.0
      2015             895.6                61.3             588.7              24.2       306.8          37.1
      2016             727.5                47.9             475.4              20.3       252.1          27.6
Data Source: EIA-7A.
Output is in million short tons; Employees is in thousand people.




                                                                                                                 Page 36
 
                            Table 3: Summary Statistics

                                       National     Coal Producing Non-Coal Producing
     Death Rate(Opioid) per 100k         6.903          12.607            6.540
                                        (9.283)        (15.882)          (8.570)
      Death Rate(Any) per 100k          12.590          20.820           12.068
                                       (12.289)        (17.960)         (11.643)
      Share Of Coal Miners               0.003           0.047            0.000
                                        (0.020)         (0.066)          (0.000)
      Output(Million Tons)               0.328           5.493            0.000
                                        (6.729)        (27.020)          (0.000)
      Unemployment Rate                  6.820           7.530            6.775
                                        (2.956)         (2.694)          (2.966)
      Median Household Income           44.786          40.474           45.059
                                       (11.886)         (9.621)         (11.964)
      Population Density                262.135         98.517          272.527
                                      (1755.237)      (159.247)        (1809.180)
      Male Population Ratio              0.500           0.499            0.500
                                        (0.022)         (0.016)          (0.023)
      Age Group 20-39 Ratio              0.237           0.241            0.237
                                        (0.044)         (0.033)          (0.044)
      Age Group 40-59 Ratio              0.277           0.282            0.277
                                        (0.027)         (0.022)          (0.027)
      High School Diploma Rate          83.547          81.359           83.686
                                        (7.364)         (8.204)          (7.285)
      Bachelor's Degree Rate            19.336          15.798           19.561
                                        (8.762)         (7.263)          (8.801)
              Observations               34509           2061             32448
    Year Range: 2006-2016. Standard Errors in Parentheses. Coal mining counties are
    counties that produced coal in any year of our sample




                                                                                        Page 37
 
                                     Table 4: OLS Results by Gender Groups
                                                                       Opioid Death Rate
                                                 Whole Population                             Male       Female
    Share of Coal Miners
    Effect                                            51.886***                              43.905*    59.357***
    S.E.                                               (16.608)                              (25.988)    (17.667)
    IQR Impact                                          0.427                                 0.299       0.801
    Elasticity                                          0.192                                 0.129       0.296
    Lags                                                  3                                     3           3
    Share of Underground
    Miners
    Effect                                            73.476***                          89.600**       54.663*
    S.E.                                               (25.416)                          (43.784)       (29.621)
    IQR Impact                                          0.212                             0.214          0.258
    Elasticity                                           0.115                             0.111          0.115
    Lags                                                   3                                 3              3
    Share of Surface Miners
    Effect                                            55.490**                                34.912    76.155***
    S.E.                                              (23.435)                               (36.628)    (22.174)
    IQR Impact                                         0.233                                  0.121       0.525
    Elasticity                                          0.119                                  0.06        0.22
    Lags                                                  3                                     3           3

Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 .




                                                                                                              Page 38
 
                                      Table 5: OLS Results by Age Groups
                                                                 Opioid Death Rate
                                 Under 20                   20-39                40-59          Above 60
  Share of Coal Miners
  Effect                               5.993                      93.515*           73.714**     18.847
  S.E.                                (5.431)                     (50.670)           (35.377)   (18.358)
  IQR Impact                              .                         0.460              0.415        .
  Elasticity                           0.308                        0.190              0.156     0.326
  Lags                                    3                           3                  3         3
  Share of
  Underground Miners
  Effect                               0.463                     277.19***             5.795     17.27
  S.E.                                (6.809)                     (91.307)           (62.969)   (27.598)
  IQR Impact                              .                         0.477              0.011        .
  Elasticity                            0.01                        0.237              0.005     0.126
  Lags                                    3                           3                  3         3
  Share of Surface
  Miners
  Effect                               11.472                      52.941           109.024**    21.638
  S.E.                                (8.044)                     (63.441)           (51.011)   (25.546)
  IQR Impact                              .                         0.133              0.313        .
  Elasticity                           0.342                        0.062              0.134      0.217
  Lags                                    3                           3                  3          3
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 .




                                                                                                       Page 39
 
                       Table 6: IV Results with Bartik Instrument, by Gender Groups
                                                                                        Opioid Death Rate
                                                                        Whole Population                Male     Female
  Share of Coal Miners
  Effect                                                                     113.153***              125.802**   103.839*
  S.E.                                                                        (22.765)                (36.625)   (62.059)
  IQR Impact                                                                    0.931                   0.857      1.401
  Elasticity                                                                    0.420                   0.371      0.517
  Lags                                                                            3                       3          3
  Share of Underground Miners
  Effect                                                                     260.813***             298.114***    230.268
  S.E.                                                                        (51.391)                (78.990)   (140.589)
  IQR Impact                                                                    0.751                   0.711      1.088
  Elasticity                                                                    0.407                   0.370      0.483
  Lags                                                                            3                       3          3
  Share of Surface Miners
  Effect                                                                     199.517***             216.698***   188.765*
  S.E.                                                                        (40.822)                (67.604)   (110.546)
  IQR Impact                                                                    0.838                   0.753      1.301
  Elasticity                                                                    0.429                    0.37      0.545
  Lags                                                                            3                       3          3
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
Standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                   Page 40
 
                       Table 7: IV Results with Bartik Instrument, by Age Groups
                                                                      Opioid Death Rate
                                            Under 20              20-39             40-59         Above 60
  Share of Coal Miners
  Effect                                          -37.359***               82.255    339.212***   62.435*
  S.E.                                              (13.372)              (83.743)    (120.588)   (37.270)
  IQR Impact                                            .                    0.405       1.910        .
  Elasticity                                         -1.920                  0.167       0.719      1.080
  Lags                                                  3                      3           3          3
  Share of Underground Miners
  Effect                                          -79.780***              193.289    781.863***   144.297*
  S.E.                                              (30.793)             (182.159)    (275.736)   (81.676)
  IQR Impact                                            .                    0.333       1.541        .
  Elasticity                                         -1.726                  0.165       0.698      1.05
  Lags                                                  3                      3           3         3
  Share of Surface Miners
  Effect                                          -69.558***              145.289    595.799***   109.337
  S.E.                                              (23.770)             (153.857)    (213.968)   (68.320)
  IQR Impact                                            .                    0.365       1.713        .
  Elasticity                                         -2.071                  0.171       0.732     1.095
  Lags                                                  3                      3           3         3
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
Standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                       Page 41
 
                                      Table 8: Opioid Prescription Rates
                                                                                            Opioid Prescription Rate
                                                                                                OLS           IV
     Share of Coal Miners
     Effect                                                                                    66.363      132.069
     S.E.                                                                                     (72.562)     (94.346)
     IQR Impact                                                                                0.039        0.077
     Elasticity                                                                                0.026        0.052
     Lags                                                                                         3            3
     Share of Underground Miners
     Effect                                                                                  222.919*      273.461
     S.E.                                                                                    (122.590)    (204.869)
     IQR Impact                                                                                0.046        0.056
     Elasticity                                                                                0.037        0.046
     Lags                                                                                         3            3
     Share of Surface Miners
     Effect                                                                                    9.433       253.447
     S.E.                                                                                     (83.191)    (175.554)
     IQR Impact                                                                                0.003        0.076
     Elasticity                                                                                0.002        0.058
     Lags                                                                                         3            3
    Year Range: 2006-2016.
    Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
    Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
    For OLS, standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
    For IV, standard errors obtained by bootstrap in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 .




                                                                                                                Page 42
 
                          Table 9: Retailing Sector Regressions, by Gender Groups
                                                                      Opioid Death Rate
                                          Whole Population                          Male          Female
    Share of Retail
    Effect                                       -5.146                             -16.067**      6.541
    S.E.                                        (5.650)                               (7.301)     (7.891)
    IQR Impact                                  -0.025                                 -0.066      0.053
    Elasticity                                   -0.049                                -0.122      0.084
    Lags                                            3                                     3          3

Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 .




                           Table 10: Retailing Sector Regressions, by Age Groups
                                       Opioid Death Rate
                                 Under 20                20-39                        40-59     Above 60
 Share of Retail
 Effect                                -4.462                    -22.854*             -1.273      7.644
 S.E.                                 (3.630)                    (13.607)            (12.405)    (8.658)
 IQR Impact                               .                       -0.068              -0.004        .
 Elasticity                           -0.590                      -0.119              -0.007      0.340
 Lags                                     3                          3                   3          3
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 .




                                                                                                       Page 43
 
Appendix - Not for Publication
1.     Detailed Definition of Death Codes

For Drug Overdose Data:

       To use these codes listed below, input these codes as underlying cause of death in CDC

WONDER underlying cause of death data extractor.


X40:   Accidental poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics and antirheumatics
X41:   Accidental poisoning by and exposure to antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic, antiparkinsonism and
       psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
X42:   Accidental poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], not
       elsewhere classified
X43:   Accidental poisoning by and exposure to other drugs acting on the autonomic nervous system
X44:   Accidental poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified drugs, medicaments and
       biological substances
X60:   Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics and
       antirheumatics
X61:   Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic, antiparkinsonism
       and psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
X62:   Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], not
       elsewhere classified
X63:   Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to other drugs acting on the autonomic nervous system
X64:   Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified drugs, medicaments and
       biological substances
X85:   Assault by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Y10:   Poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics and antirheumatics,
       undetermined intent
Y11:   Poisoning by and exposure to antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic, antiparkinsonism and psychotropic
       drugs, not elsewhere classified, undetermined intent
Y12:   Poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], not elsewhere
       classified, undetermined intent
Y13:   Poisoning by and exposure to other drugs acting on the autonomic nervous system, undetermined
       intent
Y14:   Poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified drugs, medicaments and biological
       substances, undetermined intent


For Opioid Drug Overdose Data:

       To use these codes listed below, input the drug overdose codes listed above in the

underlying cause of death section in the CDC WONDER multiple cause of death data extractor

then input the codes listed below into the multiple cause of death section.


                                                                                                Page 44
 
T40.0:   Opium
T40.1:   Heroin
T40.2:   Other opioids (Codeine) (Morphine)
T40.3:   Methadone
T40.4:   Other synthetic narcotics (Pethidine)
T40.5:   Cocaine
T40.6:   Other and unspecified narcotics




2.       Definition of Coal Mining Regions:

The following regions and their definitions are from Energy Information Administration.

Coal-producing regions: A geographic classification of areas where coal is produced.

         Appalachian region: Consists of Alabama, Eastern Kentucky, Maryland, Ohio,
         Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.
         Northern Appalachian region: Consists of Maryland, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Northern
         West Virginia.
         Central Appalachian region: Consists of Eastern Kentucky, Virginia, Southern West
         Virginia, and the Tennessee counties of: Anderson, Campbell, Claiborne, Cumberland,
         Fentress, Morgan, Overton, Pickett, Putnam, Roane, and Scott.
         Southern Appalachian region: Consists of Alabama, and the Tennessee counties of:
         Bledsoe, Coffee, Franklin, Grundy, Hamilton, Marion, Rhea, Sequatchie, Van Buren,
         Warren, and White.
         Interior region (with Gulf Coast): Consists of Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas,
         Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas, and Western Kentucky.
         Illinois Basin: Consists of Illinois, Indiana, and Western Kentucky.
         Western region: Consists of Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, North
         Dakota, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
         Powder River Basin: Consists of the Montana counties of Big Horn, Custer, Powder
         River, Rosebud, and Treasure and the Wyoming counties of Campbell, Converse, Crook,
         Johnson, Natrona, Niobrara, Sheridan, and Weston.
         Uinta Basin: Consists of the Colorado counties of Delta, Garfield, Gunnison, Mesa,
         Moffat, Pitkin, Rio Blanco, Routt and the Utah counties of Carbon, Duchesne, Emery,
         Grand, Sanpete, Sevier, Uintah, Utah, and Wasatch.




                                                                                          Page 45
 
3.     Data Interpolation

We obtained the educational attainment and median household income data from American

Community Survey (ACS). For year 2005 to 2007, ACS only covered 1/3 of the counties in the

United States. Such data was not available from 2001 to 2004. Since educational attainment and

income level may have profound effects on one's drug abuse, we interpolate these variables to

match our regression period. We assume that the growth rates of median household income and

educational attainment are constant from 2000 to 2016 within the county. Since there is not much

fluctuation in these variables, this assumption should be reasonable.




                                                                                        Page 46
 
Full Regression Results

                         Table A1: Gender Group Results with All Types of Coal Mining
                                                                                                                       
                                                      OLS                                    Bartik Instrument
                                     Whole            Male          Female          Whole           Male         Female
    Share of Coal Miners            46.503*         66.613          23.893         76.210          80.215       70.752*
                                    (25.525)       (43.671)        (21.970)       (73.237)      (116.151)       (37.991)
    1 Lag                          -64.430**     -120.124**          -6.114        -88.653        -71.110      -105.369*
                                    (31.527)       (53.658)        (24.192)       (96.812)      (165.834)       (54.220)
    2 Lag                            37.546        66.788*           6.333      198.189***        209.732      188.211**
                                    (22.945)       (36.725)        (28.434)       (61.963)      (132.600)       (76.420)
    3 Lag                            32.267         30.628          35.246       -72.592**        -93.035        -49.755
                                    (26.209)       (36.320)        (27.495)       (30.132)       (77.931)       (67.148)
    Unemployment Rate                  0.011         -0.006          0.038           0.033          0.026         0.050
                                     (0.061)        (0.088)         (0.071)        (0.082)        (0.134)        (0.060)
    Median Household Income           -0.002         -0.026          0.038          -0.006         -0.034         0.035
                                     (0.041)        (0.039)         (0.076)        (0.045)        (0.054)        (0.044)
    Population Density             -0.002***         -0.001       -0.002***      -0.002***       -0.001**      -0.002***
                                     (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.001)
    Male Population Ratio         -51.755***     -81.257***         -18.937     -55.363***     -85.550***        -21.958
                                    (19.170)       (22.398)        (29.906)       (16.612)       (19.100)       (30.706)
    Age Group 20-39 Ratio            14.436      43.494***         -17.161      15.321***       45.759***        -17.790
                                    (10.661)       (13.519)        (16.542)        (4.578)        (9.570)       (16.358)
    Age Group 40-59 Ratio             5.745        24.942*          -15.494          6.192         25.164        -14.901
                                     (8.867)       (12.901)        (12.402)       (12.828)       (25.446)       (10.537)
    Highschool Diploma Rate        -0.125***      -0.223***          -0.016       -0.109**       -0.203**         -0.004
                                     (0.047)        (0.058)         (0.072)        (0.045)        (0.084)        (0.015)
    Bachalor Degree Rate               0.022       0.139**           -0.109          0.026        0.149**         -0.111
                                     (0.048)        (0.059)         (0.079)        (0.049)        (0.063)        (0.097)
    Constant                       39.266***      50.613***         26.243      39.519***       50.703***       26.763**
                                    (10.654)       (11.357)        (17.645)        (5.924)        (7.981)       (11.581)
  Cumulative Effect                51.886***       43.905*        59.357***     113.153***      125.802**       103.839*
  S.E.                              (16.608)       (25.988)        (17.667)       (22.765)       (36.625)       (62.059)
  IQR Impact                          0.427           0.299          0.801           0.931          0.857         1.401
  Elasticity                           0.192          0.129           0.296          0.420          0.371         0.517
  Fixed Effect                          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
  Year Dummies                          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
  State Year Fixed Effect               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
  R-squared                            0.12            0.10           0.06            0.12           0.10          0.06
  N. of Counties                       3139           3139            3139           3091           3091           3091
  N. of Observations                  34487          34487           34487          33938          33938          33938
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                 Page 47
 
                         Table A2: Gender Group Results with Underground Coal Mining
                                                                                                                         
                                                          OLS                                 Bartik Instrument
                                          Whole           Male         Female         Whole          Male          Female
    Share of Underground Coal Miners    82.541**      114.553*          45.631       169.108       176.115       158.663*
                                         (41.441)      (67.509)       (49.329)      (167.389)    (261.570)        (89.896)
    1 Lag                                -94.354*    -167.371**        -18.402       -207.212     -185.347       -227.579*
                                         (48.472)      (71.644)       (57.032)      (224.394)    (369.282)       (125.421)
    2 Lag                                 58.379        85.221         31.466      460.176***     523.611*      402.115***
                                         (46.855)      (72.530)       (49.391)      (143.089)    (295.897)       (151.966)
    3 Lag                                 26.911        57.196          -4.031     -161.260**     -216.265        -102.930
                                         (54.241)      (73.649)       (50.996)       (66.897)    (181.115)       (140.241)
    Unemployment Rate                      0.008         -0.007          0.032         0.027         0.018          0.047
                                          (0.062)       (0.090)        (0.071)        (0.081)      (0.134)         (0.059)
    Median Household Income                0.000         -0.025          0.040        -0.004        -0.031          0.037
                                          (0.041)       (0.039)        (0.077)        (0.045)      (0.054)         (0.045)
    Population Density                  -0.002***        -0.001      -0.002***      -0.002***     -0.001**       -0.002***
                                          (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.000)      (0.001)         (0.001)
    Male Population Ratio              -50.681***    -80.387***        -17.658     -53.625***   -83.595***         -20.418
                                         (19.184)      (22.390)       (29.919)       (16.396)     (19.185)        (30.877)
    Age Group 20-39 Ratio                 13.844      42.776***        -17.616      13.846***    44.034***         -19.035
                                         (10.696)      (13.493)       (16.607)        (4.766)      (9.907)        (16.833)
    Age Group 40-59 Ratio                  5.295        24.514*        -15.974         5.093        23.915         -15.872
                                          (8.909)      (12.900)       (12.478)       (12.627)     (25.355)        (10.843)
    Highschool Diploma Rate             -0.123***     -0.222***         -0.013       -0.106**     -0.200**          -0.001
                                          (0.047)       (0.058)        (0.072)        (0.045)      (0.084)         (0.014)
    Bachalor Degree Rate                   0.021        0.139**         -0.111         0.023       0.145**          -0.114
                                          (0.048)       (0.059)        (0.079)        (0.049)      (0.063)         (0.097)
    Constant                            38.856***     50.374***         25.666      39.057***    50.174***       26.373**
                                         (10.665)      (11.364)       (17.652)        (5.800)      (8.077)        (11.511)
  Cumulative Effect                     73.476***      89.600**       54.663*      260.813*** 298.114***           230.268
  S.E.                                   (25.416)      (43.784)       (29.621)       (51.391)     (78.990)       (140.589)
  IQR Impact                               0.212          0.214          0.258         0.751        0.711           1.088
  Elasticity                               0.115          0.111          0.115         0.407         0.370          0.483
  Fixed Effect                              Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
  Year Dummies                              Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
  State Year Fixed Effect                   Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
  R-squared                                 0.12          0.10            0.06          0.12          0.10           0.06
  N. of Counties                           3139           3139           3139          3091          3091            3091
  N. of Observations                       34487         34487          34487          33938        33938           33938
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                  Page 48
 
                             Table A3: Gender Group Results with Surface Coal Mining
                                                                                                                           
                                                              OLS                              Bartik Instrument
                                               Whole          Male       Female        Whole           Male         Female
    Share of Surface Coal Miners              42.259        57.071       25.433       138.544        147.285       127.327*
                                             (30.139)      (50.442)     (24.970)     (129.183)     (207.156)       (65.257)
    1 Lag                                     -57.129     -110.398*       -1.109      -151.746      -109.203     -192.590**
                                             (37.756)      (64.368)     (25.890)     (167.767)     (297.015)       (95.762)
    2 Lag                                     32.078        65.611        -4.491    342.344***      338.885      347.417**
                                             (25.304)      (39.955)     (37.848)     (108.147)     (236.585)      (148.982)
    3 Lag                                     38.282        22.628      56.322*     -129.625**      -160.269        -93.389
                                             (25.449)      (35.447)     (33.081)      (54.980)     (135.122)      (126.190)
    Unemployment Rate                          0.004         -0.013        0.030         0.038         0.033          0.053
                                              (0.061)       (0.089)      (0.071)       (0.083)       (0.135)        (0.062)
    Median Household Income                    -0.002        -0.026        0.037        -0.008        -0.036          0.033
                                              (0.041)       (0.039)      (0.076)       (0.045)       (0.054)        (0.044)
    Population Density                      -0.002***        -0.001    -0.002***     -0.002***       -0.001*      -0.002***
                                              (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.001)
    Male Population Ratio                  -51.987***    -81.054***      -19.603    -56.744*** -87.085***           -23.204
                                             (19.162)      (22.414)     (29.894)      (16.797)      (19.038)       (30.591)
    Age Group 20-39 Ratio                     15.054      43.754***      -16.210     16.491***    47.101***         -16.775
                                             (10.659)      (13.554)     (16.506)       (4.443)       (9.307)       (15.993)
    Age Group 40-59 Ratio                      5.883       24.881*       -15.153        7.056        26.118         -14.108
                                              (8.867)      (12.911)     (12.387)      (12.994)      (25.530)       (10.305)
    Highschool Diploma Rate                 -0.126***     -0.225***       -0.017      -0.111**      -0.206**         -0.006
                                              (0.047)       (0.058)      (0.072)       (0.045)       (0.084)        (0.016)
    Bachalor Degree Rate                       0.023       0.139**        -0.108         0.028       0.151**         -0.109
                                              (0.048)       (0.059)      (0.079)       (0.050)       (0.064)        (0.097)
    Constant                                39.371***     50.668***       26.391     39.904***    51.161***       27.072**
                                             (10.648)      (11.359)     (17.634)       (6.026)       (7.916)       (11.635)
  Cumulative Effect                          55.490**       34.912     76.155***    199.517*** 216.698***          188.765*
  S.E.                                       (23.435)      (36.628)     (22.174)      (40.822)      (67.604)      (110.546)
  IQR Impact                                   0.233         0.121         0.525        0.838         0.753          1.301
  Elasticity                                   0.119          0.060        0.220         0.429        0.370          0.545
  Fixed Effect                                  Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
  Year Dummies                                  Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
  State Year Fixed Effect                       Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
  R-squared                                     0.12          0.10          0.06         0.12          0.10           0.06
  N. of Counties                                3139          3139         3139          3091          3091           3091
  N. of Observations                           34487         34487        34487         33938         33938          33938
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                   Page 49
 
                              Table A4: Age Group Results with All Types of Coal Mining
                                                                                                                                       
                                                   OLS                                                        Bartik Instrument
                                 Under 20        20-39       40-59        Over 60     Under 20         20-39          40-59       Over 60
    Share of Coal Miners         11.094**   158.419***        7.917          4.417      10.573       268.079          4.156        -28.008
                                  (5.108)      (56.339)    (53.574)       (20.515)     (23.492)     (190.272)      (146.557)      (27.871)
    1 Lag                          -1.052    -189.033**     -51.200        -28.847      27.347        76.729        -322.668       -16.082
                                  (9.221)      (75.797)    (91.964)       (32.384)     (30.839)     (341.602)      (271.065)      (42.141)
    2 Lag                          5.303     166.919**       -9.756        20.510      -11.991       313.070       390.799**        71.312
                                 (11.415)      (81.391)    (79.700)       (41.057)      (9.821)     (220.568)      (154.128)      (64.975)
    3 Lag                          -9.352       -42.791   126.752**        22.767    -63.289***   -575.622*** 266.925***            35.214
                                  (8.570)      (78.128)    (63.621)       (24.973)     (22.496)      (98.611)       (98.581)      (34.636)
    Unemployment Rate               0.031        -0.081       0.112          0.030        0.044        0.119           0.023         0.007
                                  (0.044)       (0.166)     (0.143)        (0.059)      (0.029)       (0.220)        (0.111)       (0.056)
    Median Household Income         0.003         0.030       0.057         -0.067        0.004        0.029           0.043        -0.072
                                  (0.012)       (0.084)     (0.130)        (0.049)      (0.018)       (0.118)        (0.124)       (0.045)
    Population Density             -0.000     -0.005***    -0.003**       0.001**        -0.000     -0.005***       -0.003**      0.001**
                                  (0.000)       (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.000)
    Male Population Ratio           5.946   -143.034***     -40.743         -1.041        6.611   -151.261***        -43.180        -3.892
                                  (6.560)      (40.465)    (48.594)       (22.795)      (7.237)      (38.636)       (64.081)      (27.418)
    Highschool Diploma Rate        -0.014     -0.486***       0.109         -0.064       -0.014     -0.433***         0.122         -0.065
                                  (0.020)       (0.111)     (0.138)        (0.043)      (0.017)       (0.064)        (0.085)       (0.051)
    Bachalor Degree Rate          0.049**         0.197      -0.204          0.049    0.050***         0.191          -0.195      0.057**
                                  (0.022)       (0.132)     (0.142)        (0.048)      (0.010)       (0.152)        (0.203)       (0.023)
    Constant                       -2.087   123.265***       26.976         10.856       -2.487    122.949***        27.467         12.385
                                  (3.933)      (23.439)    (32.417)       (14.289)      (4.250)      (17.716)       (31.999)      (17.662)
    Cumulative Effect              5.993       93.515*    73.714**         18.847    -37.359***       82.255      339.212***      62.435*
    S.E.                          (5.431)      (50.670)    (35.377)       (18.358)     (13.372)      (83.743)      (120.588)      (37.270)
    IQR Impact                         .         0.460        0.415             .           .          0.405           1.910           .
    Elasticity                      0.308         0.190       0.156          0.326       -1.920        0.167           0.719         1.080
    Fixed Effect                     Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
    Year Dummies                     Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
    State Year Fixed Effect          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
    R-squared                        0.02         0.08         0.07           0.04        0.02          0.08            0.07         0.04
    N. of Counties                  3139          3139        3139           3139         3091         3091            3091          3091
    N. of Observations             34487         34487       34487          34487        33938         33938          33938         33938


Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                  Page 50
 
                               Table A5: Age Group Results with Underground Coal Mining
                                                                                                                                            
                                                        OLS                                                       Bartik Instrument
                                       Under 20       20-39        40-59    Over 60      Under 20          20-39           40-59       Over 60
    Share of Underground Coal Miners    11.127     219.180**      57.259     38.637        18.556         585.348          -2.581      -56.396
                                       (14.644)    (110.763)     (93.942)   (39.362)      (54.250)      (425.454)       (341.627)      (67.554)
    1 Lag                                 9.851     -237.475     -87.445    -92.179        66.461        164.622         -721.165      -45.063
                                       (16.632)    (146.144)    (122.742)   (84.580)      (74.456)      (742.277)       (632.590)     (105.445)
    2 Lag                                 4.585      282.665      -38.154    61.692        -22.470       746.151*       906.156**      153.739
                                       (22.595)    (190.549)    (112.934)   (73.845)      (23.631)      (423.465)       (361.613)     (149.770)
    3 Lag                              -25.100       12.820       74.136      9.121    -142.327***   -1302.832***      599.453***       92.017
                                       (17.219)    (192.855)     (93.395)   (34.061)      (51.961)      (205.068)       (222.153)      (78.843)
    Unemployment Rate                    0.027        -0.100        0.121     0.034          0.042         0.091            0.029        0.008
                                        (0.044)      (0.165)      (0.144)    (0.060)       (0.028)        (0.216)         (0.111)       (0.056)
    Median Household Income              0.004        0.033         0.059    -0.067          0.004         0.037            0.044       -0.072
                                        (0.012)      (0.083)      (0.130)    (0.049)       (0.018)        (0.117)         (0.124)       (0.045)
    Population Density                   -0.000    -0.005***    -0.003**    0.001**         -0.000      -0.005***        -0.003**      0.001**
                                        (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.000)
    Male Population Ratio                 6.068   -141.874***     -39.589     -0.760         6.507    -149.055***         -41.920       -3.693
                                        (6.562)     (40.536)     (48.603)   (22.808)       (7.197)       (39.153)        (64.048)      (27.224)
    Highschool Diploma Rate             -0.014     -0.488***       0.115     -0.062         -0.013      -0.420***          0.121        -0.066
                                        (0.020)      (0.112)      (0.138)    (0.043)       (0.017)        (0.066)         (0.085)       (0.051)
    Bachalor Degree Rate               0.048**        0.199        -0.208     0.048      0.050***          0.179           -0.195      0.057**
                                        (0.022)      (0.132)      (0.142)    (0.047)       (0.010)        (0.151)         (0.203)       (0.023)
    Constant                             -2.149   122.706***      26.022     10.575         -2.531     120.372***          27.275       12.387
                                        (3.937)     (23.501)     (32.408)   (14.295)       (4.217)       (18.169)        (31.904)      (17.534)
    Cumulative Effect                    0.463    277.190***        5.795    17.270     -79.780***        193.289      781.863***     144.297*
    S.E.                                (6.809)     (91.307)     (62.969)   (27.598)      (30.793)      (182.159)       (275.736)      (81.676)
    IQR Impact                               .        0.477         0.011         .             .          0.333            1.541           .
    Elasticity                            0.010        0.237        0.005      0.126        -1.726         0.165            0.698        1.050
    Fixed Effect                           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes
    Year Dummies                           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes
    State Year Fixed Effect                Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes
    R-squared                             0.02         0.08         0.07       0.04           0.02          0.08             0.07         0.04
    N. of Counties                        3139         3139         3139       3139          3091           3091            3091          3091
    N. of Observations                   34487        34487        34487      34487         33938          33938           33938         33938
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 51
 
                                   Table A6: Age Group Results with Surface Coal Mining
                                                                                                                                         
                                                      OLS                                                      Bartik Instrument
                                    Under 20        20-39       40-59    Over 60      Under 20          20-39           40-59       Over 60
    Share of Surface Coal Miners    14.320**    162.334**       -6.824     -7.707      22.512         495.231           14.229      -54.466
                                     (6.208)      (64.338)    (66.990)   (23.268)     (41.072)       (341.818)       (254.131)      (47.149)
    1 Lag                             -4.851    -179.563**     -42.306     -6.914       45.695        143.369         -578.624      -22.944
                                    (10.217)      (84.995)   (113.053)   (21.703)     (51.715)       (625.697)       (469.405)      (68.741)
    2 Lag                             5.442       138.733       -3.183      3.963      -24.377        530.896       680.207**       131.659
                                    (12.888)      (89.893)    (93.219)   (38.300)     (17.470)       (439.713)       (265.782)     (113.838)
    3 Lag                             -3.438       -68.563   161.337**    32.297    -113.388***   -1024.206*** 479.987***            55.088
                                     (9.006)      (61.849)    (75.389)   (31.827)     (39.510)       (190.337)       (176.600)      (61.354)
    Unemployment Rate                  0.029        -0.106       0.110      0.029        0.046          0.142            0.019         0.006
                                     (0.044)       (0.165)     (0.144)    (0.059)      (0.029)         (0.223)         (0.112)       (0.055)
    Median Household Income            0.003        0.032        0.056     -0.067        0.004          0.023           0.043         -0.072
                                     (0.012)       (0.084)     (0.129)    (0.049)      (0.018)         (0.118)         (0.123)       (0.045)
    Population Density                -0.000     -0.005***    -0.003**   0.001**        -0.000       -0.005***        -0.003**      0.001**
                                     (0.000)       (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.000)
    Male Population Ratio              5.885   -141.913***     -41.110     -1.065       6.697      -153.061***         -44.102        -4.030
                                     (6.555)      (40.428)    (48.558)   (22.792)      (7.269)        (38.213)        (64.126)      (27.585)
    Highschool Diploma Rate           -0.015     -0.492***       0.110     -0.064       -0.014       -0.444***          0.123         -0.065
                                     (0.020)       (0.112)     (0.138)    (0.043)      (0.017)         (0.063)         (0.086)       (0.052)
    Bachalor Degree Rate             0.049**        0.199       -0.205      0.049     0.051***          0.200           -0.195      0.056**
                                     (0.022)       (0.132)     (0.142)    (0.048)      (0.010)         (0.153)         (0.204)       (0.023)
    Constant                          -1.991   123.278***       27.168    10.887        -2.449      125.066***          27.598       12.372
                                     (3.930)      (23.415)    (32.387)   (14.288)      (4.276)        (17.343)        (32.079)      (17.770)
    Cumulative Effect                11.472         52.941   109.024**    21.638     -69.558***       145.289       595.799***      109.337
    S.E.                             (8.044)      (63.441)    (51.011)   (25.546)     (23.770)       (153.857)       (213.968)      (68.320)
    IQR Impact                           .          0.133        0.313        .            .            0.365            1.713           .
    Elasticity                         0.342        0.062        0.134      0.217       -2.071          0.171            0.732         1.095
    Fixed Effect                        Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
    Year Dummies                        Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
    State Year Fixed Effect             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
    R-squared                          0.02          0.08        0.07       0.04         0.02            0.08            0.07          0.04
    N. of Counties                     3139          3139        3139       3139         3091           3091             3091          3091
    N. of Observations                34487         34487       34487      34487        33938           33938           33938         33938
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors are obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                      Page 52
 
                                        Table A7: IV First Stage Regressions
                                                                                                                              
                                               Gender Groups                                         Age Groups
                                          All   Underground               Surface         All        Underground         Surface
    Predicted Share                2586.794*** 1159.866***            1426.928***   2585.331***      1160.605***      1424.726***
                                     (377.031)    (235.731)             (326.357)    (378.030)        (236.061)        (326.365)
    Unemployment Rate                 -0.360**    -0.132***             -0.229**      -0.355**        -0.131***         -0.224**
                                       (0.140)     (0.044)                (0.108)      (0.140)         (0.044)           (0.108)
    Median Household Income              0.022      -0.003                  0.024       0.023           -0.001            0.025
                                       (0.025)     (0.012)                (0.021)      (0.024)         (0.012)           (0.020)
    Population Density                  -0.000      -0.000                 -0.000       -0.000          -0.000            -0.000
                                       (0.000)     (0.000)                (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)
    Male Population Ratio                6.392      -6.044                12.437         5.386          -1.997             7.383
                                      (13.683)     (5.791)               (11.651)      (9.704)         (4.931)           (7.432)
    Age Group 20-39 Ratio          -2.363       5.974                 -8.338
                                   (14.116)     (3.777)               (13.395)
    Age Group 40-59 Ratio          -14.585      -1.485                -13.101
                                   (12.272)     (3.323)               (11.255)
    Highschool Diploma Rate             -0.041      -0.037                -0.004        -0.045           -0.038          -0.007
                                       (0.053)     (0.030)                (0.036)      (0.052)          (0.030)         (0.035)
    Bachalor Degree Rate                -0.008       0.014                 -0.022       -0.009            0.012          -0.021
                                       (0.052)     (0.019)                (0.043)      (0.050)          (0.019)         (0.042)
    Constant                             6.001       5.544                  0.457        2.167           4.650           -2.483
                                       (7.138)     (3.798)                (4.606)      (7.277)          (3.705)         (4.924)
  F Statistic                          47.073       24.209                19.117       46.771           24.173          19.057
  Fixed Effect                            Yes         Yes                    Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes
  Year Dummies                            Yes         Yes                    Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes
  State Year Fixed Effect                 Yes         Yes                    Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes
  R-squared                              0.23        0.19                    0.14        0.23              0.19           0.13
  N. of Counties                         3091        3091                   3091         3091             3091            3091
  N. of Observations                    43225       43225                  43225        43225            43225           43225
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect. F statistic is the test of null hypothesis that excluded
instrument coefficient in first stage regression equals zero.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                          Page 53
 
                                    Table A8: Prescription Rate Regressions

                                                                  Opioid Prescription Rate
                                                    OLS                                                IV
                                      Whole         Underground       Surface         Whole     Underground       Surface
    Share                             27.568           134.404         -5.458     274.097**      625.778**     486.268**
                                    (46.348)         (116.717)       (52.638)      (135.592)     (305.189)      (243.389)
    1 Lag                             14.143           106.495        -15.788        -95.949      -220.657       -168.410
                                    (36.625)          (99.016)       (45.511)       (82.810)     (184.412)      (149.125)
    2 Lag                            -49.778          -124.750        -27.643    -128.463***    -313.544***    -213.593**
                                    (31.016)          (83.584)       (32.483)       (48.390)     (108.223)       (87.153)
    3 Lag                             74.430           106.769         58.322        82.383       181.885         149.181
                                    (62.927)          (94.204)       (69.797)       (80.724)     (189.403)      (139.958)
    Unemployment Rate                 -0.287            -0.247         -0.323         -0.106        -0.116         -0.098
                                     (0.237)           (0.234)        (0.241)        (0.228)       (0.229)        (0.227)
    Median Household Income         -0.178**          -0.177**       -0.175**     -0.159***       -0.153**      -0.163***
                                     (0.086)           (0.086)        (0.086)        (0.060)       (0.060)        (0.061)
    Population Density             -0.007***         -0.007***      -0.007***     -0.007***      -0.007***      -0.007***
                                     (0.002)           (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
    Male Population Ratio           -118.206          -113.645       -118.156    -110.777***    -107.367***   -113.646***
                                    (79.841)          (79.774)       (79.860)       (32.450)      (31.266)       (33.481)
    Age Group 20-39 Ratio             54.678            50.610         57.169         55.850       53.428          57.918
                                    (39.636)          (39.433)       (39.693)       (40.711)      (40.158)       (41.201)
    Age Group 40-59 Ratio             -2.274            -3.357         -1.429         -1.502        -3.315         0.051
                                    (41.214)          (41.147)       (41.237)       (27.309)      (26.619)       (27.903)
    Highschool Diploma Rate         0.467***         0.474***       0.464***       0.435***       0.443***       0.428***
                                     (0.151)           (0.151)        (0.151)        (0.063)       (0.064)        (0.062)
    Bachalor Degree Rate              -0.139            -0.146         -0.136         -0.158        -0.165         -0.151
                                     (0.147)           (0.147)        (0.147)        (0.171)       (0.168)        (0.173)
    Constant                        88.553**          86.807**      87.992**      86.194***      84.740***     87.363***
                                    (37.486)          (37.471)       (37.492)       (16.091)      (16.091)       (16.121)
  Cumulative Effect                   66.363         222.919*           9.433       132.069       273.461         253.447
  S.E.                              (72.562)         (122.590)       (83.191)       (94.346)     (204.869)      (175.554)
  IQR Impact                           0.039             0.046          0.003          0.077        0.056          0.076
  Elasticity                           0.026             0.037          0.002          0.052         0.046         0.058
  Fixed Effect                          Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
  Year Dummies                          Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
  State Year Fixed Effect               Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
  R-squared                             0.19              0.19          0.19           0.19           0.19          0.19
  N. of Counties                       2983              2983           2983           2936          2936           2936
  N. of Observations                  30850             30850          30850          30332         30332          30332
Year Range: 2006-2016.
Includes year fixed effect, county fixed effect, state-by-year fixed effect.
Cumulative Effect is the linear combination of all lagged terms.
For OLS, standard Errors are clustered at county level.
For IV, standard Errors obtained by bootstrap in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                 Page 54
 
