                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         YOUR PLACE IN THE WORLD:
             THE DEMAND FOR NATIONAL AND GLOBAL REDISTRIBUTION

                                             Dietmar Fehr
                                         Johanna Mollerstrom
                                         Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                         Working Paper 26555
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26555


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2019




We are thankful for comments from several colleagues and seminar discussants. We would like to
thank Jose Felipe Montano-Campos for superb research assistance. We are grateful to Bettina Zweck
(Kantar Public Germany), David Richter (DIW Berlin), and Carsten Schroeder (DIW Berlin) for their
support in implementing the project. This project received financial support from the German Research
Foundation (DFG) through individual grant FE 1452/3-1 (Fehr) and from the German Institute for
Economic Research (DIW Berlin, Mollerstrom). The authors declare that they have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dietmar Fehr, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Your Place in the World: The Demand for National and Global Redistribution
Dietmar Fehr, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 26555
December 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. C83,C91,D63,D83,D91,H23

                                               ABSTRACT

Some of today's most heated policy debates about Brexit, trade wars, climate change abatement, and
migration involve redistribution of resources within a given country (national redistribution) and between
countries (global redistribution). Nevertheless, theories and evidence on preferences for redistribution
have focused almost exclusively on national redistribution. In this paper, we study preferences for
global redistribution. The workhorse model in political economy predicts that individuals with incomes
in the upper levels of the national income distribution are less supportive of national redistribution
than those with incomes in the lower levels. Applied to the global arena, the model predicts that individuals
who are richer in the global income distribution will be less supportive of global redistribution. We
test this hypothesis using a two-year, face-to-face survey of a representative sample of German households.
We show that respondents are misinformed about their positions in the national and global income
distributions, and we provide novel evidence that those misperceptions are meaningful. Consistent
with previous studies, we find support for the political economy model in the national arena: the correlational
and experimental estimates indicate that the demand for national redistribution decreases with national
relative income. However, the political economy model does not hold in the global arena: support
for global redistribution does not depend on global relative income, but instead on national relative
income.


Dietmar Fehr                                           Ricardo Perez-Truglia
University of Heidelberg                               Anderson School of Management
Bergheimer Str 58                                      University of California, Los Angeles
Heidelberg 69115                                       110 Westwood Plaza
Germany                                                Los Angeles, CA 90095
dietmar.fehr@awi.uni-heidelberg.de                     and NBER
                                                       ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu
Johanna Mollerstrom
Vernon Smith Hall 5028
George Mason University
3434 Washington Blvd
Arlington, VA 22201
jmollers@gmu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26555
1       Introduction
As inequality in many Western democracies has become more pronounced (Piketty, 2014; OECD,
2015; Alvaredo et al., 2018), the debate around income redistribution has intensified. In the aca-
demic literature, this debate has focused largely on how to allocate resources between individuals
from a given country. This emphasis may not be surprising, as there are multiple institutions
and policy levers to redistribute resources domestically such as taxes and welfare programs. By
contrast, comparable institutions and policies are scarce at the global level. But the differences
between the world's poorest and most affluent citizens are staggering, and awareness about these
differences is increasing as information flows more freely across the globe (OECD, 2015; Milanovic,
2015, 2016), such that institutions and tools for global redistribution may grow in importance.1
Moreover, even if not disccused directly as tools for income redistribution, some of the most press-
ing policy issues, such as Brexit, trade wars, climate change abatement, and migration, involve
significant components of redistribution of resources across countries. For example, Weyl (2018)
shows that migration from poor to rich countries have contributed to a large reduction in global
inequality. In this paper, we use evidence from a survey experiment to take a first step toward
understanding preferences for global redistribution.
    There is a large literature aimed at understanding how preferences for national redistribution
are shaped at the individual level, starting with the seminal contribution by Meltzer and Richard
(1981).2 In their model, individuals are purely selfish and perfectly informed, they differ in their
market skills and have to vote for an income tax rate. In equilibrium, voters rationally anticipate
the disincentive effects of taxation on the labor-leisure choices of their fellow citizens and take the
effect into account when voting. Applying this model to the national arena by assuming that the
agents are individuals from the same country voting for a national income tax, the model predicts
that preferences for redistribution will be a decreasing function of an agent's relative income. We
can easily transfer this model to the global arena by assuming that the agents are voting for a
global income tax. Accordingly, the model then predicts that individuals who are higher up in the
global income distribution should be less supportive of global income redistribution.
    We designed and conducted a survey experiment to study preferences for global redistribution
in the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP), a representative longitudinal study of German
households. This panel, which started in 1984, contains an innovation sample (SOEP-IS) that
offers opportunities to implement tailor-made survey modules as well as incentivized measures
and experiments. The SOEP-IS is administered face-to-face by trained interviewers who visit
respondents in their homes each year. Our research design exploits some unique advantages that
    1
      There are also programs that redistribute across countries at the regional level, for example in the European
Union, and we see an increasing focus on and demand for foreign aid programs in rich countries. A recent example
is a referendum in Zurich, Switzerland, in which about 70 percent of voters supported an initiative to increase
funds for alleviating global poverty up to one percent of the city's tax revenue in a given year (for more details see
https://ea-foundation.org/files/prospectus-1-percent-initiative.pdf and https://tinyurl.com/yckz56v4).
    2
      See also Romer (1975).

                                                          2
the SOEP-IS has over other survey modes (e.g. phone and online surveys). For example, due to its
infrastructure, the SOEP can survey the same respondents again a year later, with little attrition.
The SOEP also can survey all household members, and guarantee that each member completes
the survey independently without communicating with other members. Moreover, the face-to-face
interviews minimize the risk of non-response to specific survey items, as well as misunderstandings
that may arise about experimental tasks. It also prevents respondents from using the Internet to
look up information while they are completing the survey.
    The survey experiment leverages the fact that preferences for redistribution tend to be deter-
mined not so much by whether individuals are rich or poor, but whether they perceive themselves
to be rich or poor (Cruces et al., 2013; Karadja et al., 2017). In the baseline survey, we elicited
respondents' perceptions about their household's position in the national and global income distri-
butions. To encourage participant attention, we offered significant rewards for accurate responses.
Comparing their prior perceptions to our own best estimates, we quantified the degree of their
misperceptions. We then introduced an information-provision experiment to create exogenous
variations in those perceptions. Individuals were randomly assigned to a control group that re-
ceived no information or to a treatment group that received easy-to-digest information about their
true positions in both the national and global income distributions. Providing information about
both national and global relative income allowed us to disentangle the effect of national-versus-
global relative income.3 Later, we elicited two main outcomes of interest: preferences for national
redistribution, and preferences for global redistribution.
    The information-provision experiment allows us to measure the causal effect of perceptions
about relative income on these redistributive outcomes. For example, take a pair of individuals
who underestimated their global relative incomes by ten percentage points. The individual who
was not assigned to information should remain biased, and the individual who was assigned to
the information should reduce or perhaps even eliminate her bias. The information-provision thus
creates a positive shock to the individual's perceived global relative income. We use a simple
econometric model that allows us to aggregate across pairs of individuals who start out with
different biases to disentangle the effects of global-versus-national relative income. We can use this
experiment to test the predictions of Meltzer and Richard (1981) in the national and global arena:
individuals who learn that they are higher in the national income distribution than they originally
thought should become less supportive of national redistribution; and individuals who learn that
they are higher in the global income distribution than they originally thought should become less
supportive of global income redistribution.
    One year after the baseline survey, we conducted a follow-up survey. Among other things, we
re-elicited respondents' perceptions about their relative incomes, again incentivized for accuracy.

   3
     If individuals learn that they are richer, on a global scale, than they previously thought, they may infer from
that information that they are also richer than they though on the national scale, and vice-versa. Measuring and
providing information about both national and global relative incomes help us avoid this problem.

                                                         3
This approach allowed us to measure the long-term effect of information on perceptions. The
follow-up survey also provided additional measurements, such as respondents' willingness to pay for
information about their global and relative incomes, using standard incentive-compatible methods
(Becker, DeGroot, and Marschak, 1964).
    The first set of findings cover preferences for global redistribution. We find significant vari-
ation in preferences for global redistribution across individual. Moreover, preferences for global
redistribution are significantly correlated to preferences for national redistribution, and they also
share many of the usual correlates such as political orientation, and beliefs about the role of effort
and luck in economic success. Still, global redistribution is a concept which is arguably harder to
think about for respondents than national redistribution, given that most redistributive policies
are enacted at the national level. To deal with this concern, we included two validation tests.
First, we show that preferences for global redistribution are significantly correlated to behavior
in a simple distributional task with real stakes, in which the individual can share 50 Euros with
a foreign household that is poor by global standards. Second, we show that our survey measure
of preferences for global redistribution is predictive of related policy preferences: support for the
creation of an international institution mandated with the implementation of redistribution across
countries, support for globalization policies, and support for immigration policies.
    The second set of results is about the relationship between relative income and redistribution
preferences. First, we document significant misperceptions about relative positions in the national
and global income distributions. In our representative sample of Germans, the absolute size of
misperceptions about national and global relative positions are similar, with a mean absolute
error of 23 percentage points for both. Nevertheless, there are some notable differences in the
distribution of global and national misperceptions. Respondents are on average correct about
their national relative positions, with approximately an equal number of respondents over- and
under-estimating their positions. However, they significantly underestimate their positions in the
global income distribution.
    Second, testing the key prediction of Meltzer and Richard (1981), we find support for this
political economy model in the national arena but not in the global arena. At the national level, the
correlational evidence indicates that the perceived national relative income is negatively correlated
the demand for national redistribution, with a strong heterogeneity by ideological orientation
(Cruces et al., 2013; Kuziemko et al., 2015; Karadja et al., 2017; Fernandez-Albertos and Kuo,
2018; Alesina et al., 2018b; Fenton, 2020). Specifically, the correlation is driven almost entirely by
left-of-center individuals, who comprise approximately one-third of the sample. The results from
the information-provision experiment further corroborates these findings. We find that information
about national relative income affects demand for national redistribution in the predicted direction,
and only for left-of-center respondents. Our evidence in support of the political economy model in
the national arena are consistent with prior evidence based on observational data (see e.g., Fong,
2001; Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005; Alesina and Giuliano, 2011; Mollerstrom and Seim, 2014) as

                                                  4
well as experimental data (Cruces et al., 2013; Karadja et al., 2017). On the other hand, we find
that, contrary to the prediction, global relative income is not related to preferences for global
redistribution. This result is supported by the correlational evidence as well as the information-
provision experiment. However, we find that support for global redistribution does decrease in the
perceived national income rank.
    Finally, taking advantage of unique features of our survey, we look into the nature of mis-
perceptions. Several questions have been raised about the interpretation of misperceptions about
important variables such as relative income and income inequality. For example, a significant
fraction of survey respondents' misperceptions may be due to their lack of attention to the sur-
vey, lack of interest in the topic, confusion about what the survey question is trying to elicit, or
experimenter-demand effects. We provide several insights about the robustness of the documented
misperceptions. We show that these misperceptions persist despite significant rewards for guess-
ing correctly, and that they are consistent across time and across different members of the same
household. Providing information to individuals affects their perceptions a year later, implying
that individuals truly incorporate the information. Moreover, we find that individuals care enough
about the information to share it voluntarily with family members in the year that passes between
the two surveys: giving information to one household member not only affects that same household
member a year later, but other household members too. Finally, using an information-acquisition
experiment, we find that individuals are willing to pay non-trivial amounts for information about
their global and national income ranks.
    Together, these findings provide a first glimpse into preferences for global redistribution. Al-
though these preferences correlate with similar characteristics as preferences for national redistri-
bution, we find no evidence that relative global income does affect demand for global redistribution.
Acknowleding that there are many potential explanations for this finding, such as respondents fail-
ing to realize how rich they are at the global level, we interpret our results as suggestive evidence
for a reference group effect. Specifically, we find that global redistribution does decrease in per-
ceived national income rank, suggesting that the relevant reference group when thinking about
global redistribution are people nationally, but not globally.
    This study ties into various strands of literature. First, it is related to a literature measuring
preferences for redistribution. In addition to selfish motives (Fong, 2001; Alesina and La Ferrara,
2005; Alesina and Giuliano, 2011; Mollerstrom and Seim, 2014), this literature highlights other-
regarding factors such as the relative importance of effort versus luck (e.g., Alesina and Giuliano,
2011; Mollerstrom and Seim, 2014; Alesina et al., 2018b; Gärtner et al., 2019).4 We contribute to
this literature by being the first to study preferences for global redistribution.
    We contribute to a growing literature on the role of misperceptions as determinants of prefer-
   4
     What constitutes "too much" inequality differs widely between individuals and countries. For example, exper-
imental and observational research document that people, in general, do not approve of situations where there is
"too much" inequality, but they also do not prefer resources to be completely equally distributed (e.g., Fehr and
Schmidt, 1999; Bolton and Ockenfels, 2000; Charness and Rabin, 2002; Norton and Ariely, 2011).

                                                       5
ences for redistribution. For example, a number of studies have documented the role of mispercep-
tions about relative income (Cruces et al., 2013; Karadja et al., 2017; Engelhardt and Wagener,
2017; Fernandez-Albertos and Kuo, 2018), wealth inequality (Norton and Ariely, 2011; Kuziemko
et al., 2015; Fehr and Reichlin, 2020), income mobility (Alesina et al., 2018b; Fehr et al., 2019;
Gärtner et al., 2019), and immigration (Alesina et al., 2018a; Haaland and Roth, 2019). One
common argument against this literature is that misperceptions reflect mostly measurement error,
inattention, or disinterest from the survey respondent. We contribute to this literature by lever-
aging the unique setting provided by the GSOEP to provide unique evidence that misperceptions
are meaningful.5
    Lastly, our study relates to international aid and migration research in political science, as
well as in sociology and economics. Some literature on international aid argues that it is driven
primarily by strategic considerations of the giving nation rather than need in the recipient country
(see e.g., Alesina and Dollar, 2000; Kuziemko and Werker, 2006; Dreher et al., 2009). However,
there is growing interest in questions regarding public opinion about foreign aid (Kinder and Kam,
2010; Bauhr et al., 2013; Milner and Tingley, 2013; Bechtel et al., 2014; Nair, 2018; Eichenauer
et al., 2018). The work of Nair (2018) is probably most related to our paper, as it explores the link
between global relative income and support for foreign aid. Immigration is another powerful force
for redistribution of income across countries (see e.g., Lucas, 2005; Weyl, 2018). The importance
of migration as a redistributive tool is on the rise, and migration streams are expected to continue
to increase (OECD, 2014, 2017). Voters and policy makers in most Western democracies and
throughout the world struggle with questions about how many migrants to welcome and how to
facilitate their integration. This paper contributes to this literature by measuring how preferences
for both national and global redistribution relate to attitudes and opinions on immigration.
    The paper continues as follows. Section 2 outlines our research design and describes our data.
Section 3 documents our results on misperception of national and global income, and Section
4 discusses our results on the demand for both national and global redistribution. Section 5
concludes.


2       Survey Design and Implementation
We collected data in cooperation with the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) and made
use of their Innovation Sample (SOEP-IS). The SOEP-IS is a longitudinal study that surveys
a representative sample of the German population on a wide range of topics once a year.6 All
household members over the age of 16 are assessed in computer-assisted face-to-face interviews
    5
      Our findings are also informative for a broader literature on misperceptions that covers, for example, mis-
perceptions about the inflation rate (Cavallo et al., 2017), housing prices (Fuster et al., 2019), and cost of living
(Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2017).
    6
      The SOEP-IS draws on the same pool of questions as the SOEP and makes use of the same professional survey
company (see Goebel et al. (2018) for more details on the SOEP, and Richter and Schupp (2015) for the SOEP-IS).

                                                         6
performed by trained professionals.
   We designed two tailor-made survey modules, including a randomized information treatment,
and incentivized belief and outcome measures. The modules were implemented in two consecutive
waves of the SOEP-IS: a baseline survey in 2017 and a follow-up survey in 2018 (see the Online
Appendix for our survey modules). Interviews were conducted in private with each member of
a household (i.e., there was no communication possible between household members during and
between the interviews). An interview with a household member lasted for about 45-60 minutes,
out of which our modules comprised on average 8-10 minutes.


2.1    Survey Design: Baseline
The baseline survey has the following structure: i) pre-treatment questions; ii) assessment of
perceived position in the income distribution; iii) randomized treatment providing truthful and
accurate information about location in the income distribution; iv) primary outcome measures on
preferences for redistribution; and v) secondary outcome measures on globalization and immigra-
tion. The outcome measures on preferences for redistribution (in part iv) were assessed both in
the national (i.e. German) context, and in the global context. Consequently, we asked respondents
in (ii) to state their perceived location in both the national and global income distributions. We
randomized whether respondents saw the national or the global question first. To ease presentation
and comprehension, the randomization was done across respondents, in the sense that a person
who saw the national level question first in (ii) would see information about the national level
first in (iii) (if randomly selected to the treatment group) and would be asked the question about
national redistribution first in part (iv).
    The pre-treatment part (i) included two questions about how respondents perceive the role
of luck and effort in economic success in the national and global context (luck/effort beliefs).
These beliefs are typically strong predictors of individual demand for redistribution at the national
level (see e.g. Piketty, 1995; Alesina and Angeletos, 2005; Benabou and Tirole, 2006 for seminal
theoretical work, and Fong, 2001; Mollerstrom and Seim, 2014; Karadja et al., 2017; Gärtner
et al., 2019 for empirical evidence). We also use these two questions as a falsification test, as
we should not find treatment effects on a variable that was measured before the information
treatment. Because there is growing evidence that individual views about redistribution are subject
to strong heterogeneity in political orientation (e.g., Karadja et al., 2017; Alesina et al., 2018b,a;
Fenton, 2020), we purposefully placed our module after the questions about political attitudes
that are routinely included in the SOEP-IS. In this way, we can estimate the heterogeneity of the
experimental results by political ideology.
    Estimates of the global income distribution predominantly rely on per-capita pre-tax household
income (see e.g., Milanovic, 2015, 2016). Therefore, before asking respondents for their perceptions
of their relative national and global income in part (ii) of the survey module, we highlighted their


                                                  7
absolute, per-capita pre-tax household income. We then asked them to state their position in the
national and global income distributions. Both relative income questions were incentivized for
accuracy, and respondents were informed that they would receive 20 Euro for each assessment that
was correct to the closest percentile (ensuring that it was optimal for them to answer in a way
that elicited the true mode of their beliefs).
    After stating the perceived location in the national and global income distribution, respondents
answered several questions unrelated to our research (these questions were, among other things,
related to the respondents' civil status, their siblings, and their children, and did not vary by
treatment). Subsequently, our module continued. In part (iii) we randomized half of the respon-
dents into a treatment which provided them with information about their true location in the
national and global income distributions. The information revealed how many people are poorer
at the national and global levels, based on their stated pre-tax per-capita household income, and
additionally visualized this information using customized graphs to make it easier to understand
and digest. See Figure 1 for a sample of the information treatment. The other half of respondents
received no information. Then, in part (iv), we asked both groups for their views on national and
global redistribution, respectively. The answers to these questions were given on 1-10 scales with
1 indicating no demand for redistribution and 10 indicating a desire for complete redistribution
that equalizes post-redistribution income between citizens. As abstract concepts of redistribution
can be difficult for respondents to think about, not least at the global level, we took care to clearly
define and explain all concepts, such as "economic redistribution", involved. The trained inter-
viewers also received information on how to respond to potential questions that the respondents
had while taking the survey.
    We complemented these outcome measures with two incentivized assessments that cover the
altruistic aspect of redistribution. To this end, we used two simple distribution tasks with real
stakes in a national and a global context, respectively. More precisely, respondents were asked to:
a) distribute 50 Euro between themselves and a poor German household; and b) distribute another
50 Euro between themselves and a poor global household. German households were drawn from the
bottom ten percent of the income distribution of SOEP-IS households that are not in our sample.7
To facilitate transfers to a poor global household, we used GiveDirectly, a well-established non-
profit charity that provides cash transfers to poor households in Kenya and Uganda, and whose
eligibility criteria ensures that recipient households belong to the bottom ten percent of the global
income distribution (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016). We randomly selected one in seven respondents
and implemented their distribution decision in one randomly selected task (i.e. either the national
or the global distribution decision). The money that a respondent allocated to herself was given
to her immediately after completing the survey, while national recipient households received their
transfers (the exact amount given by the respondent) with a cover letter explaining the transfer
after the data collection for this SOEP-IS wave was completed.
   7
       The SOEP-IS consists of several independent samples that are each representative of the German population.

                                                         8
    Finally, part (v) contained questions about whether the respondent supports globalization,
and if she would appreciate Germany implementing a generous immigration policy that would
allow more people from poor countries to live and work in Germany. We also asked whether
the respondent would support an international institution with a mandate to implement global
redistribution. The answers to these questions were given on a 1-10 scale, with 1 (10) indicating no
(full) support for globalization, a generous immigration policy, and an international, redistributive
institution.


2.2     Survey Design: Follow-Up
We designed a follow-up survey that we implemented in the same sample of respondents a year later.
The purpose of this survey is to test whether the information provided to the survey participants
persisted a year later, as well as to measure how much they value information on income ranks.
    We began by highlighting information about the respondents' absolute per-capita pre-tax house-
hold income, and again asked them to state their rank in the national and global income distribu-
tions. We rewarded each accurate prediction with ten Euro. Additionally, we asked respondents
about how certain they were about each of their answers, on a 0-10 point-scale (emulating steps of
ten percent: being completely uncertain, ten percent certain, 20 percent certain, ..., 100 percent
certain). This time, however, we did not provide information on the true rank in either context.
Instead, after answering several SOEP-IS questions unrelated to our research (again among the re-
spondents' civil status, siblings, children etc.), all participants answered the same questions about
demand for redistribution, globalization, and immigration as in the baseline survey.
    In a next step we elicited respondents' willingness to pay (WTP) for information about their
true rank in the national and the global income distributions. To do so, we used a list-price version
of the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak method (see e.g., Andersen et al., 2006). The list presents,
separately for each income distribution, five scenarios in which respondents must choose between
receiving information about their true rank in the corresponding income distribution, or receiving
monetary compensation. The amount of money was predetermined and ranged from 0.1 Euro
in Scenario 1 to ten Euro in Scenario 10, in increasing increments (0.1, 1, 2.5, 5, and 10 Euro).
We informed respondents that one of the overall ten scenarios would be randomly selected and
implemented.8 To avoid respondents paying for this information for strategic reasons, we took care
to assure respondents that we would not ask any more incentivized questions about their relative
income rank, either later in the survey, or in later waves of the survey.




   8
      The instructions for the elicitation procedure, which we adapted from the elicitation task employed in Fuster
et al. (2019), were tested for understanding with cognitive interviews.

                                                        9
2.3     Survey Implementation
We implemented our two survey modules in the 2017 and 2018 waves of the SOEP-IS, which
ran from September through December in each year. A total of 1,392 respondents took part
in the baseline survey, while 1,167 participated in the follow-up survey (84 percent of the 1,392
respondents in the baseline survey).
    In Table 1, we show that the treatment and control groups are balanced on observable char-
acteristics. Since we will consider heterogeneity by left-of-center and center/right individuals, the
table also shows the balance within each of those groups. In general, we see in Table 1 that the
observable characteristics are balanced over our samples. For one pre-treatment characteristic,
age, we see a small and marginally significant difference. Yet, this is well below what we would
expect when running a total of 36 tests. Nevertheless, to be conservative, this characteristic is
included in the set of control variables in the regression analysis (in addition to age and sex of the
respondent, the vector of control variables also include a set of indicator variables for education and
the respondent's political affiliation, an indicator for whether the respondent is disabled, retired,
and unemployed as well as an indicator for East Germany).
    One potential concern with using data from the follow-up survey as outcome measures is that
the treatment may have affected the decision to participate in the follow-up survey. This is not
a significant concern for two reasons. First, attrition is not high, as about 84 percent of the
participants in the baseline survey participated in the follow-up survey one year later.9 Second,
and most importantly, there is no significant difference in the attrition rates between individuals
who were in the control group (15 percent attrition), and individuals who were in the treatment
group in the baseline survey (17 percent attrition, p=0.247 for t-test of proportions). In Appendix
A.1, we provide further evidence that attrition was random.


3       Results: Preferences for Redistribution
3.1     Variation in Demand for Redistribution
We start with an descriptive analysis of preferences for redistribution at the national and the global
level. The two main outcome variables, demand for national and global redistribution measured
in the baseline survey are presented in Figure 2. Figure 2.a reveals significant variation as to how
much redistribution individuals want at both the national and the global level. Figure 2.b shows
that even though the two preferences are correlated (correlation coefficient 0.70, p<0.01), the
correlation is not perfect: there are some respondents who want extensive national redistribution

    9
     Attrition in our follow-up survey is substantially lower than in other studies, which typically also consider
shorter time spans between surveys: for example, 80 percent of first-time respondents participate in the second
survey of Karadja et al. (2017) three months later, while in Kuziemko et al. (2015) 78 percent of participants who
started the survey completed it and only 14 percent responded to a follow-up one month later.

                                                       10
but very little global redistribution, and vice versa.
    Table 2 investigates the correlates of preferences for national and global redistribution, using
data from the baseline control group only (i.e., individuals who did not receive any feedback from
us regarding their true relative income rank). The two left columns look at the extent to which our
measure of national demand for redistribution is correlated with personal characteristics that have
previously been shown to correlate with demand for redistribution (Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005;
Alesina and Giuliano, 2011; Mollerstrom and Seim, 2014; Karadja et al., 2017; Gärtner et al., 2017,
2019). In column (1) each covariate enters a bivariate regression with demand for redistribution as
the dependent variable, whereas the model in column (2) has all covariates entering simultaneously.
We mostly confirm previous findings. For example, the demand for national redistribution is
decreasing in income, and in the extent to which the respondent believes that effort (rather than
luck) is the driver of economic success. Demand for national redistribution is also higher among
those who define themselves as being to the left on the political spectrum. We fail to find support
for some previously documented findings however. We see, for instance, no gender difference in
the demand for national redistribution (in other work, women are generally found to demand more
redistribution than men). The two right columns in Table 2 display the results of the corresponding
correlational analysis for demand for global redistribution. There are some differences compared
to the correlates of demand for national redistribution. Most notably, there is no relation between
a respondent's income and her demand for global redistribution. The fact that those to the left
on the political spectrum want more redistribution remains however, as does the correlation with
luck/effort beliefs.
    A challenge with these two outcome measures is that they are unincentivized self-reports. To
test whether respondents put their money where their mouth is, we also conducted two distribution
tasks. In each of these two tasks respondents could split 50 Euro between themselves and a poor
household in the national context or in the global context. In one task the poor household was a
German household from the bottom-10 percent of the national income distribution (drawn from a
different SOEP-IS sample). In the other task, the poor household was a Kenyan household from
the bottom-10 percent of the global income distribution (drawn from eligible households of the
GiveDirectly cash-transfer program). While giving behavior in both cases is related to demand
for redistribution, we have to keep in mind that these outcomes measure altruism, not preferences
for redistribution. As a result, the Meltzer-Richard model would not predict effects on these
outcomes (in that model, individuals are purely selfish). However, to the extent that preferences
for redistribution are at least partially driven by altruistic concerns, then the survey measures
on preferences for redistribution should be positively correlated to these altruistic behaviors with
real stakes. That is, we expect respondents who, on average, report a higher demand for national
redistribution also donate more to the German poor, and that respondents who have a higher
demand for global redistribution donate more to the global poor.
    We observe that there was substantial giving among the households: the average shared with

                                                11
the poor German household was 56 percent (M=28.0 Euro, SD=14.8) while the average shared with
the Kenyan households was 64 percent (M=31.8 Euro, SD=15.9). Most important, Figure 3 shows
that these donations with real stakes are correlated with the stated preferences for redistribution.
There is a significant positive correlation between the demand for national redistribution and
the donations to the German poor (p-value<0.01), and a significant positive correlation between
the demand for global redistribution and the donations to the Kenyan poor (p-value<0.01). More
precisely, an increase from the lowest to the highest demand for national redistribution is associated
with an increase in the share of giving to a poor German household of ten percentage points; and
an increase from the lowest to the highest demand for global redistribution is associated with an
increase in the share of giving to a poor Kenyan household of 17 percentage points.10
    We also included a number of secondary outcome variables aimed at better understanding de-
mand for global redistribution. The first of these is most directly related to preferences for global
redistribution and assesses to what extent the respondent supports the creation of an international
institution mandated with the implementation of redistribution across countries. The other two
secondary outcomes ­ support for globalization and for immigration of poor people to Germany ­
are indirectly related to global redistribution. Table 3 documents that demand for both national
and global redistribution is positively correlated with support for immigration, with support for
an international redistributive organization, and (to some extent) with support for globalization.
As expected, people who believe that it is effort (rather than luck) that determine an individual's
economic success in the global arena are less supportive of immigration, of an international redis-
tributive organization, and of globalization. Luck/effort beliefs at the national level, however, are
uncorrelated with these opinions.11
    Global redistribution is a concept which is arguably harder to think about for respondents than
national redistribution, given that most redistributive policies are enacted at the national level.
The fact that our main measure of global demand for redistribution is significantly correlated with
the secondary outcomes that measures more commonly discussed phenomena like immigration, is
also an indication that our survey was successful in introducing and defining the concept of global
redistribution so that respondents could give informed answers.




   10
      We also find that, in general, left-of-center respondents share significantly more than center/right-of-center
respondents to both the poor German household (0.60 vs 0.54; t-test, p<0.01) and the poor Kenyan household
(0.68 vs 0.62; t-test, p<0.01).
   11
      It is also interesting to note that respondents are in wide agreement that luck plays a more important role
in generating individual global economic success than in generating individual national economic success. The
average answer on the luck/effort scale is 6.41 (SD=1.68) for the national and 5.81 (SD=1.94) for the global context
(p<0.01). For more results on the correlates of the secondary outcome variables, see Table A.4 in the Online
Appendix.

                                                        12
3.2     Perceptions of Relative Income
What do respondents know about national and global relative income? On the one hand, there
are reasons to expect that misperceptions for global relative income will be more substantial than
those of national relative income. For example, the information about the national income distri-
bution may be more accessible than information about the global income distribution. National
newspapers may often provide information related to the national income distribution but rarely
provide information related to the global income distribution. The same case can be made about
indirect sources of information about the income distribution, such as salary discussions with social
contacts or casual observation of other people's consumption: the majority of these conversations
and observations may happen domestically rather than abroad. On the other hand, there are rea-
sons to expect lower misperceptions for global relative income than for national relative income.
For instance, estimating the global relative income is arguably much easier than estimating the
national counterpart. Even if a household had no idea whether it is poor or rich within Germany,
by just knowing that Germany is a rich country the household could still guess that it is in the
very top of the global income distribution.
    Figure 4 shows the perceptions for national relative income (panel a) and global relative in-
come (panel b). The results indicate that substantial misperceptions exist for both the global and
national beliefs. Figure 5.a shows the histograms of misperceptions: i.e., the difference between
prior beliefs and reality.12 Here, a positive (negative) number indicates that the individual respon-
dent over-estimates (under-estimates) her own rank. For example, 0.3 means that the respondent
believes that she is 30 percentage points higher on the relative income scale than she actually is,
and a -0.1 would indicate that the respondent's relative income position is in fact ten percentage
points lower than she believes.13 A visual inspection of Figure 5.a indicates a much smaller average
bias for national than for global rank, and it is indeed the case that the average bias for national
rank is close to zero (M=-0.01, SD=0.29). Moreover, there are roughly the same number of peo-
ple over-estimating their national rank as under-estimating it. This is not true for global rank:
respondents under-estimate their relative position in the global income distribution by an average
of 15 percentage points (SD=0.26, p<0.01 for a paired t-test of differences in means). Despite
these different average errors in national and global relative income perceptions, we observe quite
pronounced individual biases that are similar in magnitude at the national and global levels. We
compare the accuracy of national and global relative income perceptions using the mean absolute
error, which is very similar for national and global beliefs (23 percentage points in both cases). In
other words, at the individual level, Germans are as (in)accurate about their national income rank
  12
      In Appendix A.2, we also show the distribution of the gap between the information provided to the individuals
and the prior beliefs.
   13
      One potential concern is that part of the misperceptions may be due to the fact that individuals do not know
their absolute, rather than relative, income. However, Appendix A.3 shows this is not a significant source of concern.
Indeed, we provide suggestive evidence that respondents know their absolute income well, which is consistent with
the results reported in Karadja et al. (2017) that self-reported income is highly correlated with administrative data.

                                                         13
as they are about their global income rank.
    Figure 5.b shows the relationship between the national and the global biases. They are signif-
icantly (albeit not perfectly) correlated with a correlation coefficient of 0.61 (p<0.01), implying
that if a respondent over-estimates her position relative to other Germans chances are that she will
also over-estimate how relatively rich she is globally. This, in turn, may imply that respondents
are, to some extent, extrapolating their beliefs about their national relative position to the global
arena. We also test to what extent misperceptions of national and global relative income differ by
subgroups. As discussed above, misperceptions about national income rank are highly correlated
with misperceptions about global income rank. Moreover, the two types of biases have similar
correlates (results presented in Appendix A.4).
    Finally, we can assess if the misperceptions are consistent with the middle-class bias that would
be expected under assortativity neglect. That is, the poor interact disproportionally with poor
people and thus end up overestimating their relative income; while the rich interact dispropor-
tionally with rich people and thus end up underestimating their relative income.14 The results
are presented in Figure 6.a for national relative income and Figure 6.b for global relative income.
Figure 6.a shows that, consistent with prior evidence (Cruces et al., 2013), there is a middle-class
bias in the perceptions about national relative income. Households below the median income over-
estimate their relative income while households above the median income under-estimate their
relative income. Figure 6.b shows that a middle-class bias may also exist for the belief about
global relative income. However, since the vast majority of German households are placed in the
top two deciles of the global income distribution, there is no sufficient data to provide a sharp test
of the middle-class bias at the global level.


3.3     Effect of Relative Income on Preferences for Redistribution
Before presenting the experimental results, we explore the raw correlations between respondents'
relative income perceptions and their preferences for redistribution. The results are presented in
Table 4, and again based only on individuals in the baseline survey control group. The first two
columns display the results for the full control group. They show that perceived global rank is not
related to demand for redistribution, neither at the national nor at the global level, while perceived
national rank is related to demand for national, but not global redistribution.
    Previous work has shown significant polarization along political orientation with respect to
providing information on relative income and income inequality. Karadja et al. (2017), for instance,
document that individuals to the left and to the right of center on the political spectrum react
differently to information about relative income. Even though they do not directly report left-
right heterogeneity, the findings by Cruces et al. (2013) and Fernandez-Albertos and Kuo (2018)
   14
     Frick et al. (2019) formalize how this assortativity neglect may arise more generally. Theoretically, a middle-
class bias may also lead to more inequality, in particular, if the middle class can redistribute resources to themselves
and are richer than the poor (Acemoglu et al., 2015).

                                                          14
indicate that informing people of their true economic placement affects support for redistribution
only from those who learn they are poor (who tend to be left-wing). This substantial heterogeneity
by left-right spectrum goes beyond information-provision experiments on relative income. For
example, Kuziemko et al. (2015) find that providing information about inequality only affects
individuals with sufficiently high levels of trust in the government, who tend to overwhelmingly
place themselves to the left of the political spectrum ­ and in a re-analysis of their data, Fenton
(2020) finds strong heterogeneity by political identification too. Alesina et al. (2018b) find that only
left-wing respondents increase support for redistribution in reaction to pessimistic information on
social mobility. Consequently, we leverage the setup of baseline survey module and use the answers
to pre-treatment questions on political orientation for analyzing heterogeneity in response to our
treatment.
    The results are displayed in columns (3) through (6) of Table 4. Respondents indicate their
political orientation on a scale from 1 (left) to 10 (right) and we split the sample into left (re-
spondents who picked from 0 to 4 on the 1-10 scale) and center/right (the rest). In line with the
previous literature, we find significant heterogeneity. While demand for both national and global
redistribution are significantly correlated with a respondents' perceived national (but not global)
income rank for those with political opinions to the left-of-center, neither correlation is significant
for center/right respondents.
    Next, we use our information experiment to investigate the causal relation between relative
income and demand for redistribution. We use the following specification:



  Yi = nat · ri,nat
              signal    prior
                     - ri,nat · Ti + int · ri,int
                                            signal    prior
                                                   - ri,int · Ti
                                          + 1 · ri,nat
                                                 signal    prior
                                                        - ri,nat + 2 · ri,int
                                                                        signal    prior
                                                                               - ri,int + 3 Xi + i , (1)

    where ri,nat
            prior
                  denotes the perceived national rank in the baseline survey (i.e., the prior belief,
before receiving information) and ri,nat signal
                                                denotes the signal that could have been given, or not
given, as feedback depending on whether the individual was in the treatment group or not. Ti is
the treatment indicator variable, indicating whether the individual was treated with information
about her actual relative income, or not. The two key parameters are nat and int , where                  nat
                                                                                                         100
shows the causal effect of a respondent receiving information implying that her national rank is 1
percentage point higher than she previously thought. Correspondingly,            int
                                                                                100
                                                                                     shows the causal effect
of a respondent being told that her global rank is 1 percentage point higher than she believed
it to be. The variables ri,nat
                           signal    prior
                                  - ri,nat  and ri,int
                                                  signal    prior
                                                         - ri,int control for the non-random variation in
prior misperceptions: i.e., they guarantee that nat and int are identified by random variation in
information provision. Last, Xi is a set of additional controls.15
  15
     In Appendix A.6, we present results for the average effects of receiving information (i.e., regardless of whether
the feedback was above or below the prior belief).

                                                         15
    There are two features of this specification worth mentioning that we address in more detail
in Appendix A.5. First, we use the center/right group for the sake of brevity: in Table A.5
we show that the results are similar in the two subgroups ("Center" and "Right"). Second, the
specification is quite demanding in that it simultaneously includes in the regression two variables
that are significantly correlated: perceptions of national and global relative income. In Appendix
A.6 we present alternative specifications which only include perceptions of national or global ranks.
The results from these less demanding specifications are not only robust, but also more precisely
estimated.
    The experimental results are presented in Table 5 and line up relatively well with the raw
correlations in Table 4. The first two columns of Table 5 present the average treatment effects and
indicate that preferences for redistribution (national and global) decrease with national relative
income, but the magnitude is small and the coefficients are imprecisely estimated and statistically
insignificant. The second set of columns shows that the effects are large and significant for the left-
leaning respondents: communicating information to left-of-center respondents that their national
income rank is 10 percentage points higher than they previously believed decreases their support
for national redistribution by around 0.08 standard deviations, while the effects of national rank on
global redistribution are slightly higher in magnitude (0.09 standard deviations). In contrast, there
are no significant effects of information about global rank on the demand for global (or national)
redistribution. The third set of columns shows a null-effect for center/right respondents: the point
estimates are close to zero, precisely estimated and statistically insignificant.
    Figure 7 provides a graphical representation of the effects of information on national rank using
binned scatterplots. In the interest of maximizing power, and based on the results presented above,
we use a specification that ignores the misperceptions about global income. Figure 7.a depicts this
relation for the left-of-center respondents, and indicates that the results are not driven by outliers,
and that assuming a linear relationship is reasonable. Figure 7.b shows center/right respondents,
and confirms that the effects of the information intervention are robustly null across the entire
distribution.
    Next, we consider the effects on the secondary outcomes. These results are presented in Table 6.
As before, we consider the effects on the full sample (panel a), for left-of-center respondents (panel
b), and center/right respondents (panel c). In each panel, the first column reproduces, for compar-
ison, the effect of information provision on the demand for global redistribution. Columns 2-4 in
each panel present the results for the questions about support for an international, redistributive
institution, support for immigration, and support for globalization, respectively. The outcome
measure in the fifth column is a standardized index of all four measures of global redistribution,
following the methodology of Kling et al. (2007).16

  16
     In Appendix A.7, we present the effects on the behavior in the dictator games, which took place after the
information provision stage and in Appendix A.8 we present the effects on the redistributive preferences elicited in
the follow-up survey.

                                                        16
    Considering first the left-of-center sample shown in panel b), we see that receiving information
that one has a higher relative income in Germany than previously believed, causally decreases
support for a redistributive international institution (column 2). The coefficient for this outcome
(-1.035, p<0.05) is similar in magnitude and statistical significance as the coefficient on the main
outcome on global redistribution (-0.929, p<0.05). The point estimates for the support for glob-
alization and immigration outcomes (-0.499 and -0.521 in columns (3) and (4), respectively) are
also negative although somewhat smaller in magnitude than the other coefficients and statistically
insignificant. The effects on the index (column 5) are similar in magnitude to the main outcome
(-0.759) and highly statistically significant (p-value<0.01). For the center/right sample (panel c),
the effects are again precisely estimated nulls.
    We present further robustness checks in Appendix A.5. First, we provide a falsification test
of the information intervention: we use the two questions about the respondent's belief in the
importance of effort versus luck for individual economic success both at the national the global
level. Despite these variables being related to demand for redistribution, we expect no treatment
effect as they were measured before the information-provision. The results confirm this expectation:
the coefficients are close to zero, statistically insignificant and precisely estimated. Last, we provide
a graphical analysis of the effects of information, using histograms to break down the treatments
into positive, neutral, and negative news about the income ranks. This exercise confirms our
results reported above.


4     Results: Robustness of Misperceptions
The results presented so far indicate substantial misperceptions about national and global relative
income that shape respondents' preferences for redistribution. However, self-reported data on
misperceptions come with certain challenges due to their self-reported nature. For instance, some
respondents may not be paying attention to the question, or they may have a good intuition about
their relative income but face difficulty communicating that with numbers. Another challenge
is that respondents may be uninformed simply due to the fact that they do not care about the
general topic that is under investigation. Indeed, these concerns are not specific to perceptions
about relative income, but may be applicable to all types of misperceptions studied in the broader
literature. In this section, we take advantage of our unique data and SOEP-specific features to
address all of these concerns.


4.1    Consistency Across Household Members and Over Time
We start by noting that misperceptions exist in our data even though we provided significant
rewards for the respondents to correctly state their national and global position in the relative
income distribution. The incentives, at least to some extent, reduce the concerns about measure-


                                                   17
ment error as we are giving people an incentive to pay attention, and to think harder than they
would under non-incentivized conditions.
    Next, we show that the misperceptions are robust across household members and over time. The
data from the follow-up survey help us to assess the consistency (or lack thereof) of misperceptions.
If biases are pure measurement error, there should be no correlation between the bias in one wave of
the survey and the next. On the other hand, if individuals are truly biased, their misperceptions
should be correlated over time. Figure 8 shows that the persistence is significant: for national
ranks, for each one percentage-point bias in the baseline survey, a respondent is biased in the
same direction by 0.4 percentage points in the follow-up survey (p<0.01). Results are similar in
magnitude for global rank (correlation is 0.28, p<0.01). The existence of such a persistence is even
more remarkable given that there are some factors working against it ­ in particular, individuals
are changing their absolute income over time, which often causes their true position to change as
well (for details, see Appendix A.9).
    We further document that misperceptions are quite consistent within households. If mispercep-
tions are pure measurement error, they should be independent across household members. If, on
the other hand, they reflect real, meaningful biases, we should expect them to be correlated across
household members. We find that the within-household variance in misperceptions is 41.8 percent
for national rank and 58.2 percent for global rank. To put this in perspective, we use the standard
SOEP-IS question about the number of household members as a natural benchmark. In principle,
household members should have a high degree of agreement on this factual question. We observe
that for the reported number of household members, 10.8 percent of variation is within-household.
Despite this not being zero (which we would expect if all households were perfectly consistent), it
is quite low.17 This implies that household members are less consistent in their assessments of the
household's income rank than about how many members the household has. However, the variance
is far from 100 percent, which is what we would expect if misperceptions were only measurement
errors generated at the individual level.


4.2     Persistence of Learning
Another way of testing whether the misperceptions are spurious or not, is by measuring the persis-
tence of the information provided in the experiment (see e.g., Cavallo et al., 2017). If mispercep-
tions are due to measurement error, anchoring, experimenter demand or lack of attention/interest,
we would not expect the effects of providing information to be long-lasting. We use a similar
regression framework as before.

                     t+1
                    ri,nat + = nat · ri,nat
                                      signal    prior
                                             - ri,nat · Ti + 1 · ri,nat
                                                                  signal    prior
                                                                         - ri,nat + i ,                       (2)
  17
     Note that such small inconsistencies may come from misreporting, e.g., a typo, or they may come from border-
line cases where, for example, one spouse includes a child currently at college as a member of the household while
the other spouse does not.

                                                       18
    The dependent variable, ri,nat
                                 t+1
                                     , denotes the perceived national rank in the follow-up survey,
ri,nat -ri,nat is the misperception about the national rank, and Ti is an indicator variable indicating
 signal   prior

whether the individual received relative-income information. The coefficient nat tells us the rate
of pass-through between the information given, and subsequent beliefs (for example, a coefficient
of 0.1 would indicate that for each percentage point shock in information given, the posterior belief
a year later is higher by 0.1 percentage points). Note that we should not expect a perfect pass-
through rate (i.e., a rate of 1), because Bayesian individuals would, for example, take an average
between the provided signal and their prior beliefs. Empirically, even when beliefs are re-elicited
immediately (which is not the case here, but has been done in other work), the pass-through rate
tends to be closer to 0.5, and falls significantly over a few months (see e.g., Cavallo et al., 2017;
Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2017; Fuster et al., 2019). Moreover, we expect a limited pass-through
in this context as a respondent's actual relative income can change from one year to the other, so
what she learned about her relative income one year ago may only be of limited help when she
assesses her current income rank. We use an analagous specification for global relative income.
    The results of estimating the pass-through rate are presented in Table 7. Column (1) suggests
a pass-through coefficient of 0.14 at the national level, i.e., for each percentage point that the
treatment corrected a respondent's misperception about national relative income, a year later she
reports beliefs that have moved 0.14 percentage points closer to accurate beliefs. This suggests
that the respondents have at least some interest in the information ­ as they otherwise would not
be likely to remember what they learned. Column (3) presents a similar pass-through estimate
(0.11 percentage points) for global relative income.
    We provide several robustness checks. Columns (5) and (7) present the results from a falsifi-
cation test where the dependent variable is the belief in the baseline survey (i.e., before they or
the other household members actually received the information). We should expect no effect on
this prior belief, which is also what we find: this fake rate of pass-through is in both cases close
to zero, statistically insignificant and precisely estimated. Appendix A.1 provides an additional
robustness check, using attrition to the follow-up survey as the dependent variable, to show that
the findings are not driven by selective attrition.
    As complementary evidence, we can also use data on the certainty of beliefs a year later.
In the follow-up survey, we ask respondents to state how confident they are in their answers
about their position in the income distributions. Figure 9.a shows that, on average, individuals
are aware that they do not know their position in the income distributions well (only about
four (eight) percent of respondents report to be 90 to 100 percent certain about their national
(global) relative position assessment, respectively). Moreover, Figure 9.b shows the relationship
between respondents' confidence in their answer and their accuracy, and we see evidence of some
self-awareness in particular in the case of global rank: here biases are significantly smaller among
people who felt more certain. That is,the bias is around 32 percentiles for those who are completely
uncertain or only 10 percent sure, whereas it is around 12 percentiles for those who report to be

                                                  19
90 or 100 percent sure.
    Finally, if an individual truly learned from the information, we would expect her to feel more
certain about her answer when assessing her income rank a year later. The results in Table 8,
for national rank (column 1) and global rank (column 3) confirm this conjecture. The evidence
suggests that receiving information about one's true income rank increased belief certainty in
national rank by 0.421 (p<0.01) and in global rank by 0.583 (p<0.01) in the follow-up one year
later.


4.3    Information Diffusion within Households
Due to the fact that we randomized the information treatment at the individual level, sometimes
an individual received information, while other members of the same household did not. We exploit
this feature to measure intra-household information diffusion, and find that providing information
to one respondent affects the beliefs of the other members of her household one year later. If
individuals take the time to discuss the information they receive with other household members,
they presumably find it interesting or useful. We reiterate that any sharing of information among
household members must take place after the baseline survey, as each interview was conducted in
private and communication between household members was not allowed.
    In this analysis, we extend specification (2) :



   t+1
  ri,nat + = nat · ri,nat
                    signal    prior
                           - ri,nat · Ti + nat
                                           peer    signal
                                                · ri,nat     prior
                                                          - ri,nat · Tipeer
                                                               + 1 · ri,nat
                                                                      signal    prior
                                                                             - ri,nat + 2 Di + i , (3)

    Here the variable Tipeer takes the value 1 if the individual did not receive the information, but
at least one other member of her household did. Di represents a set of indicator variables for the
number of respondents in the household. This is important to control for as a member of a larger
household faces a higher probability that another household member will be randomly assigned to
the treatment. In other words, assignment to the peer treatment is only random after conditioning
on household size. The coefficient natpeer
                                           tells us the rate of pass-through between the information
we gave to a respondent's household peer(s) to her own beliefs one year later.
    The results are presented in column (2) of Table 7, and suggest that there is significant diffusion
of information within households. The coefficient of 0.145 implies that for each percentage point
shock in information given to another member of a respondent's household, her posterior belief a
year later is higher by 0.145 percentage points. Moreover, accounting for this spillover of informa-
tion is important for correctly understanding the long-term effects on beliefs: once we control for
potential peer information, the pass-through of own information to own beliefs rises from 0.137 in
column (1) to 0.179 in column (2). The comparisons between the pass-through for own information


                                                    20
versus peer information suggests that 81 percent (= 0.145 / 0.179) of the information travels to
other people in the household. This is a very high degree of information diffusion. We reproduce
the analysis for the global rank in column (4). The rate of pass-through is somewhat lower (0.099),
and we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no difference (p=0.12); however we also cannot reject
that it is equal to the corresponding rate for national rank (p=0.51). The comparisons between the
pass-through for own information versus peer information suggest that 67 percent (=0.099/0.148)
of the information about global income rank makes its way to other members of the household.18
    Columns (2) and (4) of Table 8 explore the effects of information diffusion to other members of
the household on the certainty of beliefs a year later. If a respondent obtained information from
another household member, we would expect her to feel more certain when answering the question
about income rank a year later. The results are presented for national and global rank, in columns
(2) and (4), respectively. The evidence is mixed: The household peer treatment increased belief
certainty in national rank by just 0.056 and this effect is statistically insignificant. However, given
that this point estimate is not precisely estimated (the 95 percent confidence interval is between
-0.38 and 0.49), we cannot rule out large positive effects. For global rank, the evidence is clearer:
the household peer treatment increased own belief certainty by 0.513 (p<0.05), which is not only
statistically significant but also almost as large in magnitude as the effect of own treatment.


4.4     Demand for Information
A last piece of evidence that points to respondents caring about the topic and paying attention
is that most of them are willing to pay to receive information about their relative income at the
end of the follow-up survey. To analyze the demand for information, we can start by looking
at whether the responses people gave are consistent across scenarios. Around five percent of
respondents provided inconsistent responses in at least one of the two WTP questions.19 This
level of consistency is in the lower end of the range of other studies using similar methods to elicit
the WTP for information.20
    The distribution of WTP, for the 95 percent of the respondents who provided consistent answers,
is shown in Figure 10.a, which indicates a significant WTP for information. We estimate the mean
WTP using an interval regression model and find that this is 6.17 (SD=0.26) for national rank
and 6.12 (SD=0.27) for global rank.21 Figure 10.b shows the relationship between the WTP

   18
      We can run the same falsification test as discussed above, where the dependent variable is the belief in the
baseline survey (i.e., before they or the other household members actually received the information). These results
are presented in columns (6) and (8) of Table 7 and are as expected.
   19
      For example, they chose five Euro instead of information, but then chose information instead of ten Euro.
Those who reported inconsistent responses to one piece of information, e.g. national rank, were almost always
inconsistent in the other piece of information, i.e. about global rank. This suggests these individuals were not
paying attention or they had trouble understanding the instructions.
   20
      For instance, the share of inconsistent respondents was about two percent in Allcott and Kessler (2019), five
percent in Fuster et al. (2019), and 15 percent in Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018).
   21
      This model assumes that the latent WTP is normally distributed. The constant in this model can be interpreted

                                                        21
for national vs. global rank. On average, the WTP is almost identical, and the two are highly
correlated. But the correlation is not perfect; that is, some respondents are more interested in
acquiring information about their national than their global rank, and vice versa.
    Given that the maximum WTP is 10, the average WTP seems fairly high, also taking into
account that the information provided is in principle something respondents could find out online by
themselves. In that sense, this WTP is giving a lower bound on how much respondents care about
the information, as many who are interested in acquiring the information are probably deciding
whether to pay for it in the survey, or to search for it on their own later. We can also compare
the median WTP in our study with the results from other papers that elicit WTP for information
using similar methods. We find that individuals value information on their national and global
relative income rank more than they value, for example travel information ($0.40, Khattak et al.,
2003), food certification information ($0.80, Angulo et al., 2005), home energy reports ($3, Allcott
and Kessler, 2019) and future national home prices ($4.16, Fuster et al., 2019).22
    Taken together, we have documented significant misperceptions not only about national but
also about global relative income and demonstrated that they are not just statistically significant,
but also meaningful and robust.


5     Conclusions
This study presents evidence on the determinants of demand for national and global redistribution
using a large-scale, longitudinal, survey experiment. We start by studying misperceptions about
individual relative income, at both the national and global levels, in a representative sample of the
German population. We show that the degree of misperceptions are comparable in magnitude be-
tween the national relative income and the global relative income.23 Moreover, we provide unique
evidence that these misperceptions are meanignful and robust. For example, we show that misper-
ceptions persist despite significant rewards for guessing correctly. We show that misperceptions
are consistent across time and across different household members. Moreover, providing informa-
tion to individuals affects the perceptions of those same individuals a year later, and affects the
perceptions of other members of the individuals' household. We find that individuals are willing
to pay non-trivial amounts for information about their global and national income ranks.
    Using both correlational and experimental estimates, we find evidence that relative national
income is a significant determinant of preferences for national redistribution. This finding aligns


as the mean WTP under the implicit assumption that WTP can take negative values; if instead we were to assume
that the WTP must be non-negative, then the mean would be even higher.
   22
      In contrast, the information about income rank is not as valuable as the information about peer salaries, re-
ported in Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018). That information, however, is not available online and is also potentially
profitable from the perspective of career choice and salary negotiations.
   23
      There are some differences, though: e.g., while Germans, on average, are correct about their national relative
income rank, they tend to underestimate their global income rank by about 13 percentage points.

                                                         22
with the predictions of seminal political economy models (Meltzer and Richard, 1981), which
predict that the relatively rich demand less redistribution than the relatively poor, as the rich
receive fewer monetary benefits from redistribution. We observe significant heterogeneity in this
relation, however. For the political left, the relation between relative national income rank and
demand for national redistribution is pronounced and robust, but for the political center and right
it is not. This suggests that left-leaning people are more open to redistribution as they are also
more elastic to information as to whether they are richer or poorer than they thought.
    Our findings indicate that the Meltzer and Richard (1981) model does not hold in the global
arena: global relative income rank is neither correlated with nor causally related to demand for
global redistribution. Arguably, preferences for global redistribution are a hypothetical and ab-
stract concept, which may explain the missing link between global relative income rank and demand
for global redistribution. However, we present a host of evidence, suggesting that this is unlikely
to be the case. Not only do we find that national and global preferences share similar correlates,
and that preferences for global redistribution are related to more tangible measures such as sup-
port for immigration, globalization and for an international organization mandated with global
redistribution, but also that global redistribution does decrease in perceived national income rank.
We interpret this evidence as suggestive of a reference group effect. That is, when thinking about
preferences for global redistribution, it matters more how one compares to other people nationally
than to others around the globe.
    We studied preferences for global redistribution among people in one of the richest countries
in the world. The overwhelming majority of them would thus be net contributors to global re-
distribution. Our results indicate that poorer Germans may fail to realize that more extensive
global redistribution would redistribute their income to other parts of the world where people are
even poorer. Indeed, if migration from poor to rich countries continue to increase and issues about
globalization and disintegration of markets (e.g., Brexit) intensify, we will likely see more economic
pressure on the lower part of the income distribution in rich countries. Therefore, it will be crucial
to gain a better understanding of what drives demand for global redistribution. The present study
is just an early step in this process, as many more studies (not least from developing countries)
will be needed to create a full understanding of global demand for redistribution, and of the ways
it resembles, and differs from, demand for national redistribution.


References
Acemoglu, D., S. Naidu, P. Restrepo, and J. A. Robinson (2015): "Democracy, Redistribution,
  and Inequality," in Handbook of Income Distribution, Elsevier, vol. 2, 1885­1966.

Alesina, A. and G. M. Angeletos (2005): "Fairness and redistribution: US vs Europe," American
  Economic Review, 95, 913­935.



                                                  23
Alesina, A. and D. Dollar (2000): "Who gives foreign aid to whom and why?" Journal of Economic
  Growth, 5, 33­63.

Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011): "Preferences for redistribution," in Handbook of Social Eco-
  nomics, Elsevier, vol. 1, 93­131.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005): "Preferences for redistribution in the land of opportunities,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 89, 897­931.

Alesina, A., A. Miano, and S. Stantcheva (2018a): "Immigration and Redistribution," NBER
  Working Paper No. 24733.

Alesina, A., S. Stantcheva, and E. Teso (2018b): "Intergenerational mobility and preferences for
  redistribution," American Economic Review, 108, 521­54.

Allcott, H. and J. B. Kessler (2019): "The welfare effects of nudges: A case study of energy use
  social comparisons," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 236­76.

Alvaredo, F., L. Chancel, T. Piketty, E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2018): World inequality report
  2018, Belknap Press.

Andersen, S., G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutström (2006): "Elicitation using multiple
  price list formats," Experimental Economics, 9, 383­405.

Angulo, A. M., J. M. Gil, and L. Tamburo (2005): "Food safety and consumers' willingness to pay
  for labelled beef in Spain," Journal of Food Products Marketing, 11, 89­105.

Bauhr, M., N. Charron, and N. Nasiritousi (2013): "Does corruption cause aid fatigue? Public
  opinion and the aid-corruption paradox," International Studies Quarterly, 57, 568­579.

Bechtel, M. M., J. Hainmueller, and Y. Margalit (2014): "Preferences for International Redis-
  tribution: The Divide over the Eurozone Bailouts," American Journal of Political Science, 58, 835­856.

Becker, G. M., M. H. DeGroot, and J. Marschak (1964): "Measuring utility by a single-response
  sequential method," Behavioral science, 9, 226­232.

Benabou, R. and J. Tirole (2006): "Belief in a just world and redistributive politics," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121, 699­746.

Bolton, G. E. and A. Ockenfels (2000): "ERC: A theory of equity, reciprocity, and competition,"
  American Economic Review, 90, 166­193.

Bottan, N. and R. Perez-Truglia (2017): "Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
  Income," NBER Working Paper No. 23615.




                                                  24
Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017): "Inflation expectations, learning, and su-
  permarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  9, 1­35.

Charness, G. and M. Rabin (2002): "Understanding social preferences with simple tests," The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 117, 817­869.

Cruces, G., R. Perez-Truglia, and M. Tetaz (2013): "Biased perceptions of income distribution
  and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment," Journal of Public Economics,
  98, 100­112.

Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018): "How Huch Does your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary
  Comparisons," NBER Working Paper No. 24841.

Dreher, A., J.-E. Sturm, and J. R. Vreeland (2009): "Development aid and international pol-
  itics: Does membership on the UN Security Council influence World Bank decisions?" Journal of
  Development Economics, 88, 1­18.

Eichenauer, V. Z., A. Fuchs, and L. Brückner (2018): "The effects of trade, aid, and investment on
  China's image in developing countries," University of Heidelberg Department of Economics Discussion
  Paper Series.

Engelhardt, C. and A. Wagener (2017): "What do Germans think and know about income inequal-
  ity? A survey experiment," Socio-Economic Review, 16, 743­767.

Fehr, D., D. Muller, and M. Preuss (2019): "Social Mobility Perceptions and Inequality Accep-
  tance," mimeo.

Fehr, D. and Y. Reichlin (2020): "Wealth Inequality, Personality and Risk Taking," mimeo.

Fehr, E. and K. M. Schmidt (1999): "A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114, 817­868.

Fenton, G. (2020): "How Elastic are Preferences for Redistribution? New Results on Partisan Polar-
  ization," Working Paper.

Fernandez-Albertos, J. and A. Kuo (2018): "Income Perception, Information, and Progressive
  Taxation: Evidence from a Survey Experiment," Political Science Research and Methods, 6, 83­110.

Fong, C. (2001): "Social preferences, self interest and the demand for redistribution," Journal of Public
  Economics, 82, 225­246.

Frick, M., R. Iijima, and I. Yuhta (2019): "Dispersed Behavior and Perceptions in Assortative
  Societies," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper.

Fuster, A., R. Perez-Truglia, M. Wiederholt, and B. Zafar (2019): "Expectations with En-
  dogenous Information Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation," NBER Working Paper No. 24767.

                                                   25
Gärtner, M., J. Mollerstrom, and D. Seim (2017): "Individual risk preferences and the demand
  for redistribution," Journal of Public Economics, 153, 49­55.

------ (2019): "Income Mobility, Luck/Effort Beliefs, and the Demand for Redistribution: Perceptions
  and Reality," mimeo.

Goebel, J., M. M. Grabka, S. Liebig, M. Kroh, D. Richter, C. Schröder, and J. Schupp
  (2018): "The German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP)," Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik.

Haaland, I. and C. Roth (2019): "Labor Market Concerns and Support for Immigration," mimeo.

Haushofer, J. and J. Shapiro (2016): "The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers to the
  poor: experimental evidence from Kenya," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1973­2042.

Karadja, M., J. Mollerstrom, and D. Seim (2017): "Richer (and holier) than thou? The effect of
  relative income improvements on demand for redistribution," Review of Economics and Statistics, 99,
  201­212.

Khattak, A. J., Y. Yim, and L. S. Prokopy (2003): "Willingness to pay for travel information,"
  Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 11, 137­159.

Kinder, D. R. and C. D. Kam (2010): Us against them: Ethnocentric foundations of American opinion,
  University of Chicago Press.

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007): "Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects,"
  Econometrica, 75, 83­119.

Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015): "How elastic are preferences
  for redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments," American Economic Review, 105,
  1478­1508.

Kuziemko, I. and E. Werker (2006): "How much is a seat on the Security Council worth? Foreign
  aid and bribery at the United Nations," Journal of Political Economy, 114, 905­930.

Lucas, R. E. (2005): International migration and economic development: Lessons from low-income
  countries, Edward Elgar Publishing.

Meltzer, A. and S. Richard (1981): "A rational theory of the size of government," Journal of Political
  Economy, 89, 914­927.

Milanovic, B. (2015): "Global inequality of opportunity: How much of our income is determined by
  where we live?" Review of Economics and Statistics, 97, 452­460.

------ (2016): Global inequality: A new approach for the age of globalization, Harvard University Press.

Milner, H. V. and D. Tingley (2013): "Public opinion and foreign aid: A review essay," International
  Interactions, 39, 389­401.

                                                  26
Mollerstrom, J. and D. Seim (2014): "Cognitive ability and the demand for redistribution," PloS
  one, 9, e109955.

Nair, G. (2018): "Misperceptions of relative affluence and support for international redistribution," The
  Journal of Politics, 80, 815­830.

Norton, M. and D. Ariely (2011): "Building a better America--one wealth quintile at a time,"
  Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 9­12.

OECD (2014): "Is Migration Really Increasing?" Migration Policy Debate.

------ (2015): In it together: Why less inequality benefits all, Paris: OECD Publishing.

------ (2017): International Migration Outlook, Paris: OECD Publishing.

Piketty, T. (1995): "Social mobility and redistributive politics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110,
  551­584.

------ (2014): Capital in the twenty-first century, Belknapp Press.

Richter, D. and J. Schupp (2015): "The SOEP Innovation Sample (SOEP IS)," Schmollers Jahrbuch,
  135, 389­399.

Romer, T. (1975): "Individual welfare, majority voting, and the properties of a linear income tax,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 4, 163­185.

Weyl, G. (2018): "The Openness-equality Trade-off in Global Redistribution," The Economic Journal,
  128, F1­F36.




                                                    27
              Figure 1: Screenshot of a Sample of the Information Treatment




Notes: Information and visualization of the provided information about relative income at
the national level. Information about global relative income ranks was presented analogously.




                          Figure 2: Preferences for Redistribution

               a. Distribution                        b. Correlation National Vs. Global




Notes: Distribution of preferences for national and global redistribution (panel a.) and their
correlation (panel b.) in the baseline survey.




                                             28
      Figure 3: Preferences for Redistribution vs. Generosity in Distributional Tasks

        a. National Redistribution                        b. Global Redistribution




Notes: Binned scatterplots showing the relationship between preference for national redis-
tribution and share of giving to a poor German household (panel a.) and the relationship
between preference for global redistribution and share of giving to a poor global household
(panel b.). Data from baseline survey.




            Figure 4: Prior Beliefs about Income Rank vs. True Income Rank

         a. National Income Rank                          b. Global Income Rank




Notes: Distribution of prior beliefs about own income rank and the true income rank at the
national level (panel a.) and global level (panel b.). Data from baseline survey.




                                            29
                                  Figure 5: Misperceptions

     a. Distribution of Misperceptions                  b. Correlation of Misperceptions




Notes: Distribution of misperceptions at the national and global level (panel a.) and their
correlation (panel b.). Misperceptions are calculated as difference between prior beliefs about
income rank and true income rank. Positive (negative) differences correspond to overestima-
tion (underestimation) of own income rank. Data from baseline survey.




                                 Figure 6: Middle-Class Bias

         a. National Income Rank                             b. Global Income Rank




Notes: Binned scatterplots showing the relationship between true income rank and misper-
ceptions at the national level (panel a.) and global level (panel b.). Data from the baseline
survey.




                                              30
          Figure 7: Effects of Information Provision on Demand for Redistribution

        a. Left-of-center Respondents                    b. Center/Right Respondents




Notes: Binned scatterplots showing the effect of information on true income rank on demand
for redistribution for left-of-center respondents (panel a.) and center/right respondents (panel
b.) in the baseline survey. Demand for redistribution is a standardized index of national and
global demand for redistribution. Analysis conditional on a set of standard controls.




                   Figure 8: Year-over-year Persistence of Misperceptions

          a. National Income Rank                            b. Global Income Rank




Notes: Binned scatterplots showing the persistence of misperceptions between the baseline
and the follow-up survey (one year later) for national income rank (panel a.) and global
income rank (panel b.). Estimates based on control groups in the baseline and follow-up
survey only.




                                              31
                    Figure 9: Confidence in Beliefs about Income Rank

       a. Distribution of Confidence                  b. Confidence vs. Misperceptions




Notes: Distribution of reported confidence in beliefs about income rank in follow-up survey
(panel a.) and relationship between confidence and misperceptions for both national and
global income rank (panel b.). Estimates in panel b.) based on follow-up control group only.




                             Figure 10: WTP for Information

              a. Distribution                        b. Correlation National vs. Global




Notes: Distribution of willingness to pay (WTP) for information on national and global
income rank (panel a.) and their correlation (panel b.) in the follow-up survey.




                                            32
                                                              Table 1: Randomization Balance
                                                                 All                       Left-Of-Center              Center/Right-Wing
                                                     Treat    Control   P-value    Treat     Control   P-value     Treat    Control   P-value
                                                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)
                     HH Income (EUR 1,000s)          43.64     43.54      0.97     52.40      45.61         0.12   39.09    42.54      0.37
                                                     (1.91)    (2.28)              (3.45)     (2.52)               (2.26)   (3.14)
                     No. of Household Members         2.34      2.28      0.35      2.37       2.35         0.90    2.32     2.24      0.31
                                                     (0.04)    (0.05)              (0.07)     (0.09)               (0.06)   (0.06)
                     Female (=1)                      0.54      0.55      0.79      0.54       0.58         0.42    0.55     0.54      0.82
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)              (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.02)   (0.02)
                     Age                             54.58     56.44      0.06     52.67      55.51         0.09   55.58    56.88      0.28
                                                     (0.71)    (0.69)              (1.20)     (1.20)               (0.87)   (0.84)
                     Education: upper secondary       0.63      0.60      0.23      0.56       0.54         0.67    0.66     0.62      0.20
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)              (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.02)   (0.02)
                     Education: college               0.22      0.23      0.61      0.33       0.31         0.70    0.16     0.19      0.24
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)              (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.02)   (0.02)
33




                     Disabled (=1)                    0.13      0.15      0.18      0.12       0.11         0.90    0.14     0.17      0.11
                                                     (0.01)    (0.01)              (0.02)     (0.02)               (0.02)   (0.02)
                     Unemployed (=1)                  0.03      0.04      0.70      0.02       0.02         0.91    0.04     0.05      0.75
                                                     (0.01)    (0.01)              (0.01)     (0.01)               (0.01)   (0.01)
                     Retired (=1)                     0.34      0.35      0.72      0.32       0.31         0.92    0.36     0.37      0.65
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)              (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.02)   (0.02)
                     SPD Supporter (=1)               0.13      0.16      0.14      0.22       0.25         0.35    0.09     0.11      0.16
                                                     (0.01)    (0.01)              (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.01)   (0.01)
                     CDU/CSU Supporter (=1)           0.22      0.24      0.30      0.10       0.09         0.71    0.28     0.31      0.26
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)              (0.02)     (0.02)               (0.02)   (0.02)
                     East Germany (=1)                0.23      0.23      0.99      0.25       0.27         0.76    0.22     0.22      0.86
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)              (0.03)     (0.03)               (0.02)   (0.02)
                     Observations                     705       687                 241        222                  464      465

     Notes: Averages for a standard set of observables, p-value is for test of difference for treatment and control.
                           Table 2: Correlates of Demand for Redistribution
                                                    National Redistribution   Global redistribution
                                                      (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)
                                                                                       
            Age                                     -0.008        -0.003      -0.016      -0.010
                                                    (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)
            Female                                   -0.047       0.007        -0.065      -0.081
                                                    (0.173)      (0.174)      (0.179)     (0.182)
            Education: upper secondary               -0.085       -0.142       -0.239      -0.402
                                                    (0.177)      (0.254)      (0.185)     (0.270)
            Education: college & more                -0.076       -0.287       -0.075     -0.638
                                                    (0.198)      (0.304)      (0.213)      (0.322)
            Unemployed                               0.456        0.053        0.522       0.571
                                                    (0.453)      (0.440)      (0.423)     (0.428)
            Monthly net income (log)                -0.459      -0.658         0.013       -0.152
                                                     (0.197)     (0.218)      (0.199)     (0.216)
            Political orientation: left-of-center   1.014        1.016        1.117       1.073
                                                     (0.170)      (0.175)      (0.181)     (0.196)
            East Germany                            0.527         0.262        -0.028      -0.155
                                                     (0.203)     (0.217)      (0.208)     (0.232)
            German citizenship                      -0.697        -0.466      -0.786       -0.521
                                                    (0.362)      (0.367)       (0.371)    (0.384)
            Catholic                                 -0.063       -0.145       -0.293      -0.380
                                                    (0.194)      (0.234)      (0.201)     (0.239)
            Protesant                               -0.418       -0.421        -0.104      -0.286
                                                     (0.184)      (0.214)     (0.199)     (0.230)
            Luck vs. Effort National                -0.174        -0.086       -0.086      -0.014
                                                     (0.054)     (0.063)      (0.056)     (0.071)
            Luck vs. Effort Global                  -0.174       -0.114       -0.121       -0.071
                                                     (0.047)      (0.058)      (0.050)    (0.065)
            Risk aversion                            -0.041       -0.037      -0.079      -0.098
                                                    (0.038)      (0.039)      (0.041)      (0.042)
            Observations                                           657                      655

Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses using
data from the baseline control group. The dependent variable is national demand for redistribution (columns 1
and 2) and global demand for redistribution (columns 3 and 4). Uneven-numbered columns display coefficients
from separate regressions for each covariate, while even-numbered columns report multivariate regressions
including all covariates at once. The dependent variables are measured on a 0­10 scale with 0 indicating "no
redistribution" and 10 indicating "full redistribution." All covariates are defined as binary variables (except
age, monthly net income, luck vs. effort, and risk aversion).




                                                        34
Table 3: Correlates of Support of International Organization, Immigration, and Globalization
                                Support Int. Organization           Support Immigration            Support Globalization
                                  (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
  Luck vs. Effort National       -0.100             -0.010            -0.031        0.081            0.030            0.101
                                (0.065)            (0.060)           (0.053)       (0.061)          (0.048)           (0.057)
  Luck vs. Effort Global        -0.128              -0.019          -0.138        -0.162            -0.075            -0.120
                                 (0.055)           (0.053)           (0.044)       (0.050)          (0.040)            (0.048)
  National Redistribution       0.610             0.177             0.121         -0.145             0.042            -0.093
                                 (0.044)           (0.056)           (0.039)       (0.048)          (0.039)           (0.054)
  Global Redistribution         0.717             0.598             0.281          0.378           0.115              0.172
                                 (0.032)           (0.049)           (0.035)        (0.044)         (0.035)            (0.050)
  Observations                                       671                               682                              680

Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses using
data from the baseline control group. The dependent variable is support for an international organization to
implement global redistribution (columns 1 and 2), support for immigration from poor countries (columns 3
and 4), and support for globalization (columns 5 and 6). Uneven-numbered columns display coefficients from
separate regressions for each covariate, while even-numbered columns report multivariate regressions including
all covariates at once. All are measured on a 0­10 scale with 0 indicating "no support" and 10 indicating "full
support."




         Table 4: Correlation between Prior Beliefs and Preferences for Redistribution
                                            All                   Left-Of-Center               Center/Right
                                    (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)
                                  National        Global     National         Global      National        Global
             National Rank(i)     -0.557           -0.190    -1.009          -1.008            -0.503      0.102
                                   (0.245)        (0.235)     (0.369)         (0.372)         (0.311)     (0.300)
             Global Rank(ii)        0.085           0.127      0.573           0.643           -0.137      -0.094
                                   (0.237)        (0.235)     (0.366)         (0.392)         (0.283)     (0.281)
             P-value (i)=(ii)       0.137         0.446       0.017           0.013           0.484           0.706
             Observations            683           679         235             235             448             444

Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions with standard errors clustered at the household
level in parentheses using data from the baseline control group. The dependent variables are the standardized
national (National) and global demand for redistribution (Global). Columns 1­2 use data for the whole
baseline control sample, columns 3­4 display results for left-of-center respondents and columns 5­6 display
results for center/right respondents. Left-of-center is defined as below median on the self-assessment scale for
political orientation from left to right, whereas center/right subsumes respondents at or above the median on
this scale. P-value reports the result from a Wald test for equivalence of the two reported coefficients.




                                                             35
                                   Table 5: Effects of Information Provision on Preferences for Redistribution
                                                                     All                        Left-Of-Center                     Center/Right
                                                          (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)       (8)         (9)
                                                        National   Global     Index    National     Global       Index     National   Global      Index
           National Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)       -0.190     -0.230    -0.201    -0.777     -0.929     -0.857        0.078      0.102       0.108
                                                        (0.250)    (0.244)   (0.225)    (0.462)     (0.392)    (0.382)     (0.295)    (0.301)     (0.272)
           Global Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)         -0.001     0.114     0.038      0.190      0.150         0.171     0.002      0.174       0.061
                                                        (0.261)    (0.245)   (0.235)    (0.500)    (0.446)       (0.433)   (0.298)    (0.285)     (0.271)
           Observations                                  1,350      1,341     1,351       454        452          454        896        889        897

     Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions with standard errors clustered at the household level in parentheses using data from the
     baseline survey. The dependent variables are the standardized national (National) and global demand for redistribution (Global) and an equally-
     weighted index of the two. Columns 1­2 use data for the whole sample, columns 3­4 display results for left-of-center respondents and columns 5­6
     display results for center/right respondents. Left-of-center is defined as below median on the self-assessment scale for political orientation from left
     to right, whereas center/right subsumes respondents at or above the median on this scale. Analysis conditional on standard set of control (age,
     indicator variables for sex, education, disabled, unemployed, retired respondents, region (East Germany), and party affiliation of the respondent).
     P-value reports the result from a Wald test for equivalence of the two reported coefficients.
36
                        Table 6: Effects of Information Provision on Secondary Outcomes about Global Redistribution
                                                                                                               All


                                   Panel a)                                      (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                                                                             Global Red.   Supp. Global     Immigration    Globalization    Index

                                   National Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)      -0.230        -0.307           -0.138          0.012         -0.194
                                                                               (0.244)       (0.245)          (0.242)         (0.266)       (0.165)

                                   Global Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)        0.114         0.172            0.102           -0.243        0.087
                                                                               (0.245)       (0.241)          (0.240)         (0.258)       (0.160)

                                   P-value (i)=(ii)                             0.440         0.280            0.585          0.599         0.344
                                   Observations                                 1,341         1,325            1,358          1,345         1,364

                                                                                                          Left-Of-Center


                                   Panel b)                                      (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                                                                             Global Red.   Supp. Global     Immigration    Globalization    Index

                                   National Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)    -0.929         -1.035            -0.499          -0.521      -0.759
                                                                               (0.392)        (0.460)         (0.410)         (0.473)       (0.273)

                                   Global Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)        0.150         0.540            0.701           -0.110        0.308
                                                                               (0.446)       (0.473)          (0.457)         (0.512)       (0.321)

                                   P-value (i)=(ii)                             0.155         0.063            0.131          0.654         0.049
                                   Observations                                  452           447              454            454           458

                                                                                                          Center/Right
37




                                   Panel c)                                      (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                                                                             Global Red.   Supp. Global     Immigration    Globalization    Index

                                   National Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)      0.102         0.073            -0.006          0.269         0.087
                                                                               (0.301)       (0.288)          (0.291)         (0.315)       (0.200)

                                   Global Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)        0.174         0.068            -0.031          -0.330        0.043
                                                                               (0.285)       (0.277)          (0.267)         (0.282)       (0.176)

                                   P-value (i)=(ii)                             0.894         0.992            0.961          0.273         0.899
                                   Observations                                  889           878              904            891           906


     Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions with standard errors clustered at the household level in parentheses using data from
     the baseline survey. The dependent variables are the standardized global demand for redistribution, support for an international organization for
     global redistribution, support for immigration from poor countries and support for globalization as well as an equally-weighted index of these four
     variables. Panel a) uses data for the whole sample, panel b) displays results for left-of-center respondents and panel c) displays results for center/right
     respondents. Left-of-center is defined as below median on the self-assessment scale for political orientation from left to right, whereas center/right
     subsumes respondents at or above the median on this scale. Analysis conditional on standard set of control (age, indicator variables for sex, education,
     disabled, unemployed, retired respondents, region (East Germany), and party affiliation of the respondent). P-value reports the result from a Wald
     test for equivalence of the two reported coefficients.
                                       Table 7: Effects of Information Provision on Beliefs One Year Later
                                                                         Beliefs in Follow-Up Survey                 Beliefs in Baseline Survey
                                                                 (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                               National      National    Global    Global      National   National   Global    Global
         National Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)                0.137        0.179                              0.017      -0.001
                                                                 (0.039)      (0.044)                          (0.025)    (0.030)
         National Rank: Peer Treatment*(Feedback - Prior)                    0.144                                        -0.059
                                                                             (0.057)                                      (0.036)
         Global Rank: Treat*(Feedback - Prior)                                          0.114      0.148                              -0.043    -0.036
                                                                                         (0.043)    (0.047)                          (0.027)   (0.029)
         Global Rank: Peer Treatment*(Feedback - Prior)                                             0.099                                       0.023
                                                                                                   (0.063)                                     (0.041)
         Observations                                            1,150        1,150      1,135         1,135    1,224      1,224     1,147        1,147

     Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions estimating the effect of information provision on beliefs about income rank one year later
     (in the follow-up survey). Standard errors clustered at the household level in parentheses. Analysis conditional on number of household members,
38




     and household gross income.
        Table 8: Effects of Information Provision on Belief Certainty One Year Later
                                               Certainty in Follow-Up Survey
                                           (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                         National   National    Global     Global
                       Treatment         0.421       0.441     0.583      0.770
                                          (0.136)    (0.171)    (0.146)    (0.181)
                       Peer Treatment                 0.056                0.513
                                                     (0.222)               (0.233)
                       Observations        1,152      1,152      1,138      1,138

Notes: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. OLS regressions estimating the effect of information provision on
confidence of belief statements about income rank one year later (in the follow-up survey). Standard errors
clustered at the household level in parentheses. Analysis conditional on number of household members, and
household gross income.




                                                    39
