                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EQUILIBRIUM GRADE INFLATION WITH IMPLICATIONS FOR FEMALE INTEREST IN
                           STEM MAJORS

                                          Thomas Ahn
                                        Peter Arcidiacono
                                          Amy Hopson
                                        James R. Thomas

                                       Working Paper 26556
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26556


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
the Federal Trade Commission. The contributions of Amy Hopson to this article were prepared in
her former capacity as a researcher at Duke University. The opinions expressed in the article are
the authors' own and do not reflect the views of the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the Department
of Labor or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Thomas Ahn, Peter Arcidiacono, Amy Hopson, and James R. Thomas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Equilibrium Grade Inflation with Implications for Female Interest in STEM Majors
Thomas Ahn, Peter Arcidiacono, Amy Hopson, and James R. Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 26556
December 2019
JEL No. I23,J16

                                        ABSTRACT

Substantial earnings differences exist across majors with the majors that pay well also having
lower grades and higher workloads. We show that the harsher grading policies in STEM courses
disproportionately affect women. To show this, we estimate a model of student demand courses
and optimal effort choices of students conditional on the chosen courses. Instructor grading
policies are treated as equilibrium objects that in part depend on student demand for courses.
Restrictions on grading policies that equalize average grades across classes helps to close the
STEM gender gap as well as increasing overall enrollment in STEM classes.


Thomas Ahn                                     Amy Hopson
Naval Postgraduate School                      Bureau of Labor Statistics
247 Ingersoll Hall                             akhopson@gmail.com
Monterey, CA 93943
sahn1@nps.edu                                  James R. Thomas
                                               Federal Trade Commission
Peter Arcidiacono                              600 Pennsylvania Ave NW
Department of Economics                        Washington, DC 20580
201A Social Sciences Building                  james.robinson.thomas@gmail.com
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu
 Equilibrium Grade Inflation with Implications for Female Interest
                                              in STEM Majors

                 Thomas Ahn             Peter Arcidiacono           Amy Hopson           James Thomas
             Naval Postgraduate           Duke University             Bureau of           Federal Trade
                     School                NBER & IZA             Labor Statistics         Commission

                                                 December 7, 2019



                                                       Abstract

             Substantial earnings differences exist across majors with the majors that pay well also having
         lower grades and higher workloads. We show that the harsher grading policies in STEM courses
         disproportionately affect women. To show this, we estimate a model of student demand courses
         and optimal effort choices of students conditional on the chosen courses. Instructor grading
         policies are treated as equilibrium objects that in part depend on student demand for courses.
         Restrictions on grading policies that equalize average grades across classes helps to close the
         STEM gender gap as well as increasing overall enrollment in STEM classes.



1       Introduction

Even after accounting for selection, substantial earnings differences exist across majors. Majors in
engineering and the sciences, as well as economics and business, pay substantially more than other
fields.1 Further, earnings disparities across majors have increased substantially over time (Altonji
et al. (2014) and Gemici & Wiswall (2014)). Despite their value in the marketplace, STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) fields are perceived to be under-subscribed. A report
    
       The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
Trade Commission. The contributions of Amy Hopson to this article were prepared in her former capacity as a
researcher at Duke University. The opinions expressed in the article are the authors' own and do not reflect the views
of the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the Department of Labor.
    1
      See Altonji et al. (2012), Altonji, Kahn & Speer (2016),Xue & Larson (2015) and Altonji, Arcidiacono & Maurel
(2016) for reviews.


                                                            1
by the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (2012) highlighted difficulties in
the U.S. retaining "its historical preeminence in science and technology" due to a potential shortage
of approximately 1 million STEM professionals over a decade. More recently, Marcia K. McNutt,
President of the National Academy of Science, in a statement before the Congressional Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology (2019), testified "there are troubling signs that ... U.S.-born
students are not entering STEM fields in sufficient numbers, and foreign STEM students are no
longer coming to the U.S. ... as they did before." In response, there has been a flurry of recent
legislative activity to encourage majoring in STEM and to retain STEM degree holders.2
       But do universities want more STEM majors? Universities appear to at least tacitly discourage
majoring in STEM by being laissez-faire with regard to differences in grading and study time
across fields. The same majors that pay well also give (on average) significantly lower grades
(Sabot & Wakeman-Linn (1991), Johnson (2003)) and are associated with more study time (Brint
et al. (2012), Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2014)).3 Lower grades and higher study times deter
enrollment. Sabot & Wakeman-Linn (1991) show that the absolute level of grades was a far more
important indicator of taking further courses in the subject than their ranking within the class.
When colleges have intervened in grading practices, enrollment in STEM classes has increased.
Butcher et al. (2014) showed that a policy of capping the fraction of A's given at Wellesley College
resulted in shifts towards science classes and science majors.4
       These differences in grading and workloads affect major decisions in predictable ways. Those
who have relatively weak academic preparation (e.g. SAT scores or HS grades) are substantially
more likely to leave STEM fields.5 At Duke University, African-American men were more likely to
   2
       A number of state legislatures have introduced or are planning to introduce (as of 2019) bills to waive or reduce
tuition and/or forgive student loans for STEM students who agree to teach in the state for a number of years (Hinz
(2019), Latek (2019), Chapman (2014)). The GI Bill was recently expanded to support veterans seeking a STEM
degree (Veteran STEM Scholarship Improvement Act) (Gross 2019). Legislation has also been introduced to keep
more international students who graduate in STEM fields in the U.S. by easing restrictions on green cards issuance
(Keep STEM Talent Act of 2019, STEM Jobs Act of 2012 (H.R. 6429) ) (Graeml 2019).
  3
    There is also evidence that students enter unaware of the extent of cross-department differences in grading
standards. Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2014) show that the over-optimism regarding performance at Berea College
is primarily driven by students over-predicting their performance in the sciences. As students take more classes, they
generally revise their expected performance in the sciences downward. This holds true even for students who persist
in the sciences who ought to have received relatively positive grade realizations.
   4
     Another example is Minaya (2018) that shows that a policy change which reduced the differential in average
grades between STEM and non-STEM fields led to an increase in STEM participation.
   5
     See Arcidiacono (2004), Arcidiacono et al. (2012), and Arcidiacono et al. (2016).



                                                            2
express an initial interest in STEM majors and economics, yet left these majors at a rate of over
54% compared to just 8% for white men (Arcidiacono et al. 2012). Yet the same study shows that
racial differences in STEM persistence disappear when one accounts for differences in pre-college
preparation.
       Women are also more likely to switch out of STEM, though for different reasons; the exist-
ing literature generally finds that this differential attrition cannot be explained by differences in
preparation.6 This is perhaps surprising because women study substantially more than men (Stine-
brickner & Stinebrickner 2004, Arcidiacono et al. 2012) suggesting the higher study times required
for STEM classes would not be a deterrent. But if the reason women study more is the higher
perceived benefits of the grades themselves­as opposed to a lower cost of studying­then the low
grades given in STEM may contribute to the lack of persistence in STEM majors.7 In this case,
reducing the grading differences across STEM and non-STEM classes would work to mitigate the
gender gap in STEM.
       In this paper we examine how students make course enrollment decisions and in particular the
sensitivity of these enrollment decisions to grading policies. We treat the difference in grading and
study time across classes as equilibrium objects. Professors choose these grading policies recognizing
how their policies affect the number and type of students who enroll in their courses.
       To estimate both the demand and supply side of the model, we use registrar and course evalua-
tion data from the University of Kentucky. The registrar data contains a number of characteristics
of the students as well as the course enrollments and grades. The course evaluation data provides
information on how many hours a week students are studying in each course.
       The raw data show that STEM classes are almost twice as large as their non-STEM counterparts.
They also are associated with grades are over 0.3 points lower and average study time that is
almost 40% higher. Women have higher grades in both STEM and non-STEM classes but are also
significantly under-represented in STEM classes.
       Our demand-side model helps explain this lack of representation. The demand-side of the
model has students choosing courses and exerting effort based on their preferences for classes and
   6
       See Arcidiacono et al. (2012), Astorne-Figari & Speer (2019, 2018), Kugler et al. (2017), Ost (2010), and Price
(2010). Griffith (2010) is a notable exception which finds that differences in preparation can explain a large portion
of the gender difference in STEM attrition.
    7
      Using elicited expectations data, Zafar (2013) shows that women have a higher preferences for good grades.
Saltiel (2019) shows that, for the same math ability, self-efficacy in math is lower for women. This is perhaps in part
due to higher responsiveness to grading differentials across fields.



                                                           3
departments, costs of studying, and expected grade grades. Expected grades in turn depend on the
optimal choice of study time. Identification of preferences for grades­and how those preferences
differ between men and women­comes from how students sort into classes. The more students sort
into classes based on their comparative advantage in grades, the higher the estimated preference
for grades.
       The results show that comparative advantage in both observed and unobserved ability, differ-
ences in preferences for departments, and differences in female representation among STEM faculty
all contribute to the gender gap in STEM.8 But so too do the differences in grading policies across
STEM and non-STEM professors. In fact, our estimates suggest that the harsher grading policies
in STEM contribute more to the STEM gap than any of the other previously listed explanations
with the exception of differences in preferences for departments. This is driven by our finding that,
while both men and women value grades, women value grades significantly more than men.
       Requiring all classes to have, for example, the same mean grade may professors to respond along
other dimensions such as the amount of work they assign. To understand professor responses­and
indeed why the grading differences are there in the first place­we estimate the supply side of the
market. We posit a professor utility function that penalizes deviations from his or her (individual-
specific) ideal enrollment, average grades, and workload.9
       Estimates of professor preferences show that STEM instructors on average have lower ideal
grades and higher workloads. However, differences in demand for STEM classes also contribute
to the lower grades in STEM. Because higher enrollments are costly to the professor, classes that
have high demand­which are disproportionately in STEM­give relatively lower grades to deter
enrollment. Indeed, removing differences in professor preferences would still result in grades being
0.07 points lower in STEM as a result of the higher demand for STEM classes.
       By estimating the supply side, we can examine the general equilibrium effects of policy changes.
Requiring the same mean grade across classes provokes a small instructor response but the overall
effect of the policy is a substantial increase in the number of STEM classes taken by females, an
increase that is significantly larger than the corresponding increase for males. From a financial
standpoint as well as its ability to be locally implemented at the school or department evel, this
   8
       Throughout this study, "ability" is shorthand for a pre-college human capital accumulation. See further discussion
in section 5.3.
   9
     Ferreyra et al. (2018) also endogenizes study effort (though not at the level of the course) in an equilibrium
model.




                                                             4
would be a cheap way of reducing the STEM gender gap.10
         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and shows some basic
patterns regarding differences in grading between STEM and non-STEM courses. In section 3,
we develop a model of student demand for courses and the optimal study time associated with
those courses. Section 4 describes our estimation strategy. Section 5 shows the estimates of the
model and partial equilibrium counterfactuals. Section 6 explains the set up and estimation of the
supply-side, as well as showing the general equilibrium counterfactuals. Section 7 concludes.


2         Data

Estimating an equilibrium model of student choices of courses and study time as well as professor
preferences over grade policies requires rich data. We use administrative data coupled with course
evaluations from the University of Kentucky (UK). UK, the state's flagship public post-secondary
institution, has a current undergraduate enrollment of approximately 21,000. The school was ranked
119 out of approximately 200 `National Universities' by U.S. News & World Report (U.S. News
& World Report 2013). This places UK in the middle of the distribution of large post-secondary
institutions, and the student body serves as a good cross-section of college students nationwide.
         The data set contains student demographic and course enrollment information. Each semester,
the student body's course selections and grades are recorded by the Registrar's Office. This data
set is particularly valuable because every student outcome in every class is captured, allowing us
to estimate a rich model of student and professor interactions. We also collect information on
course pre-requisites to accurately capture a student's choice set. We focus on student enrollment
observations from one semester, Fall 2012.
         In addition, we have access to class evaluation surveys completed by students at the end of the
semester. Students do not identify themselves in the evaluation forms, and while we cannot link
them to the transcript data at the individual level, we are able to match at more aggregated levels.
However, coverage is not complete as some departments opt out of administering end-of-course
evaluations. In addition, linking the class evaluation data to the enrollment data is complex, as
rules for identifying the course (or sections within the course) and instructor (or sub-instructor -
frequently a graduate student - teaching under the supervision of a head-instructor) are defined
    10
         Such a policy may also have multiplier effects from women making up a greater share of STEM enrollments. This
would be the case if the departmental preferences we estimate were influenced by the number of women choosing
courses in those departments.


                                                            5
independently by the department. Most critically for our research, students are asked about the
number of hours per week they spend on studying for this particular course. This information
makes the identification of structural parameters on study effort possible, allowing us to analyze
how differences in average study time relates to course and student characteristics across courses.11
       Our Fall 2012 selected sample yields approximately 58,000 student/class observations. There are
about 16,000 unique undergraduates, implying that on average, each student enrolls and completes
four courses.12 Table 1 provides demographic summary statistics, separated by gender. Overall,
women and men look similar when entering college. Women have higher high school grades and
slightly lower standardized ACT scores.13 Women also have higher grades while in college. Sharp
differences show up in major selection. While women comprise a slight majority at UK overall,
the ratio between men and women in STEM majors is approximately 1.6. In contrast to students
from more selective institutions (seen in many other studies of higher education outcomes), over 30
percent of students at UK are part-time students, taking less than 12 credits during the semester.
       Table 2 summarizes class-level characteristics separated by STEM-status of the course. For this
paper, we include Economics, Finance, Accounting, and Data Sciences courses to the commonly
used definition of STEM courses (Biology, Chemistry, Engineering, Mathematics, and Physics).14
STEM classes are substantially larger and give significantly lower grades compared to non-STEM
courses. As implied by Table 1, female students are the minority in STEM classes. This is despite
the fact that they perform better, on average, than their male counterparts in these courses.
       For these summary statistics and the reduced-form analyses that follow, we aggregate the eval-
uation data up to the class level and match to the transcript data. We are able to match 76 percent
of classes successfully. We then restrict the data to classes with at least a 50 percent response
rate and drop classes with small numbers of respondents to prevent possible identification. On
  11
       The survey asks 20 questions on the value of the course and instructor to the student on a five-point Likert scale.
Each student reveals what year of school he or she is in, how valuable he or she finds the course and instructor,
expected final grade, and whether the course was a major requirement.
  12
     We also observe withdrawal data. Withdrawal rate of undergraduates is approximately 5.4%. Of these, approxi-
mately 45% withdraw from the course prior to the midterm examination. We speculate that many of these students
were `shopping around' for courses at the start of the semester and realized that they needed to drop a course they
had not been attending part-way through the semester.
  13
     SAT scores are converted to equivalent ACT scores.
  14
     See Table A.12 for categorization of departments into STEM / non-STEM. All empirical results presented in the
paper have been replicated using only the restrictive definition of STEM, and salient conclusions remain qualitatively
identical.




                                                             6
average, students spend about an additional hour per week (or 40 percent more time) studying
in a representative STEM course, compared to time spent on studying for an average non-STEM
course. The study time difference actually understates the true gap across STEM and non-STEM
courses. Students with higher academic ability will select more often into STEM courses, so each
hour spent studying should yield more learning. Yet, STEM classes average much lower grades.
A student attempting to generate an equivalent grade across a STEM and non-STEM course will
have to invest significantly more than an extra 40 percent in study time in the STEM course.
       Table 3 presents simple OLS results showing the relationship between individual and class char-
acteristics with grades and study hours after controlling for a large number of academic background
measures.15 The grades regression sample is at the student/class level, and the study hours per
week regression sample is at the class level. The first column gives the results for grades. The
patterns are consistent with those in Table 2: STEM classes give lower grades and females have
higher grades. Classes that have a higher fraction of female students also give higher grades. This
is consistent with there not being a grade curve that is common across STEM or non-STEM de-
partments. If such a curve existed, the higher grades females receive would translate into lower
grades for everyone else. Class size has a negative effect on grades. The coefficient on class size
confounds two effects that work in opposite directions. On the one hand, students prefer higher
grades so higher enrollments should be associated with higher grades. On the other, courses that
have high intrinsic demand may have lower grades since these courses do not need to have high
grades to attract students.
       The second column on Table 3 shows regressions of study hours on the average characteristics
of the class. STEM classes are associated with about an extra half hour of study, slightly less
than what is seen in the descriptive statistics. This suggests that STEM classes are attracting
students who are willing to study more, with the grading policies in the STEM classes further
spurring on these students to commit more time to study. Classes that have more women also
study more, consistent with the previous literature (DiPrete & Buchmann 2013). But perhaps
the most interesting coefficient is that on average grades. Courses that give higher grades have
  15
       We restrict our sample to standard classes with at least 16 students. The total number of classes in the data
set is 2,026. From this we exclude nearly half of the classes from the analysis. Many of the excluded classes can be
categorized into: non-academic classes (e.g. "academic orientation" or " undergraduate advising"), advanced and
remedial independent student courses (including tutoring), classes in fine arts requiring individualized instruction
(e.g. "voice", "jazz ensemble", or "art studio"), and graduate-level classes taken by very advanced undergraduate
students.



                                                          7
                                Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Gender

                                                              Men       Women
                                High school GPA               3.49        3.62
                                                             (0.472)    (0.401)
                                ACT Reading Score             26.1        26.0
                                                             (5.13)      (4.84)
                                ACT Math Score                25.7        23.9
                                                             (4.65)      (4.23)
                                Fall 2012 GPA                 2.86        3.12
                                                             (0.938)    (0.848)
                                Fall 2012 Credits             11.5        11.7
                                                             (3.97)      (3.85)
                                STEM Major                   38.3%       24.6%
                                STEM & Econ Major            59.2%       37.6%
                                Black                        6.86%       7.93%
                                Hispanic                     2.48%       2.80%
                                Misc. Min.                   2.10%       2.86%
                                1st Gen                      13.5%       15.0%
                                Pell Grant                   28.8%       30.2%

Note: Fall 2012 University of Kentucky undergraduate students, 7,904 men, 8,286 women. "Econ Major" includes
Economics, Finance, Accounting, and Data Sciences. 1st Gen is first-generation college students. Standard
deviations in parentheses.



less study time, suggesting grades should be interpreted as relative, not absolute, measures of
accomplishment, as well as suggesting grade inflation may have negative consequences for learning.


3     Model

The descriptive evidence motivates our model of course choices. The key components of the model
are that grading policies influence enrollment decisions directly because students value grades but
also indirectly through incentivizing (costly) study effort. Individual i chooses n courses from the
set [1, . . . , J ]. Let dij = 1 if j is one of the n courses chosen by student i and zero otherwise.


                                                        8
                               Table 2: Descriptive Statistics by Course Type

                                                                 STEM       Non-STEM
                              Class Size                             80.2     41.4
                                                                 (99.3)      (46.0)
                              Average Grade                          2.94     3.27
                                                                 (0.45)      (0.42)
                              Average Grade | Female                 3.00     3.37
                                                                 (0.56)      (0.43)
                              Study Hours                            3.37     2.45
                                                                 (1.42)      (0.81)
                              Percent Female                     37.0%       58.3%
                              Percent Fem.Prof.                  27.0%       46.4%

Note: Fall 2012 University of Kentucky courses with enrollments of 16 or more students, 341 STEM courses, 743
non-STEM courses. For study hours, 327 STEM courses and 652 non-STEM courses. Standard deviations in
parentheses.



Following Nevo et al. (2005), we assume the payoff associated with a bundle of courses is given
by the sum of the payoffs for each of the individual courses where the payoffs do not depend on
the other courses in the bundle.16 We specify the payoff for a particular course j as depending on
student i's preference for the course, ij , the amount of study effort the individual chooses to exert
in the course, sij , and the expected grade conditional on study effort, E [gij | sij ]:


                                        Uij = i E [gij | sij ] - i sij + ij                                 (1)

i then gives how much the individual values grades while i gives the individual's cost of studying.
Students then solve the following maximization problem when choosing their optimal course bundle:
                                                     J
                                       max                 dij Uij                                          (2)
                                     di1 ,...,diJ
                                                    j =1
                                                     J
                                  subject to:              dij = n, dij  {0, 1}j
                                                    j =1

  16
       For a model that includes complementarities in bundled choice, see Gentzkow (2007). The Gentzkow (2007)
framework is not feasible in our setting because of the large number of potential course bundles.



                                                            9
Table 3: Regressions of Grades and Study Time on Characteristics of the Individual and/or Class

                                                                   Study hours
                                  Dependent Var.        Grade        per week
                                  STEM Class            -0.422         0.444
                                                        (0.010)       (0.094)
                                  Female                 0.213
                                                        (0.009)
                                  Percent Female         0.387         0.371
                                                        (0.024)       (0.172)
                                  Average Grade                        -0.688
                                                                      (0.077)
                                  ln(Class Size)        -0.057         -0.184
                                                        (0.004)       (0.051)
                                  Observations          58,081          968

Note: Additional controls for grades regression include, minority, freshman, first-generation, STEM major, Pell
grant, in-state, ACT score, HS GPA, % minority, % freshman, % first-generation. "Average Grade" is calculated
using the final grades for the course. Additional controls in study hours regression include % minority, % freshmen,
% first-generation, % STEM major, % Pell grant, % in-state, avg. ACT score, avg. HS GPA.




                                                        10
       The grade student i receives in course j , gij , depends on the academic preparation of student
i for course j , Aij , the amount of study effort put forth by the student in the course, sij , the
grading policies of the professor, and a shock that is unknown to the individual at the time of
course enrollment, ij . We specify the grading process as:

                                         gij = j + j (Aij + ln(sij )) + ij                                        (3)

Grading policies by the professors are then choices over an intercept, j , and a return to academic
preparation and effort, j .17 Gains from study effort enters in as a log to capture the diminishing
returns to studying. Along with the linear study effort cost defined in the utility function, this
ensures an interior solution for the optimal amount of study time.
       Making grades desirable but effort costly allows us to consider two separate explanations for
observed gender differences in study hours and conditional grade outcomes: First, women may
be studying more and earning conditionally higher grades because they value grades more than
men. Alternatively, women may be studying and achieving more because they find studying less
costly than men. Section 4 discusses how data on study hours from course evaluations allow us to
empirically distinguish these mechanisms.
       Students are assumed to know the professors' grading policies.18 Substituting in for expected
grades in (1) yields:
                                  Uij = i (j + j [Aij + ln(sij )]) - i sij + ij                                   (4)

The optimal study effort in course j can be found by differentiating Uij with respect to sij :

                                                            i j
                                                   0 =          - i
                                                            sij
                                                            i j
                                                 sij   =                                                          (5)
                                                            i

Substituting the optimal choice of study time into (4) yields:

                          Uij = i (j + j [Aij + ln(i ) + ln(j ) - ln(i ) - 1]) + ij                               (6)
  17
       For example, if there is a field-wide (or department-level) mandated/recommended grade distribution, we will be
able to capture such a policy, as j and j will have lower variance with-in vs. across department or field.
  18
     Students have a number of formal and informal resources to learn about grading policies. Informally, they may
rely on friends who have previously taken the course and other information social networks. Professors may send out
preemptive signals by posting syllabi online. More formally, course evaluations, which also reveal the (anonymous)
responders' own expected final course grades, are on-line and publicly available. In addition, several websites curate
online "reviews" of professors and courses.


                                                           11
Those who have lower study costs, low i , and higher levels of academic preparation, high Aij , find
courses with higher j 's relatively more attractive all else equal. Those who place a relatively high
weight on expected grades, high i , study more conditional on choosing the same course, but are
more attracted to courses with higher grade intercepts, high j .
         Substituting the expression for optimal study time into the grade process equation yields:

                                 gij = j + j (Aij + ln(i ) + ln(j ) - ln(i )) + ij                                   (7)

Professors who set relatively higher values of j see more study effort because higher j 's induce
more effort and because higher j 's attract students with lower study costs.
         The key equations for estimation are then given by:

    (i) the solution to the students maximization problem where (6) is substituted into (2),

 (ii) the grade production process given in (7), and

 (iii) the optimal study effort given in (5).

The next section describes the parameterizations used to estimate the model as well as the assump-
tions necessary to overcome the fact that our measures of study effort from the course evaluations
are not linked to the individual's characteristics.


4         Estimation

We first describe our estimating strategy under the assumption that there is no student-level unob-
served heterogeneity. Under this assumption, the log likelihood function is additively separable, and
we are able to estimate the parameters in three stages. We then show how to adapt our estimation
method to handle student-level unobserved heterogeneity.
         In the first stage, we estimate a reduced form version of the grade production process (Eq. (7)).
The relationship between student characteristics and grades gives estimates for the reduced form
parameters. The returns to effort are also identified, up to a normalization at the department level,
by how student characteristics translate into grades relative to the normalized course.19
         In the second stage, we relate the optimal study effort given in Eq. (5) to the student evaluation
data. The evaluations are collected for each class, and students report how many hours they spent
    19
         Technically, we mean groupings of departments. See Table A.13 for a list of departments in each of the aggregate
groupings. From hereon, we refer to these groupings as departments.


                                                             12
studying in that class. This helps us recover some of the study effort parameters, as well as unravel
some of the normalizations on the  's required in the first stage. We are able to relate all  's across
departments, but still can only identify the  's relative to one course.
      In the last stage, we estimate the choice problem given by Eqs. (6) and (2). We use the
estimates from the first stage to calculate expected grades for each student and the estimated effort
from the second stage. Combining the estimates from these three stages allows us to identify all
the grading policy parameters, the grade preference parameters, the effort cost parameters, and
the course preference parameters.


4.1      Parameterizations

To estimate the model, we need to place some structure on course preferences, ij , the value of
grades, i , and the cost of effort, i . Further, we must relate academic preparation, Aij , to what
we see in the data. Denote wi = 1 if individual i is female and zero otherwise. Denote Xi as a row
vector of explanatory variables such as ACT scores, high school grades, race, etc.20 Denote Zi as
a row vector of explanatory variables that affect preferences for particular departments or levels of
courses within departments. Hence Zi includes gender as well as year in school, allowing women to
have preferences for classes in particular departments and the attraction of upper-division versus
lower-division classes to vary by department and year in school. Preference shocks for courses are
represented by      ij .   Finally, we partition courses into K departments, K < J , where k (j ) gives the
department for the j th course. We then parameterize the model as follows:

                                     Aij   = wi 1k(j ) + Xi 2k(j )                                               (8)

                                      ij   = 0j + wi 1k(j ) + Zi 2k(j ) +      ij                                (9)

                                      i = exp (0 + wi 1 + Xi 2 )                                                (10)

                                        i =  0 + wi  1                                                          (11)

      There is no intercept in Aij as it can not be identified separately from the j 's. Note that the
same variables enter into academic preparation, preferences, and effort costs, only with different
coefficients. Preferences for courses allow for both course fixed effects as well as students with
particular characteristics preferring courses in particular departments, 1k(j ) . Note also that the
effort costs are exponential in the explanatory variables. This ensures that effort costs are positive.
 20
      The majority of students at the University of Kentucky submit ACT scores in their college applications.



                                                         13
Finally, preferences for grades are only allowed to vary by gender. In principle, we could allow
them to vary with Xi as well, but this would substantially complicate the model.
   Having separate estimates by gender across all the relevant parameters will help uncover some
of the driving forces behind the gender gap in STEM. For example, if female intrinsic demand for
courses in STEM departments is relatively low (1k(j ) negative) while preferences for grades and
cost of effort are relatively equal across males and females (1 and 1 close to zero), then changing
grading policies will have no effect on the gender gap in STEM. In this case, it would require figuring
out why females are not interested in STEM fields, and policies would have to be geared more
towards early education about opportunities in STEM for females, or changing cultural attitudes
towards females in STEM. On the other hand, if females have significantly different preferences over
grades and study effort compared to males, then altering grading policies could affect the gender
distributions within classes and departments. For example, if females have higher preferences for
grades (1 positive) and lower cost of effort (1 negative) than males, then increasing j and
correspondingly changing  to keep enrollments in STEM courses the same would result in an
increase in the fraction of females in STEM.


4.2     Estimation without Unobserved Heterogeneity

4.2.1    Grade parameters

Substituting the parameterizations for academic preparation, Ai , the value of grades, i , and study
costs, i , into (7) yields the following reduced form grade equation:

                              gij = 0j + j wi 1k(j ) + Xi 2k(j ) + ij                             (12)

where:

                              0j   = j + j (ln(0 ) + ln(j ) - 0 )                                 (13)

                           1k(j ) = 1k(j ) + ln(0 + 1 ) - ln(0 ) - 1                              (14)

                           2k(j ) = 2k(j ) - 2                                                    (15)

We estimate the reduced form parameters {0j , 1 , 2 } as well as the structural slopes, the j 's,
using nonlinear least squares. A normalization must be made for every department as scaling
up the 's by some factor and scaling down the  's by the same factor would be observationally




                                                  14
equivalent. We set one j equal to one for each department.21 Denote Ck as the normalization for
                                N where  =  /C
department k . We then estimate j                                             N          N
                                        N  j   k(j ) . Similarly, we estimate 1k(j ) and 2k(j )
      N
where 1                           N
        k(j ) = 1k(j ) Ck(j ) and 2k(j ) = 2k(j ) Ck(j ) .
                                                   N ,  N } comes from the relationship between student
       The variation in the data used to identify {1   2
                                                                                              N 's
characteristics and grades in each department. The variation in the data used to identify the j
is how these characteristics translate into grades relative to the normalized courses.


4.2.2       Study parameters

We next turn to recovering some of the study effort parameters as well as undoing the normalization
made on all the  's but one. To do so, we use (5). The issue with using (5) is that we do not
directly observe study effort. However, the course evaluation data give reported study hours for each
individual in the classroom. This information cannot be linked to the individual data on grades,
academic preparation, and course choices. But the evaluation data does provide information about
the year in school of the evaluator (e.g., freshman, sophomore, junior, or senior). In contrast to the
reduced form results shown in Table 3, the evaluation data is collapsed to the average values per
year in school cross course level and linked to the enrollment data.22
       To link study hours to study effort, we assume that the relationship is log-log with measurement
error ij :


                                                ln(hij ) = µ ln(sij ) + ij                                          (16)

       Substituting in for sij yields:


                             ln(hij ) = µ (ln(µ1 ) + ln(i ) + ln(j ) - ln(i )) + ij                                 (17)

                                        = 0 + wi 1 - Xi 2 + µ ln(j ) + ij                                           (18)

where:

                                       0 = µ(ln(0 ) - 0 )                                                           (19)

                                       1 = µ(ln(0 + 1 ) - ln(0 ) - 1 )                                              (20)

                                       2 = µ2                                                                       (21)
  21
       The study effort analysis allows us to recover the normalizations for all the departments but one, as we will show
in section 4.2.2. The final normalization is undone in the estimation of the utility parameters, shown in section 4.2.3.
  22
     As with the summary statistics, we drop small classes and those with low response rates.



                                                            15
The coefficient on ln(j ) then gives the curvature of the relationship between study effort and hours.
   Recall that we had to normalize one j for every department in the grade equation. Substituting
in with our estimate  N and making the appropriate adjustments yields:
                     ^j

                            ln(hij ) =                                    N ) + ij
                                       ~ 0 + wi 1 - Xi 2 + 3k(j ) + µ ln(^                         (22)

where 3k(j ) = µ ln(Ck(j ) /C1 ) and ~ 0 = 0 + µ ln(C1 ). Here C1 is the normalized course for the
base department.
   Since we can only link characteristics of the students to the evaluation data by year in school,
the observations we use in estimating the study parameters are at the class-year level. Let li indicate
the year in school of student i. Our estimating equation for students of level l is then:

                   i (li   = l)dij ln(hij )
                                              =                                     N ) + jl
                                               ~ 0 + wjl 1 - Xjl 2 + 3k(j ) + µ ln(^               (23)
                           i ( l i = l ) d ij

where wjl and Xjl are the averages of these characteristics for those of year level l enrolled in course
j . We correct for potential bias due to measurement error in j using instrumental variables. We
use the share of freshmen, sophomores, and juniors in each class as instruments for log(j ), and
estimate using limited information maximum likelihood (LIML). The instruments are strongly sta-
tistically correlated with the potential endogenous variable. F-statistic calculations on the excluded
instruments pass the rule-of-thumb test (F-stat = 12.05).
   Estimates of (23) allow us to recover the elasticity of hours with respect to study effort, µ
                                                                                               ^, as
well as an estimate of 2 , how observed characteristics affect study costs, as ^2 = ^ 2 /µ
                                                                                         ^. We can
also partially undo the normalization on the  's, solving for  's that are normalized with respect
to one course rather than one course in each department. Namely, let  P = 
                                                                     ^j    N exp(^
                                                                          ^j     2k(j ) /µ
                                                                                         ^).  P
                                                                                             ^j
provides an estimate of j /C1 . The last normalization­the returns on preparation and study time
in the normalized course­will be recovered in the estimation of the utility function parameters. The
remaining structural parameters embedded in (23) can be recovered after estimating the parameters
of the utility function, described in the next section.


4.2.3   Utility parameters

We now turn to estimation of the parameters of the utility function. Given our estimates of the
grade equation, equation (12), we can calculate expected grades in each of the courses given optimal
study choices:
                                 E [gij |s       ^     N    ^N + Xi ^N
                                          ij ] = 0j + ^j wi  1k(j )  2k(j )                        (24)

                                                       16
Given the estimates of the unnormalized returns to study and ability, ^ , we can express the utility
i receives from choosing course j and studying optimally as:

                    Uij = 0j + wi 1k(j ) + Zij 2k(j ) + E [gij |sij ] - j (0 + wi 1 ) +          ij         (25)

We then substitute in for j with C1  P which, after rearranging terms, yields:
                                    ^j

                                                                                P
             Uij = 0j + wi 1k(j ) + Zij 2k(j ) + E [gij |sij ](0 + wi 1 ) - C1 ^j (0 + wi 1 ) +        ij   (26)

The goal is then to recover the course fixed effects, 0j , the value women place on courses in
particular departments, 1k(j ) , other department-specific preferences as well as preferences over
instructor characteristics, 2k(j ) , preferences over grades, , and the returns to ability and study
time in the normalized course, C1 .
      The variation in the data that identifies 0 and 1 comes from how individuals sort based on
their comparative advantage in grades. Someone who is strong in mathematics will be more likely
to sort into classes where the returns to ability in mathematics is high. To the extent that women
are more or less likely to sort based on where their abilities are rewarded then identifies 1 .
      More subtle is the identification on the returns to the normalized course. If separate course
fixed effects were estimated for both men and women then C1 would not be identified as it would
be subsumed into the course fixed effects. But by allowing females preferences to vary at the
department rather than the course level,23 the extent to which sorting happens beyond the effect
through grades themselves identifies C1 .
      We assume that        ij   is distributed Type 1 extreme value. If individuals were choosing one
course, estimation of the parameters in (26) would follow a multinomial logit. Students, however,
choose bundles of courses. Even though the structure of the model is such that there are no
complementarities for choosing particular combinations of courses, the probability of choosing a
particular bundle does not reduce to the probabilities of choosing each of the courses separately.

Simulated maximum likelihood

      We use simulated maximum likelihood coupled with a fixed point algorithm to estimate the
choice parameters. To illustrate the approach, denote Ki as the set of courses chosen by i. Denote
Mi as the highest payoff associated with any of the non-chosen courses:

                   Mi = max 0j + wi 1k(j ) + Zij 2k(j ) + E [gij ] - ^j (0 + wi 1 ) +             ij
                          j/ Ki
 23
      Note that females are also allowed to value having a female professor more or less than males.


                                                          17
Suppose Ki consisted of courses {1, 2, 3} and that the values for all the preference shocks, the                      ij 's,

were known with the exception of those for {1, 2, 3}. The probability of choosing {1, 2, 3} could
then be expressed as:

              P r(di = {1, 2, 3}) = P r(U i1 > Mi , U i2 > Mi , U i3 > Mi )

                                       = P r(U i1 > Mi )P r(U i2 > Mi )P r(U i3 > Mi )

                                       = (1 - G(Mi - U i1 ))(1 - G(Mi - U i2 ))(1 - G(Mi - U i3 ))

where G(·) is the extreme value cdf and U ij is the flow payoff for j net of                 ij .

       Since the    ij 's   for the non-chosen courses are not observed, we integrate them out of the like-
lihood function and approximate the integral by simulating their values from the Type I extreme
value distribution. Denoting Mir as the value of Mi at the rth draw of the non-chosen                       ij 's   and R
as the number of simulation draws, estimates of the reduced form payoffs come from solving:
                                                                   
                                                  R   J
                                                                                 dij
                                 max       ln               1 - G(Mir - U ij )          /R                           (27)
                                  ,
                                       i         r=1 j =1

       Within the simulated maximum likelihood procedure, we solve for the course-specific effects,
the female cross department effects, and preferences for upper division STEM and non-STEM
courses by for upperclassmen using a fixed algorithm in the spirit of Berry et al. (1995). Using
the fixed point algorithm serves two purposes. First, the number of parameters the optimization
routine searches over is substantially smaller, searching over four parameters rather than 1,090
parameters.24 Second, it ensures that the model matches the data on the following dimensions (i)
enrollment in each course, (ii) the share of courses taken by each gender in each department, and
(iii) the share of upper and lower division courses in STEM and non-STEM taken by upper and
lower classmen.
       The fixed point algorithm works as follows. Denote the share of enrollments in course j in
the data as sd                                                                d
             j . Denote the share of enrollments of women in department k as skw and share of

enrollments for upper-class students in upperclass courses of type c, c  {ST EM, non - ST EM }
as sd
    cu . Given an initial guess of the  's, we can calculate the model analogs to each of these shares

and update the model analogs in such a way that we eventually iterate to a fixed point. Letting
  24
       1,071 course fixed effects, 13 female cross department effects, and 2 STEM cross upper and lower classmen effects
are solved for using the fixed point algorithm. The remaining parameters are preferences for grades for men and
women, female cross female professor, and the normalizing constant.




                                                             18
i  (0, 1] be a dampening factor to ensure we have a contraction mapping, the mth update of the
 's follows:25

                              (m)        (m-1)                      (m-1)
                            0j      = 0j         + 0 ln sd
                                                         j - ln sj 
                              (m)        (m-1)                        (m-1)
                            1k      = 1k         + 1 ln sd
                                                         kw - ln skw 
                              (m)        (m-1)                        (m-1)
                            2k      = 2k         + 2 ln sd
                                                         ku - ln sku 




Updating continues until the maximum of the absolute value of the change in the  's is sufficiently
small.
       Our simulated maximum likelihood approach is similar in spirit to that of Nevo et al. (2005). The
estimator in Nevo et al. (2005) randomly samples rankings of chosen options, computes likelihood
contributions conditional on rankings, and averages across sampled rankings to simulate a full
likelihood. Our approach simulates the stochastic utility of the best non-chosen course, computes
likelihood contributions conditional on this stochastic utility, and averages across simulation draws
to simulate a full likelihood.

Recovering the remaining structural parameters

       Given ^0 , ^1 , and C
                           ^1 , we are now in a position to recover the remaining structural pa-

rameters. The normalizing constants for each department where k = 1 can be recovered using
^k = exp(^
C        2k(j ) /µ   ^1 . Estimates of the unnormalized j 's are given by 
                 ^2 )C                                                    ^j =  NC
                                                                               ^j ^k(j ) .

       The remaining structural parameters from the study effort estimation, equation (23), are the
study cost intercept, 0 , and the (relative) female study costs, 1 . These can be recovered using:
                                                                ^0
                                       ^0 = ln(C
                                               ^1 ) + ln(^0 ) - ~
                                                                µ
                                                                ^
                                       ^1 = ln(
                                               ^0 + ^1 ) - ln(^0 ) - ^1
                                                                     µ
                                                                     ^

The remaining structural parameters of the grade equation, equation (12), are the course intercepts,
  25
       If we were only updating one of these sets of  's no dampening would be needed. We have found that setting 0
and 1 to 1 and setting 3 to 0.5 is sufficient for the problem to be a contraction mapping.




                                                         19
j , and the returns to observed abilities 1k(j ) and 2k(j ) . These can be recovered using:

                               ^j     = ^0j -  ^j (ln(^0 ) + ln(^j ) - ^0 )
                                          ^N
                                           1j         ^0 +  ^1 ) + ln(^0 ) + ^1
                           ^ 1k(j )   =        - ln(
                                         ^
                                        Ck(j )
                                          ^N
                                           1j      ^2
                           ^ 2k(j )   =        +
                                         ^
                                        Ck(j )

4.3    Estimation with Unobserved Heterogeneity

We now consider the case when one of the components of Xi is unknown to take into account
correlation across outcomes for the same individual. We assume that this missing component takes
on S values where s is the unconditional probability of the sth value. Let Xis be the set of
covariates under the assumption that individual i is of type s. The components of the unobserved
heterogeneity are identified through the correlation of grades in each of the courses as well as the
probabilities of choosing different course combinations.
    Integrating out over this missing component destroys the additive separability of the log likeli-
hood function suggesting that the estimation of the three sets of parameters (grades, course choices,
and study time) can no longer be estimated in stages. However, using the insights of Arcidiacono
& Jones (2003) and Arcidiacono & Miller (2011), it is possible to estimate some of the parameters
in a first stage.
    In particular, note that the selection problem occurs because students choose courses. By
focusing just on the grade estimation as well as a reduced form of the choice problem, we can
greatly simplify estimation, recovering the grade parameters as well as the conditional probabilities
of being each of the types. These conditional type probabilities can then be used as weights in the
estimation of the choice and study parameters.
    First consider the parameters of the grade process and the course choices. With unobserved
heterogeneity, we now need to make an assumption on the distribution of ij , the residual in the
grade equation. We assume the error is distributed N (0,  ). We then specify a flexible choice
process over courses that depends on an parameter vector . The integrated log likelihood is:
                                               S
                                          ln         s Ligs (,  ) Lics ()                       (28)
                                      i        s=1

where Ligs (,  ) and Lics () are the grade and choice (of courses) likelihoods respectively condi-
tional on i being of type s.

                                                        20
   We apply the EM algorithm to then estimate the grade parameters and course choice parameters
in stages. We iterate on the following steps until convergence, where the mth step follows:

  1. Given the parameters of the grade equation and choice process at step m - 1, {(m-1) ,  (m-1) }
      and {} and the estimate of  (m-1) , calculate the conditional probability of i being of type
      s using Bayes rule:
                                               (m)
                               (m)         s         Ligs (m-1) ,  (m-1) Lics (m-1)
                              qis     =         (m)
                                                                                              (29)
                                           s   s         Ligs (m-1) ,  (m-1) Lics (m-1)

                (m)                 N    (m)
  2. Update s         using         i=1 qis    /N .

                  (m)
  3. Using the qis 's as weights, obtain {(m) ,  (m) } by maximizing:

                                                                      (m)
                                                                     qis ln [Ligs (,  )]      (30)
                                                     i       s


                  (m)
  4. Using the qis 's as weights, obtain (m) by maximizing:

                                                                       (m)
                                                                      qis ln [Lics ()]        (31)
                                                         i       s


   Once the algorithm has converged, we have consistent estimates of {, , } as well as the
conditional probabilities of being in each type. We can use the estimates of qis as weights to
form the average type probabilities of students of year in school l in class j to then estimate the
parameters in (23). Finally, we use the estimates of qis as weights in estimating the structural
choice parameters using (27).


4.4   Implications from the Demand-Side Estimation

Even without estimating professor preferences, much can be learned from the demand-side esti-
mates. First, we can explain some of the persistent gender gap in STEM majors. Demand-side
estimates allow us to decompose differences in course choices, grades, and study effort between
males and females into parts due to:

  (i) differences in preferences (ij ),

 (ii) differences in value of grades (i ),

(iii) differences in study costs (ij ).


                                                                      21
    The estimates of the model can also be used to see how enrollment in STEM courses by both men
and women would be affected by changes in grading practices. First, we can adjust the intercepts
in the grading equation such that the average student's expected grade is the same across courses,
isolating the role of the level of the grade from the differences in the slopes, and therefore return
to effort. Second, we can forecast course choices if all professors were to have the same grading
practices.


5     Results

5.1   Preference estimates

Table 4 presents the preference parameters with the exception of the study costs, the class-specific
intercepts, and the coefficients on year in school cross department cross level of the course. Recall
that the parameter on expected grades is identified from variation in how abilities are rewarded
in different classes. While both men and women value grades, women derive substantively higher
utility from higher grades. One additional grade point yields about 62 percent higher utility for
females, compared to males. The estimate of female preferences for female professors is positive,
with the estimate suggesting that women are indifferent between a class that had a female professor
and one that had a male professor who gives grades that are about 0.41 points higher. This
coefficient is likely biased upward due to the aggregation of departments. To the extent that
female professors are more likely to be in departments that females have a preference for and
there is variation within our aggregated groups, we may be picking up within-group preferences for
departments.
    The second set of rows of Table 4 shows female preferences (relative to male preferences) for
different departments. The omitted category is Agriculture. The largest difference in preferences is
between Engineering and English: 1.47, which translates into over 3.7 grade points. This helps to
account for the severe under subscription to Engineering courses by women, where female share of
enrollment is at 18 percent. No other department has female shares under 37 percent. Engineering
is thus an outlier, with all the other gaps at 0.73 or smaller ( 1.82 grade points).




                                                 22
                                  Table 4: Estimates of Preference Parameters

                                Preference for:                   Coeff.    Std. Error
                                Expected grades ()                 0.246      (0.010)
                                Female × expected grades           0.153      (0.010)
                                Female × female professor          0.162      (0.010)
                                C1 (normalizing constant)          0.156      (0.014)
                                       Female preferences for Departments
                                English                                        0.345
                                Education & Health                             0.332
                                Psychology                                     0.245
                                Biology                                        0.202
                                Mgmt. & Mkting.                                0.151
                                Regional Studies                               0.147
                                Language                                       -0.123
                                Mathematics                                    -0.148
                                Communications                                 -0.159
                                Chem & Physics                                 -0.198
                                Social Sciences                                -0.279
                                Econ., Fin., Acct.                             -0.380
                                Engineering                                    -1.128

Note: Female preferences for Departments are female non-grade preference for departments, compared to males.
STEM departments are bolded.



5.2       Study effort estimates

Estimates of the study effort parameters are presented in Table 5.26 Women have almost 10% higher
studying costs compared to men. Overall, women study 33% more than men, but we estimate that
they would study over 42% more because of preferences for grades.27 The effort elasticity, µ, is
  26
       Because of measurement error in the  's that is compounded by it entering as a log in the study effort equation,
we drop classes in the bottom 5% of the  distribution. Parameters of the study effort equation stabilize after this
point.
  27
     This number comes from the difference in the log of the preferences for grades and the translation between effort
and study hours: µ(ln(0 + 1 ) - ln(0 ) - 1 ) = 0.861 · (ln(0.399) - ln(0.246)).




                                                           23
0.861 implying 1 percent increase in the returns to effort ( ), translates to a 0.86 percent increase
in study hours.
    The second set of columns shows how the returns to study effort vary across classes, taking the
median  class for each course grouping. The heterogeneity is quite large. Doubling study effort
would translate into an almost 0.4 grade point increase in Engineering but would translate into a
bit more than a tenth of a grade point in Management & Marketing and Education & Health.
             Table 5: Estimates of Study Effort and Departmental Returns to Studying

                               Study Effort                                                  Median 
                               Coeff. (- )         Std. Error     Department                    Coeff.
           Female                  -0.097            (0.117)      Engineering                   0.373
           ACT read                0.025             (0.027)      Mathematics                   0.293
           ACT math                0.048             (0.029)      Econ., Fin., Acct.            0.284
           HS GPA                  -0.191            (0.115)      English                       0.277
           Unobs. Type             -0.674            (0.205)      Chem & Physics                0.268
                                                                  Communication                 0.226
                                                                  Languages                     0.222
                             Effort Elasticity                    Regional Studies              0.220
           ln( )                   0.861             (0.299)      Biology                       0.219
                                                                  Psychology                    0.200
                                                                  Agriculture                   0.187
                                                                  Social Sciences               0.179
                                                                  Education & Health            0.150
                                                                  Mgmt. & Mkting                0.133

Note: Additional controls include minority indicator variables (Black, Hispanic, Other Minority) and first
generation college student status. STEM departments are bolded.




5.3    Grade estimates

The estimated 's (the department-specific ability weights) are given in Table 6. These are calcu-
lated by taking the reduced-form 's, undoing the normalization on the  's, and subtracting off the
part of the reduced form that 's that reflects study time (taken from  ). The departments are
sorted such that those with the lowest female estimate are listed first. The female-specific ability

                                                        24
parameter is a measure of pre-college human capital accumulation. Differences between males and
females can arise due to individual preferences and/or conscious/sub-conscious bias from teach-
ers or parents, which then lead to different choices in course-work, extra-curricular activities, and
hobbies that lead to human capital accumulation along different dimensions.28
       Note that four of the five STEM departments have the lowest female estimates. This occurs
because females study substantially more than males yet receive only slightly higher grades in STEM
courses. Given that sorting into universities takes place on both cognitive and non-cognitive skills
and that women have a comparative advantage in non-cognitive skills, males at UK have higher
STEM-specific cognitive skills than their female counterpart even though in the population cognitive
skills are similar between men and women. The returns to the different components of the ACT
score are intuitive. Higher returns to ACT math are seen in STEM classes, with higher returns for
ACT reading in English and Psychology.
       With the estimates of the grading equation, we can calculate expected grades for an average
student in each department. We do this for freshmen, separately by gender, both unconditionally
and conditional on taking courses in the department. Results are presented in Table 7. Four
patterns stand out. First, there is positive selection into STEM courses: generally those who take
STEM classes perform better than the average student. This is the not the case for all departments.
Indeed, the second pattern is that negative selection is more likely to occur in departments with
higher grades. Third, women are disproportionately represented in departments that give higher
grades for the average student. Of the six departments that give the highest grades for the average
student (female or male), all have a larger fraction female than the overall population. In contrast,
of the five departments that give the lowest grades--all of which are in the STEM umbrella--,
females are under-represented relative to the overall population in all but one (Biology). Finally,
and consistent with Table 6, women have a comparative advantage in non-STEM courses. In almost
all cases, the unconditional expected grades for women are higher than for men, in part because
women study more. The two exceptions are i) Chemistry & Physics and ii) Economics, Finance, &
Accounting.
  28
       Of course, all of the data used in the education production function are projections of human capital. The large
estimates on female across almost all departments when we control for ACT scores and HS GPA shows that these
numerical pre-college academic measures fail to capture substantial portions of human capital.




                                                           25
                    Table 6: Estimates of Department-Specific Ability Weights ()

                                        Female     ACT read       ACT math        HS GPA       Type
             Education & Health           0.360          0.001           0.038        1.424     7.694
             Regional Studies             0.334         -0.001           0.087        1.903     7.588
             Psychology                   0.279          0.082           0.083        2.385     7.676
             Communication                0.222          0.008          -0.018        1.545     6.330
             Mathematics                  0.030         -0.024           0.227        1.714     5.772
             Languages                    0.026          0.022           0.044        1.613     6.716
             Social Science              -0.054          0.080           0.035        2.284     8.126
             Mgmt. & Mkting              -0.114          0.036           0.013        2.736    10.316
             English                     -0.150          0.048           0.001        1.353     6.513
             Agriculture                 -0.219          0.040           0.069        2.371     4.359
             Biology                     -0.257          0.043           0.107        2.045     7.580
             Engineering                 -0.264         -0.005           0.059        0.745     4.429
             Econ., Fin., Acct.          -0.475          0.016           0.122        1.432     5.120
             Chem. & Physics             -0.664          0.000           0.180        1.939     6.214

Note: Additional controls include minority indicator variables (Black, Hispanic, Other Minority) and first
generation college student status. STEM departments are bolded.



5.4    Drivers of the STEM gap

Given the estimates of the student's choices over classes and effort and the estimates of the grading
process, we now turn to examining sources of the male-female gap in choice of STEM classes.
Table 8 shows share of STEM classes taken for males and females as well as how that share changes
for women as we change different characteristics. We also report the difference between the male
and female shares as a measure of the gender gap in STEM participation. The baseline shares of
STEM classes for men and women are 50.7% and 34.6%, respectively implying there is a baseline
participation gap of 16 percentage points. The first counterfactual changes female preferences for
grades to be the same as male preferences for grades. This increases the share of STEM courses
for women by 2.0 percentage points, which is a 12% reduction in the gap. Because professors
do not respond to changes in female demand for STEM courses, male STEM enrollment remains




                                                        26
Table 7: Expected Freshmen GPA for Median Classes By Department, Unconditional and Condi-
tional on Taking Courses in that Department

                              EGPA Females        EGPA Females          EGPA Males         EGPA Males          Share
                               Unconditional        Conditional        Unconditional        Conditional       Female
 Education & Health                  3.57                3.62                3.40                3.30           0.70
 Agriculture                         3.46                3.26                3.38                2.97           0.56
 Communication                       3.43                3.37                3.19                3.17           0.56
 Mgmt. & Mkting.                     3.34                3.41                3.20                3.28           0.52
 Languages                           3.28                3.29                3.12                3.12           0.55
 Regional Studies                    3.22                3.30                3.01                3.12           0.66
 Social Sciences                     3.12                3.10                2.97                2.90           0.51
 English                             3.07                3.13                2.91                2.99           0.65
 Psychology                          2.99                2.98                2.76                2.73           0.67
 Engineering                         2.86                3.02                2.79                3.04           0.18
 Econ., Fin., Acct.                  2.79                2.93                2.80                2.90           0.37
 Mathematics                         2.69                2.75                2.58                2.70           0.47
 Biology                             2.66                2.81                2.56                2.76           0.60
 Chem & Physics                      2.43                2.61                2.48                2.73           0.47
 Overall                                                                                                        0.51

Note: "Share Female" is % of enrollment in courses offered in the department that is female. "Unconditional"
represents the avg. grade outcome assuming that the entire student population enrolls in the course. STEM
departments are bolded.



unchanged in this partial equilibrium scenario.29
       Turning off observed ability differences such as differences in ACT scores and high school grades
has smaller effects on the gap (counterfactual (2)), though larger effects are found for unexplained
gender differences in ability (counterfactual (3)). Note that these effects are not driven by women
being weaker academically per se, but in part due to women being relatively stronger in non-STEM
  29
       In deriving the counterfactuals, ten classes (out of 1,084) with the estimated  < 0.01 have their enrollments
fixed. A class with such a flat returns to effort implies that grades are exclusively dependent on ability, which leads
to unstable outcomes where these courses are either empty or extremely over-populated. Administrative constraints
such as enrollment caps and cancellation of classes with no demand would prevent such occurences in the real world.




                                                          27
       Table 8: STEM Enrollment Shares in Counterfactual Scenarios (Partial Equilibrium)

                                               STEM Enrollment Share
                                               Female           Male           Change in STEM gap
           Baseline                             34.6%          50.7%                      16.0
           (1) Equalize Grade Prefs             36.6%                                      -2.0
           (2) Shift obs ability                35.2%                                      -0.5
           (3) Shift unobs ability              35.5%                                      -0.9
           (4) Equalize Non-grade Prefs         39.4%                                      -4.8
           (5) Fem prof effect off              35.0%                                      -0.4
           (6) Grade around 3                   38.5%          52.9%                       -1.7

Note: : "Change in STEM gap" for the Baseline is the difference between the male and female STEM enrollment
shares. Values beneath this number are deviations from the baseline for the corresponding counterfactual
simulation. Female preference and ability parameters are adjusted to be identical to male preferences and abilities.
 : "Grade around 3" adjusts mean grade in all courses to a B, affecting both males and females. Professor
responses remain fixed in partial equilibrium analysis.



courses.
    Counterfactuals (4) and (5) look at differences in tastes. Counterfactual (4) turns off non-grade
taste differences for departments, which increases the share of women to 39.4%, closing the STEM
gap by 4.8 percentage points or 30%. These taste differences may be a mixture of pre-college
experiences and the culture of different departments. Hence anything the university can do to close
the STEM gap on this end is likely bounded above by this number. Counterfactual (5) turns off
female preferences for female professors. One way of closing the gender gap in STEM would be to
hire more female professors. However, our estimates suggest that even equivalent representation of
female faculty in STEM and non-STEM fields would have a very small effect on the gender gap in
STEM participation.
    Finally, in counterfactual (6), we examine how changing expected grades across departments
affects the gender gap. Namely, we equalize mean grades across courses by increasing (or decreasing)
the course-specific intercepts. However, there is still heterogeneity in grades due to the relative
difference in  's and 's, the former being especially important as it dictates the returns to studying.
This counterfactual raises the share of STEM courses taken by females to about 38.5%, higher than
most of the other counterfactuals. The reason the effects are larger than in the first counterfactual



                                                          28
is that the returns to studying are much higher in STEM courses and women are willing to study
more than men, due to valuing grades more. Note that while equalizing grades increases female
participation by 3.9 percentage points, it also increases male participation by 2.3 percentage points.
In aggregate, this decreases the gender gap in STEM participation by 1.7 percentage points or 10%.
    While the patterns here suggest a potentially inexpensive way of closing the gender gap is to
equalize average grades across fields, professors are likely to strategically respond to restrictions
on grading policies. Professors may respond to restrictions on average grades by changing work-
loads ( ). In the following sections, we explicitly model professor responses and incorporate these
responses in our counterfactual predictions.


6    Equilibrium Grading Policies

In Section 5, we showed grading policy parameters j and j differ significantly across departments.
In particular, STEM courses generally have lower grading intercepts j but higher returns on effort
j compared to non-STEM courses. One principle goal of this paper is to analyze how these grading
differences influence course choices and the implications for the gender gap in STEM.
    However, this finding also prompts an additional question: Why do grading policies vary across
courses? In particular, why do STEM courses have lower average grades but higher returns on
effort than non-STEM courses? Understanding how professors choose grading policies is crucial to
anticipate equilibrium responses to changes in the environment. For example, increasing STEM
preparation in the hopes of increasing the number of STEM majors may be partially undone by
how professors change their grading policies in response to the new environment.
    The model we develop allows for grading policies to arise from differences in intrinsic demand of
students. Heterogeneity in non-grade preferences ij and abilities Aij imply that some courses will
be more popular than others even with homogenous grading policies. These differences in intrinsic
demand imply that the relationship between grading policies and the composition and outcomes
of enrolled students differs across courses. A professor teaching an intrinsically popular course will
need to grade especially harshly to achieve the same class size as a less popular course with average
grading standards.
    Because grading policies in all courses affect the choices of students, the composition of students
in each course depends on the grading policies of all professors. This general equilibrium feature
means that each professor's optimal grading policy depends on the grading policies of all other



                                                  29
professors. We assume professors do not collude when choosing grading policies implying policies
are set in a non-cooperative game between professors.
   To estimate professor preference parameters, we solve for parameter values which explain why
observed grading policies were optimal for professors. First, we estimate grading policy parameters
and student preference parameters using the methods described in Section 4. Second, we derive
the set of first order conditions which describe a pure-strategy equilibrium to the non-cooperative
grade policy setting game. This system of first order conditions describes how professor prefer-
ence parameters, grading policy parameters, and student parameters relate to one another when
all professors are setting grading policy parameters optimally. Finally, we solve for professor pref-
erence parameters which satisfy the set of first order conditions given estimates of grading policy
parameters and student preference parameters.


6.1   The Professor's Problem

We assume professors choose grading policy parameters j and j to maximize an objective function
which depends on both the number and outcomes of students who take their class. We set up the
professor's objective function to depend on (i) the number of students in their class, (ii) grades
given in the course, and (iii) the cost of assigning work. In particular, we specify the professor's
objective function to penalize deviations from the professor's ideal log enrollment, ideal grade for
the average student in the class, and ideal workload (as given by  ).
   Denote Gj (,  ) as the expected average grade in class j given the vector of grading policies for
all courses  and  . The dependence on  and  comes through the composition of the students
that take the course. Denoting Pij (,  ) as the probability i takes course j given the vector of
grading policies, Gj (,  ) is given by:
                                          N
                                          i   Pij (,  ) [Aij + ln(i ) - ln(i )]
                Gj (,  ) = j + j                          N
                                                                                   + ln(j )
                                                          i   Pij (,  )
Then the objective function professor j maximizes is:
                                                      2
                                                                               2
          Vj (,  ) = - ln          Pij (,  ) - e0         - 1 Gj (,  ) - e1j       - 2 (j - e2j )2   (32)
                               i

   Specifying the objective function in this way allows for three sources of heterogeneity across
departments to affect grading policies. First is through innate demand for the courses. Courses
differ in their innate demand and systematic differences exist across departments. These innate
differences in demand affect both log enrollment­which affects the first term­but also affects the

                                                     30
probability particular students take particular classes which can then affect the average grade given
in the class. Second is through preferences for ideal grades. This is captured by e1j where ideal
grades may on average be different across courses of particular types. Third is through ideal optimal
amount of work to assign, e2j . The ideal amount of work to assign may differ across departments
in part due to differences in the grading technology: it may be easier to grade, for example, math
problems than essays.


6.2       Estimation

Denote Wj as a vector that includes indicators for whether the course is in each of the fourteen
departments30 , whether the course is an upper division, and whether the course is upper division
and in STEM. We parameterize e1j and e2j such that they vary with Wj as well as unobserved
preference terms e        
                  1j and e2j according to:


                                                e1j   = Wj 1 + e1j

                                                e2j   = Wj 2 + e2j


e        
 1j and e2j are assumed to be orthogonal to the department and the level of the course as well as

innate demand (the j 's). These unobserved preference terms are not, however, orthogonal to the
grading policies. To account for the endogeneity of the grading policies, we use simulated method
of moments to estimate the weights on grades and workload (1 and 2 ) as well as the parameters
governing ideal grades and workloads (1 and 2 ).
       Because of the complexity of jointly solving for the optimal grading policies as functions of the
parameters, we instead set up a grid of possible grading combinations. These combinations include
the full range of j 's as well as j 's that produce expected grades on the support of the data. Fixing
the other professor's grading policies as what we have estimated in the previous step (the estimates
of the j 's and j 's), we calculate expected grades and enrollment for the different combinations of
 and  on the grid.31 Using the log expected enrollments and grades for each combination of 
and  as dependent variables, we then regress them on the a spline in  and  , doing this separately
for each class. These functions predict expected enrollments and grades extremely well and we use
them when we calculate the professor's objective function.
  30
       Recall that classes are only counted as belonging to one department
  31
       We use 50  's and 50  's where the grid points are equally spaced and the support covers the range of expected
grades and  's seen in the data.



                                                          31
      The method of simulated moments then works as follows. Given draws of e        
                                                                             1j and e2j , we

maximize the professor's objective function with respect to  and  where some of the components
of the objective function (expected grades and log expected enrollments) are approximated using
the previously mentioned spline. Given the optimal grading policies for particular draws of the
unobserved preferences, we then create moments that we can match from the data.32 Examples of
moments we match are, for each department, average grades, estimated  's, and enrollment. The
full list of moments are included in the Appendix Table A.14.


6.3      Professor preference estimates

Table 9 shows estimates of the professor parameters. The first row shows ideal log enrollment. The
number is close to zero­which is outside of the support­implying that enrollment is always costly.
Given that enrollment is costly, instructors deviate from their optimal grades and workloads by
giving lower grades and higher workloads than they would like.
      The first column of Table 9 shows how ideal grades vary by department. The sorting of de-
partments by ideal grades shows that STEM instructors generally prefer having lower average
grades than their non-STEM counterparts. Note that for the baseline category­agriculture­the
ideal grade is between an A and a B (3.5). The actual average grade is closer to a B (3.2). This
suggests instructors prefer to give high grades but do not do so in part because it would encourage
student demand. The penultimate entry of the first column shows the standard deviation of the
unobserved preference over ideal grades. Most departments are within one standard deviation of
the unobserved preference with Education & Health an outlier on the high side and Engineering a
near-outlier on the low side.
      The second column shows the results for the ideal workload. Departments with low ideal
grades tend to have high ideal workloads. For example, Engineering, Economics, and Mathematics
have the lowest ideal grades, yet are in the group of the four departments with the highest ideal
workloads. The correlation between the two sets of departmental coefficients is -0.76. The estimated
parameters imply that upper-level classes in some non-STEM departments (such as Education &
Health and Management & Marketing), the ideal grade is an A and the ideal  is near zero.
      To summarize, non-STEM professors generally prefer higher grades and require lighter work-
loads compared to their STEM colleagues.33 And both STEM and non-STEM professors prefer to
 32
      We use 64 moments to estimate 37 parameters.
 33
      Note that our model ignores spillovers across classes. Higher grades in introductory classes results in higher



                                                         32
give out higher grades with lower workloads in upper-division classes. But student demand also
affects grading policies as instructors would prefer smaller class sizes. Biology and Chemistry &
Physics departments offer an example of this dynamic. Professors in these departments prefer giv-
ing students relatively high grades and low workloads. Indeed, their grading and effort preferences
track closer to professors in non-STEM departments. Yet, as we can observe in Table 7, these two
departments have the lowest average grades for freshmen, at around 2.7. The connection between
these seeming contradictory results lies in the high level of demand for courses in these two depart-
ments. Average enrollment size in classes in these two departments are over 100, more than double
the size of the average class in other departments.


6.4    Supply-side counterfactuals

To better understand the role of professor preferences in grading policies and STEM enrollment by
gender, Table 10 revisits the counterfactual analyses of Table 8 in a general equilibrium framework
in which instructors are allowed to re-optimize their grading policies in response to changes in
student characteristics or other factors. To do this, we first take the first order conditions of
professor j 's maximization problem with respect to j and j . Following this, we rearrange these
first order conditions so that optimal grading policies of instructor j , j and j , are defined as a
function of student characteristics, professor and student preference parameters, and equilibrium
grading policies of all instructors including instructor j . We then iteratively generate vectors of
grading policies until we obtain policies which satisfy the rearranged first order conditions. When
this condition holds, every instructor's grading policies are a best response to all other instructor
grading policies.
    Table 10 conducts the same counterfactuals as those in Table 8 with instructors now allowed
to update their grading practices in response to changes in student preferences and characteristics.
With one exception­equalizing grade preferences­, adding in responses by professors slightly lowers
the counterfactual decreases in the STEM gender gap. For example, in partial equilibrium, shifting
unobserved ability for females to that of males reduces the difference between the share of STEM
courses taken by females and the share of STEM courses taken by males by 0.9 percentage points.34
But Table 10, counterfactual (3) shows that taking into account professor responses means that the
demand for more advanced classes. Hence departmental pressures may explain part of the preferences we observe.
  34
     From Table 8, the gender gap falls from 16 percentage points to 15.1 percentage points, for a difference of 0.9
percentage points.




                                                        33
                                Table 9: Estimates of Professor Preferences

             Ideal log enrollment (000's)        0.109
                           Ideal Grades                                          Ideal 
             Constant                            3.536         Constant                        0.112
             Econ., Fin., Acct.                  -0.431        Engineering                     0.181
             Engineering                         -0.271        Communication                   0.109
             Mathematics                         -0.076        Econ., Fin., Acct.              0.103
             English                             -0.061        Regional Studies                0.099
             Chem & Physics                      -0.002        English                         0.092
             Biology                             0.014         Mathematics                     0.050
             Social Sciences                     0.038         Language                        0.016
             Language                            0.061         Chem & Physics                  0.001
             Psychology                          0.101         Biology                         0.000
             Regional Studies                    0.203         Education & Health              -0.009
             Mgmt. & Mkting.                     0.219         Psychology                      -0.015
             Communication                       0.244         Mgmt. & Mkting.                 -0.034
             Education & Health                  0.430         Social Sciences                 -0.036
             Upper division                      0.262         Upper division                  -0.088
             STEM upper division                 -0.001        STEM upper division             0.055
             standard dev of ideal G pref        0.449         standard dev of ideal  pref     0.118
             weight on ideal G                   1.866         weight on ideal                16.748

Note: "Upper division" are courses with numerical designations 300 and above, typically reserved for classes with
pre-requisites where the majority of students enrolled have opted into the major. STEM departments are bolded.



gender gap only falls by 0.7 percentage points. The lower general equilibrium difference is driven
by the gap in grades given between STEM and non-STEM professor growing. Namely, shifting
female unobserved ability to that of males results in STEM (non-STEM) professors responding by
giving grades that are 0.04 points lower (0.2 points higher) than in partial equilibrium. Average
grades in STEM classes then move from being 0.38 points lower than average grades in non-STEM
classes to 0.43 point lower. Since females respond more to grade differences than males, professor
responses work to reduce the change in the STEM gender gap.
    Equalizing grade preferences (counterfactual 1) shows a different pattern. In partial equilibrium,


                                                          34
      Table 10: STEM Enrollment Shares in Counterfactual Scenarios (General Equilibrium)

                                       STEM Enrollment Share
                                                                                                     Fem PE Effect
                                       Female            Male           Change in STEM gap              / GE Effect
 Baseline                               34.6%           50.7%                       16.0
 (1) Equalize Grade Prefs               36.8%           50.6%                       -2.2                    0.90
 (2) Shift obs ability                  34.9%           50.5%                       -0.4                    1.86
 (3) Shift unobs ability                35.1%           50.4%                       -0.7                    1.88
 (4) Equalize Non-grade Prefs           39.1%           50.4%                       -4.6                    1.08
 (5) Fem prof effect off                35.0%           50.7%                       -0.3                    1.10
 (6) Grade around 3                     38.4%           52.9%                       -1.6                    1.02

Note: : "Change in STEM gap" for the Baseline is the difference between the male and female STEM enrollment
shares. Values beneath this number are deviations from the baseline for the corresponding counterfactual
simulation. Female preference and ability parameters are adjusted to be identical to male preferences and abilities.
 : "Grade around 3" adjusts mean grade in all courses to a B, affecting both males and females.
 : Female PE effect / GE effect reports the PE counterfactual change in the share of courses that women take in
STEM divided by the corresponding GE counterfactual change. Professors change grading strategies based on
student responses to changes in preferences and abilities for general equilibrium analysis.



the STEM gap shrinks by 2.0 percentage points when we shift female preferences for grades to be the
same as male preferences for grades. In general equilibrium, the STEM gap shrinks by even more
at 2.3 percentage points. The reason for this is that grades are no longer as effective at deterring
enrollment. Since instructors are grading more harshly than they would prefer, all departments
raise the grades they offer. But this increase is larger for departments that are furthest away from
their ideal grades; that is, those departments who are grading harshly because their class sizes are
especially large. Biology and Chemistry & Physics see especially large increases in grades and are
the two STEM fields where women have preferences most similar to men.
    But considering the STEM gap alone masks the extent of the equilibrium responses as these
responses often move men and women in the same direction. Table 10 compares how large the
partial equilibrium effects are relative to the general equilibrium effects by dividing the partial
equilibrium change in the share of classes taken by women that are in STEM by the corresponding
general equilibrium change. Doing so shows the extent to which the partial equilibrium change



                                                         35
understates or overstates the general equilibrium change.
    As with the changes in the STEM gap, the partial equilibrium changes are larger than the general
equilibrium changes in the all the counterfactuals except the one that equalizes grading preferences.
Changing female abilities (either observed or unobserved) results in the partial equilibrium change
being over 86% higher than the general equilibrium change. The differences between the partial
equilibrium and general equilibrium are smaller for changes in preferences for department or shifting
the fraction of female professors to be the same across departments (8% to 10% higher in partial
equilibrium), and smaller still for curving around a 3.0 (2% higher in partial equilibrium). This
latter result is especially important, implying that, even taking into account professor responses,
curving around a 3.0 would increase the fraction of courses women take in STEM by 3.8 percentage
points, an 11% increase.
    Finally, in our framework, grading policies vary for three reasons: first, because of differences
in intrinsic student demand; second, because of differences in professor preferences for ideal grades;
and third, because of differences in ideal workloads. If the same instructor is assigned to teach both
a course with low intrinsic demand and a course with high intrinsic demand, she will grade more
harshly in the course with high demand to reduce enrollment.
Table 11: STEM Enrollment Shares and Grades After Eliminating Differences in Professor Prefer-
ences

                                                         STEM Share                     Avg Grade
                                                 Female        Male    Overall     STEM       Non-STEM
          Baseline                                34.6%        50.7%    42.4%       2.79          3.22
          Equalize professor preferences          38.0%        53.4%    45.5%       2.95          3.02

Note: Equalizing professor preferences entails setting ideal average grades and ideal  's for all courses to the mean
across courses.



    In Table 11 we investigate how grading practices and enrollments would change if we removed
preferences instructor differences in preferences for grades and workloads. We do this by setting all
instructor ideal grades and  's to the mean. The differences between average grades given in STEM
and non-STEM classes is markedly reduced, though not eliminated, when differences in instructor
preferences are turned off. At baseline, STEM classes gave grades that were 0.43 points lower than
their non-STEM counterparts. Removing differences in instructor preferences shrinks the difference



                                                          36
to 0.07 points. This remaining difference is the result of higher demand for STEM courses.35
         Removing differences in instructor preferences increases enrollment in STEM courses by 3.1 per-
centage points. These effects are larger for women: the share of courses women take in STEM rises
by 3.4 percentage points versus 2.7 percentage points for men. Comparing the effects of equalizing
professor preferences to the effects of grading around a 3.0 in Table 10 shows less (more) STEM par-
ticipation by women (men). Grading around a 3.0 eliminates the grading differences across STEM
and non-STEM courses but leaves substantial differences in workloads. Eliminating differences in
professor preferences reduces, but does eliminate, grading differences across departments as well as
reducing differences in workloads. Since women value grades more than men, the elimination of
the grading differences benefits them more than their male counterparts.


7         Conclusion

The number of STEM graduates--especially for under-represented groups--has been an ongoing
concern. At the same time, STEM courses are on average associated with lower grades and higher
study times, both factors that may deter enrollment. Using administrative data form the University
of Kentucky, we estimate a model of course choices to understand what influences STEM enrollment
and how those influences differentially affect men and women. While we show that a variety of
factors influence how students choose courses, we find that differences in grading policies play an
important role in suppressing STEM demand and this is particularly true for female students.
         Specifically, we show that STEM courses assign significantly lower grades than non-STEM
courses and that a policy of curving all courses around a B would increase overall STEM participa-
tion by 7.2% and female STEM participation by 11.3%. This effect on female participation is only
slightly less than the effect of giving female students the same course content preferences as male
students (13.9%). Removing gender differences in content preferences would require large changes
in social attitudes and behaviors and might take decades. Comparatively, eliminating grading
differences across fields should be relatively straightforward and affordable.
         One issue with policies aimed at reducing grading differences is that instructors may respond
to these policies by changing other aspects of their courses. To capture these responses--and to
understand the source of grading differences more generally--our analysis treats grading policies
    35
         Note that this is the difference due to demand for these particular courses. A potential reason why STEM classes
as a whole have lower ideal grades may be overall demand for these majors resulting in pressure to restrict enrollment
in STEM classes above and beyond that due the demand for a specific STEM course.


                                                             37
as equilibrium objects chosen by instructors in competition with one another. Higher demand for
STEM courses explain part, but not all, of the differences in grading between STEM and non-
STEM courses. Accounting for the endogenous response by professors to having to curve around a
B, however, has a limited impact on the overall effects of the policy: large gains in STEM enrollment
would still occur and the gains would be especially large for women.
   While it is beyond the scope of this analysis, we speculate that long run effects of grading
regulations could also exceed our estimates due to positive feedback loops generated by other
mechanisms. For example, additional female STEM students attracted by more balanced grading
may induce culture changes that make STEM courses more hospitable to women. These culture
changes may in turn attract additional women creating a positive feedback loop that supplements
the initial effects of grading regulations. We leave analyses of these potential positive feedbacks to
future work.




                                                 38
References

Altonji, J. G., Arcidiacono, P. & Maurel, A. (2016), `The analysis of field choice in college and
  graduate school: Determinants and wage effects', Handbook of Labor Economics 5.

Altonji, J. G., Blom, E. & Meghir, C. (2012), `Heterogeneity in human capital investments: High
  school curriculum, college major, and careers', Annual Review of Economics 4(1), 185­223.

Altonji, J. G., Kahn, L. B. & Speer, J. D. (2014), `Trends in earnings differentials across college
  majors and the changing task composition of jobs', The American Economic Review 104(5), 387­
  393.

Altonji, J. G., Kahn, L. B. & Speer, J. D. (2016), `Cashier or consultant? entry labor market
  conditions, field of study, and career success', Journal of Labor Economics S1(34), 361­401.

Arcidiacono, P. (2004), `Ability sorting and the returns to college major', Journal of Econometrics
  121(1), 343­375.

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E. M. & Hotz, V. J. (2016), `University differences in the graduation of
  minorities in STEM fields: Evidence from California', American Economic Review 106(3), 525­
  562.

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E. M. & Spenner, K. (2012), `What happens after enrollment? an analysis
  of the time path of racial differences in GPA and major choice', IZA Journal of Labor Economics
  1(1), 1­24.

Arcidiacono, P. & Jones, J. B. (2003), `Finite mixture distributions, sequential likelihood and the
  EM algorithm', Econometrica 71(3), 933­946.

Arcidiacono, P. & Miller, R. A. (2011), `Conditional choice probability estimation of dynamic
  discrete choice models with unobserved heterogeneity', Econometrica 7(6), 1823­1868.

Astorne-Figari, C. & Speer, J. D. (2018), `Drop out, switch majors, or persist? The contrasting
  gender gaps', Economics Letters pp. 82­85.

Astorne-Figari, C. & Speer, J. D. (2019), `Are changes of major, major changes? The roles of
  grades, gender, and preferences in college major switching', Economics of Education Review
  70, 75­93.


                                                39
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J. & Pakes, A. (1995), `Automobile prices in market equilibrium', Economet-
  rica 63(4), 841­890.

Brint, S., Cantwell, A. M. & Saxena, P. (2012), `Disciplinary categories, majors, and undergraduate
  academic experiences: Rethinking Bok's "underachieving colleges" thesis', Research in Higher
  Education 53(1), 1­25.

Butcher, K. F., McEwan, P. J. & Weerapana, A. (2014), `The effects of an anti-grade-inflation
  policy at Wellesley College', The Journal of Economic Perspectives pp. 189­204.

Chapman, B. (2014), `Top-performing high school seniors can get free ride to state colleges for
  science studies', New York Daily News May.

DiPrete, T. A. & Buchmann, C. (2013), Rise of Women, The: The Growing Gender Gap in
  Education and What it Means for American Schools, Russell Sage Foundation.

Ferreyra, M., Garriga, C. & Diaz, A. S. (2018), `A general equilibrium analysis of college enrollment,
  completion, and labor market outcomes', Working paper.

Gemici, A. & Wiswall, M. (2014), `Evolution of gender differences in post-secondary human capital
  investments: College majors', International Economic Review 55(1), 23­56.

Gentzkow, M. (2007), `Valuing new goods in a model with complementarity: Online newspapers',
  American Economic Review 97(3), 713­744.

Graeml, Y. (2019), `Senators introduce bill seeking to help international stem students work in us',
  The Daily Californian .
  URL: www.dailycal.org/2019/06/12/senators-introduce-bill-seeking-to-help-international-stem-
  students-to-work-in-us/

Griffith, A. L. (2010), `Persistence of women and minorities in STEM field majors: Is it the school
  that matters?', Economics of Education Review 29(6), 911­922.

Gross, N. (2019), `Your GI bill benefits: Everything you need to know', Military Times .
  URL: www.militarytimes.com/education-transition/2019/07/20/gi-bill-benefits-guide/

Hinz, G. (2019), `STEM students would get free tuition under Il. bill', Crain's Chicago Business .
  URL:      www.chicagobusiness.com/greg-hinz-politics/stem-students-would-get-free-tuition-under-
  illinois-bill

                                                 40
Johnson, V. E. (2003), Grade inflation: A crisis in college education, Springer.

Kugler, A. D., Tinsley, C. H. & Ukhaneva, O. (2017), `Choice of majors: Are women really different
  from men?', Working paper.

Latek, T. (2019), `Lawmakers drawing up proposals for 2020 general assembly', Kentucky Today .
  URL: kentuckytoday.com/stories/lawmakers-drawing-up-proposals-for-2020-general-assembly

Minaya, V. (2018), `Do differential grading standards across fields matter for major choice? Evi-
  dence from a policy change in florida', Working paper.

Nat (2019), Maintaining U.S. Leadership in Science and Technology.

Nevo, A., Rubinfeld, D. L. & McCabe, M. (2005), `Academic journal pricing and the demand of
  libraries', American Economic Review 95(2), 447­452.

Ost, B. (2010), `The role of peers and grades in determining major persistence in the sciences',
  Economics of Education Review 29(6), 923­934.

Price, J. (2010), `The effect of instructor race and gender on student persistence in STEM fields',
  Economics of Education Review 29(6), 901­910.

Report to the President: Engage to Excel: Producing One Million Additional College Graduates
  with Degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (2012).

Sabot, R. & Wakeman-Linn, J. (1991), `Grade inflation and course choice', The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives pp. 159­170.

Saltiel, F. (2019), `What's math got to do with it? multidimensional ability and the gender gap in
  STEM', Working paper.

Stinebrickner, R. & Stinebrickner, T. (2014), `A major in science? Initial beliefs and final outcomes
  for college major and dropout', The Review of Economic Studies 81(1), 426­472.

Stinebrickner, R. & Stinebrickner, T. R. (2004), `Time-use and college outcomes', Journal of Econo-
  metrics 121(1), 243­269.

Xue, Y. & Larson, R. C. (2015), `Stem crisis or stem surplus: Yes and yes', ILR Review 1(138).

Zafar, B. (2013), `College major choice and the gender gap', Journal of Human Resources
  48(3), 545­595.

                                                 41
Appendix




           42
                                             Table A.12: STEM Classification by Department

                                              Non-STEM                                                                STEM
                 Aerospace Studies                      Education        Merch, Apparel & Textile                                Accountancy
                    Agr Economics           Ed Curriculum & Instr             Mil Sci & Leadership                                    Biology
         Agricultural Biotechnology   Ed Pol Studies & Evaluation        Modern & Classical Lang                        Business & Economics
            Agricultural Education    Ed, Schl & Counseling Psych                          Nursing           Chemical & Materials Engineering
               Agriculture General                         English                      Philosophy                                 Chemistry
          Allied Health Ed & Rsrch          Environmental Studies                  Plant Pathology                           Civil Engineering
           Animal & Food Sciences                  Family Sciences            Plant & Soil Sciences                         Computer Science
                     Anthropology                Fine Arts - Music                 Political Science   Dept of Finance & Quantitative Methods
               Appalachian Studies        Fine Arts - Theatre Arts                      Psychology             Earth & Environmental Sciences




43
               Arts Administration                        Forestry                   Public Health                                 Economics
     Biosystems & Agr Engineering      Gender & Women's Studies                  STEM Education             Electrical & Computer Engineering
                   Communication                       Geography      Schl of Jrnalism & Telecomm                                 Engineering
          Communication Disorders       Health Sciences Education    Schl of Art and Visual Studies                               Entomology
     Communication & Info Studies                 Hispanic Studies          Schl of Human Env Sci                                Mathematics
     Community & Leadership Dev                            History          Schl of Interior Design                    Mechanical Engineering
              Dept of Management      Kinesiology - Hlth Promotion                     Social Work                        Mining Engineering
              Dept Of Gerontology          Landscape Architecture                         Sociology                      Physics & Astronomy
      Dept of Mkt & Supply Chain           Latin American Studies          Sustainable Agriculture                      School of Architecture
              Dietetics & Nutrition         Library & Info Science                                                                   Statistics
     Early Childhd, Spec Ed, Rehab                     Linguistics
                         Table A.13: Aggregation of Departments

         Categories   Departments

       Agriculture    Agricultural Biotechnology, Agricultural Economics, Agricultural Ed,
                      Agriculture General, Animal & Food Sciences, Biosystems & Agr En-
                      gineering, Environmental Studies, Forestry, Landscape Architecture,
                      Plant Pathology, Plant & Soil Sciences, Sustainable Agriculture
 Regional Studies     Appalachian Studies, Family Sciences, Gender & Women's Studies, His-
                      panic Studies, Latin American Studies
  Communication       Arts Admin, Communication, Communication & Info Studies, Fine Arts
                      - Music, Fine Arts - Theatre Arts, Schl Of Journalism & Telecomm, Schl
                      of Art & Visual Studies, Schl of Interior Design
     Ed & Health      Allied Health Ed & Research, Comm Disorders, Community & Leader
                      Dev, Dept of Gerontology, Dietetics & Nutrition, Early Child, Spec Ed,
                      Rehab, Ed, Ed Curriculum & Instr, Ed Policy Studies & Eval, Ed, Schl
                      & Counsel Psych, Health Sci Ed, Kinesiology- Health Promotion, Lib &
                      Info Sci, Nursing, Public Health, STEM Ed, Social Work
      Engineering     Chemical & Materials Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Sci-
                      ence, Electrical & Computer Engineering, Engineering, Mechanical En-
                      gineering, Mining Engineering, Schl of Architecture
        Languages     Linguistics, Modern & Classical Languages, Philosophy
           English    English
           Biology    Biology, Entomology
     Mathematics      Mathematics, Statistics
  Chem & Physics      Chemistry, Earth & Environmental Sciences, Physics & Astronomy
       Psychology     Psychology
   Social Sciences    Anthropology, Geography, History, Political Science, Schl of Human En-
                      vironmental Sciences, Sociology
Mgmt. & Mkting.       Aerospace Studies, Department of Mgmt, Dept of Mkt & Supply Chain,
                      Merchand,Apparel & Textiles, Mil Sci & Leadership
Econ., Fin., Acct.    Accountancy, Economics, Dept of Finance & Quantitative Methods



                                            44
                      Table A.14: Simulated and Actual Moments

                          Av. log Enrollment             Av. G                 Av. 
                          Actual   Simulated    Actual     Simulated   Actual   Simulated
Agriculture                3.25        3.33      3.26        3.42      0.135      0.175
Regional Studies           3.32        3.37      3.25        3.25      0.292      0.206
Communication              3.46        3.50      3.31        3.32      0.287      0.233
Education & Health         3.48        3.50      3.54        3.57      0.157      0.165
Engineering                3.56        3.58      3.01        3.08      0.331      0.356
Languages                  3.40        3.41      3.12        3.20      0.194      0.228
English                    3.31        3.35      2.97        3.02      0.278      0.283
Biology                    4.58        4.58      2.93        2.84      0.239      0.215
Mathematics                4.04        4.05      2.81        2.80      0.239      0.215
Chem & Physics             4.36        4.34      2.88        2.79      0.232      0.253
Psychology                 4.10        4.09      3.11        3.08      0.172      0.189
Social Sciences            3.68        3.67      3.07        3.04      0.161      0.180
Mgmt. & Mkting.            3.62        3.63      3.41        3.39      0.135      0.135
Econ., Fin., Acct.         3.90        3.95      2.69        2.84      0.276      0.276
non-STEM upper division    3.41        3.37      3.45        3.34
STEM upper division        3.59        3.58      3.07        3.00
Std dev lower non-stem     0.862       0.856    0.474        0.471     0.136      0.101
Std dev lower stem         0.587       0.590    0.478        0.400     0.132      0.126
Std dev upper non-stem     0.668       0.681    0.447        0.370     0.138      0.095
Std dev upper stem         0.552       0.530    0.458        0.441     0.115      0.092


non-STEM covariance GPA with log enrollment     -0.030      -0.039
STEM covariance GPA with log enrollment         -0.098      -0.099
non-STEM covariance  with log enrollment        0.004        0.002
STEM covariance  with log enrollment            0.002        0.006
non-STEM covariance GPA with                    -0.016      -0.016
STEM covariance GPA with                        -0.016      -0.016




                                           45
