                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO APPEALS TO DONOR BENEFITS RAISE MORE MONEY THAN APPEALS
TO RECIPIENT BENEFITS? EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT WITH
                            PICK.CLICK.GIVE.

                                        John A. List
                                      James J. Murphy
                                      Michael K. Price
                                     Alexander G. James

                                     Working Paper 26559
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26559


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




Special thanks are due Heather Beatty at Pick.Click.Give., Ian Dutton and Diane Kaplan at the
Rasmuson Foundation for their enthusiasm and support for this project, and to the Alaska
Permanent Fund Division for providing the data. Financial support for this project was provided
by the Rasmuson Foundation and the John Templeton Foundation through the Science of
Philanthropy Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John A. List, James J. Murphy, Michael K. Price, and Alexander G. James. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Appeals to Donor Benefits Raise More Money than Appeals to Recipient Benefits? Evidence
from a Natural Field Experiment with Pick.Click.Give.
John A. List, James J. Murphy, Michael K. Price, and Alexander G. James
NBER Working Paper No. 26559
December 2019
JEL No. C93,D03,D64,H41,L3

                                         ABSTRACT

We partnered with Alaska's Pick.Click.Give. Charitable Contributions Program to implement a
statewide natural field experiment with 540,000 Alaskans designed to explore whether targeted
appeals emphasizing donor benefits through warm glow impact donations. Results highlight the
relative import of appeals to self. Individuals who received such an appeal were 4.5 percent more
likely to give and gave 20 percent more than counterparts in the control group. Yet, a message
that instead appealed to recipient benefits had no effect on average donations relative to the
control group. We also find evidence of long-run effects of warm glow appeals in the subsequent
year.

John A. List                                    Michael K. Price
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics, Finance,
University of Chicago                            and Legal Studies
1126 East 59th                                  The University of Alabama
Chicago, IL 60637                               250 Alston Hall
and NBER                                        Box 870224
jlist@uchicago.edu                              Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
                                                and NBER
James J. Murphy                                 mkprice2@cba.ua.edu
Department of Economics
University of Alaska Anchorage                  Alexander G. James
3211 Providence Drive                           Department of Economics
Anchorage, AK 99058                             University of Alasaka Anchorage
murphy@uaa.alaska.edu                           3211 Providence Drive
                                                Anchorage, AK 99058
                                                ajames27@alaska.edu
I. Introduction

Charitable organizations play an important role in modern economies, providing invaluable public
goods and employment opportunities for millions nationwide. As far back as the mid-1800s, the
sector has recognized the importance that private individuals play in financing their operations. In
the United States today there are more than 1.5 million registered nonprofit organizations that
receive cash contributions exceeding two percent of GDP annually. In fact, growth of the sector
has outperformed the S&P 500 over the past several decades (List, 2011). Notwithstanding, experts
predict that the sector will grow in importance as aging populations and devolutionary trends in
government cause increased reliance on the goods and services of nonprofits.
         Not surprisingly, these challenges have prompted a tremendous amount of research on the
primitives of the economics of charity and the relationship between charities and potential donors.
Much of this work has focused on the impact of different fund-raising techniques and the
associated impact on both the number of donors and overall contribution levels.1 Our study builds
on this body of work and takes as inspiration the lot of studies that show the importance of warm
glow (see, e.g., Andreoni, 1995; Crumpler and Grossman, 2008; Null, 2011; Tonin and
Vlassopoulos, 2010; Imas, 2014; Tonin and Vlassopoulos, 2014; Singh et al., 2019).2
         In this spirit, we designed a natural field experiment embedded within the state of Alaska's
Permanent        Fund      Dividend       Charitable       Contributions        Program       or     Pick.Click.Give.
(www.pickclickgive.org).3 As part of the 2014 fundraising campaign, we randomly allocated the
approximate 290,000 households in the state into either a control group or one of two treatment
groups that received a postcard promoting Pick.Click.Give. Both postcards included a normative
appeal but differed in whether the message highlighted either benefits to self ("Warm Your Heart")
or benefits to others ("Make Alaska Better for Everyone"). The slogans were designed to reflect

1
  Such studies cover topics including: (i) matching gifts and rebates (Chen et al., 2006; Eckel and Grossman, 2006;
Karlan and List, 2007; Meier, 2007; Huck and Rasul, 2011; Scharf and Smith, 2014), (ii) charitable auctions and
lotteries (Morgan, 2000; Goeree et al., 2005; Landry et al., 2006; Carpenter et al., 2008; Elfenbein and McManus,
2010), (iii) social comparisons (Frey and Meier, 2004; Shang and Croson, 2009), (iv) thank you gifts (Falk, 2007;
Alpizar et al., 2008; Eckel et al., 2014), (v) peer solicitations (Meer, 2011; Castillo et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2013),
and (vi) seed money announcements (Andreoni, 1998; List and Lucking-Reiley, 2002; Vesterlund, 2003; Potters et
al., 2007; Bracha et al., 2011).
2
  A related body of work in marketing explores the effectiveness of solicitation appeals highlighting benefits to self
(see, e.g., Brunel and Nelson, 2000; Peloza and White, 2009; Feiler et al., 2012; Baek et al., 2019).
3
  Pick.Click.Give. was established in 2009 as a way for Alaskans to share some of their annual Permanent Fund
Dividend (PFD) with eligible nonprofits throughout the state. Donors simultaneously choose the amount to give and
to which charities.


                                                            1
the two main motives for charitable giving ­ concerns for the benefits to self (impure altruism or
"warm glow") and concerns for the benefits to others (pure altruism) - and provide a means to
disentangle their relative importance.4
         Postcards were mailed during the last week of December 2013 and we received information
on donations for each of the more than 540,000 individuals who registered for their 2014
Permanent Fund Dividend online. We observe donations in excess of $3.1 million coming from
more than 26,000 unique individuals. To explore whether our messages influenced long-run
patterns of giving, we augment our data to include information on contributions through
Pick.Click.Give. in 2015.
         Results from our experiment highlight the relative importance of benefits to self on
donation decisions. Individuals who received the "Warm Your Heart" message were
approximately 4.5 percent more likely to give and their contributions were 20 percent larger than
in the control group. Messages that highlighted the benefit to others increased the propensity to
give, but had no effect on average donation size. Interestingly, similar data patterns are observed
for both warm-list households (those who contributed through Pick.Click.Give. in 2013) and cold-
list counterparts (who did not give in 2013). Treatment effects on both the propensity to give and
on average donation size were, however, more pronounced amongst cold-list which suggests that
normative appeals are an effective way to attract new donors.
         Exploring other heterogeneities, we find that women and those age 50 and over were more
likely to give and provided larger average gifts than others. However, conditional on giving, men
provided larger gifts. Such differences share similarities to data from List (2004). Moreover, these
data patterns suggest that the distribution of altruism for women was less disperse than the
distribution for men; a pattern identified by structural estimates in Della Vigna et al. (2013).
Finally, as in Landry et al. (2010), we find that prior donors were more likely to give and provided
larger average gifts than cold-list counterparts.
         Given past work showing the relative impermanence of behavioral interventions (e.g.,
Gneezy and List, 2006; Landry et al., 2010; Ferraro and Price, 2013; Allcott and Rogers, 2014)
and the importance charitable organizations place on building a long-term relationship with



4
 Although the warm-glow model (Andreoni, 1989; 1990) is the canonical example, other models that focus on the
relative importance of benefits to self include work on social pressures (e.g., Della Vigna et al., 2012; Knutsson et al.,
2013; Andreoni et al., 2017) and social identity (Benjamin et al., 2010; Kessler and Milkman, 2014).

                                                            2
donors, it is important to explore whether the effects of our targeted messages are sustained across
campaigns and impacted long-run patterns of giving. To shed insights into the long-run impacts,
we examine whether treatment assignment in 2014 impacted contributions through
Pick.Click.Give. during the 2015 campaign. Results for this analysis suggest that our intervention
impacted long-run patterns of giving--those who received the "Warm Your Heart" message were
more likely to give and provided larger contributions in the subsequent 2015 campaign than others.
Yet, for warm-list donors, the effectiveness of our "nudge" waned over time and the impact on
giving in the 2015 campaign was significantly less pronounced than what was observed during the
2014 campaign. For cold-list donors, treatment effects were more persistent and suggest that
receiving the benefits to self message had long-lasting effects.
       Our paper contributes to several different literatures. First, our paper contributes to a
growing body of work incorporating insights from behavioral economics such as the power of
defaults (Goswami and Urminsky, 2016; Altmann et al., 2019) or time inconsistency (Breman,
2011; Andreoni and Serra-Garcia, 2016) into solicitation appeals. However, our paper extends the
previous work along two dimensions. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore the
impact of targeted messages and normative appeals on charitable giving in a natural field
experiment. In this regard, our paper shares similarity with a body of work exploring the impact
of social information on contributions to a charity or online message board (e.g., Frey and Meier,
2004; Croson and Shang, 2009; Shang and Croson, 2009; Chen et al., 2010; Smith et al., 2013;
Chen et al., 2017; Gallus, 2017). Moreover, prior work has focused on behavior in the context of
a fund-raising drive to explore how various strategies affect giving to the associated charitable
cause. Our study, in contrast, explores behavior in the context of a government-sponsored program
designed to encourage giving to a range of eligible charitable organizations and how our messages
impacted aggregate patterns of giving through this program.
       Second, our paper contributes to a body of research in marketing and social psychology
exploring the impact of self- and other-benefit appeals on charitable donations (e.g., Fisher et al.,
2008; White and Peloza, 2009; Feiler et al., 2012; Baek et al., 2019). However, much of this
literature relies upon laboratory experiments and hypothetical decisions such as statements about
one's intention to/likelihood of donating to a given cause. Moreover, the aim of this literature is
to explore whether factors such as self-image concerns, public observability, or social exclusion



                                                 3
moderate the effectiveness of such appeals. Our paper extends this literature by exploring the
impact of such appeals on both contemporaneous and long-run patterns of giving.
        Third, our findings contribute to the literature on social norms and the use of normative
appeals as a means to promote behavioral change. To date, this literature has largely focused on
using such appeals to influence outcomes such as retirement savings and the use of credit (Beshears
et al., 2015; Seira et al., 2017), tax compliance (Fellner et al., 2013; Hallsworth et al., 2017), traffic
violations (Chen et al., 2017), or the amount of water or energy used by residential households
(Allcott, 2011; Costa and Kahn, 2013; Ferraro and Price, 2013; Allcott and Rogers, 2014; Brent et
al., 2015; Ito et al., 2018). In our study, however, we concentrate on participation in a government-
sponsored program and subsequent patterns of charitable giving through this program. In this
regard, our study is closest in spirit to an emerging literature that explores the use of social norms
to induce participation in in-home energy audits as a means to promote the adoption of improved
technologies (Hahn et al., 2016; Holladay et al., 2019; Allcott and Greenstone, 2017).
        Fourth, our paper contributes to a literature exploring the economic impacts of permanent
cash transfers such as Alaska's Permanent Fund Dividend payments. To date, this literature has
focused on how receipt of the PFD payments impact outcomes such as intertemporal patterns of
consumption (Hsieh, 2003; Kueng, 2015), short-term mortality (Evans and Moore, 2011),
aggregate employment (Jones and Marinescu, 2018), or crime (Watson, Guettabi, and Reimer,
2019). We extend this literature by exploring how the PFD payments influence charitable giving
and the private provision of public goods.
        Finally, our paper contributes to a literature that sets forth to identify the underlying
motives for charitable giving. Broadly speaking, such studies focus on two main drivers of
behavior ­ concerns for the benefits to self or concerns for the benefits to others ­ and attempt to
disentangle the motives by testing the extent to which donations by others are a substitute for one's
own gifts. For example, there is a rich body of work that relies upon variation in the gifts of
others/government funding to test for crowding (e.g., Kingma, 1989; Andreoni, 1993; Payne,
1998; Andreoni and Payne, 2003, 2011; Eckel et al., 2005; Crumpler and Grossman, 2008;
Andreoni et al., 2104; Ottoni-Wilhelm et al., 2017). Although such an approach tests the defining
characteristic of the pure altruism model (complete crowding), identification requires strong
assumptions regarding fund-raising effort and what is known by potential donors regarding the
gifts of others. Our study provides an alternate approach to disentangle the relative importance of

                                                    4
benefits to self and benefits to others ­ the use of targeted messages that make salient a given
motive.


II. Alaska's Permanent Fund and Pick.Click.Give.
         Every fall, Alaskans receive an annual payment known as the Permanent Fund Dividend
(PFD), which represents their share of the earnings the state receives from investing revenues from
oil production. The source of these payments, the Alaska Permanent Fund, is a sovereign wealth
fund created by an amendment to the state constitution in 1976 as a way to share returns from the
extraction of the state's oil resources with future generations. In 2014, the fund had around $50
billion in assets that were invested in a diverse portfolio managed by an independent state agency
charged with maximizing long-term income.5
         Any individual (including children) who was a resident of Alaska for the entire calendar
year prior, and who declares an intent to remain in the state indefinitely, is eligible to receive a
dividend. The registration period begins every January 1st and continues through the final day of
March with distribution of the PFD occurring in early October. Potential recipients must register
for the Permanent Fund on an annual basis to confirm their eligibility.
         The total amount distributed each year is based on a five-year average of earnings for the
Permanent Fund. The total amount is then divided equally amongst all eligible recipients.6 The
first PFD for $1000 was issued in 1982. Since then, the annual distributions have varied annually
with the per person payments ranging from a low of $331.29 in 1984 to a high of $2,072 in 2015;
see Figure 1.
         Although the PFD arrives as a lump-sum payment, Hsieh (2003) found no evidence that
consumption patterns are sensitive to PFD disbursements suggesting that the payments are
integrated into disposable income. In part, this reflects that Alaskans have a rough idea of what the
upcoming dividend payments will be when the application period opens each January. Local media




5
 See http://www.apfc.org for more information on the Permanent Fund.
6
 The use of a five year average to determine disbursements is designed to (i) reduce fluctuations in the annual dividend
payments due to volatility in the stock market and (ii) reduce incentives to manage funds for short-term gains
(Goldsmith, 2010).


                                                           5
typically provide estimates of the coming year's PFD amount, providing individuals information
that can be used to integrate the dividend into the household budget.7
         A more recent body of work calls into question the assumption that PFD disbursements are
integrated into disposable income. For example, Kueng (2018) provides evidence that variations
in PFD disbursements have a significant impact on the purchase of nondurable goods. Similarly,
Jones and Marinescu (2018) provide evidence that while PFD disbursements have no impact on
aggregate employment, there are sizeable effects of the disbursements on employment and part-
time work in the non-tradeable sector; a pattern of results they note is consistent with PFD
disbursements leading to consumption increases that stimulate labor demand. Given this evidence,
it is interesting to examine whether, and to what extent, one can stimulate individuals to share PFD
disbursements with nonprofits in the state.


The Permanent Fund Charitable Contributions Program: Pick.Click.Give.
         Historically, nonprofits around the state of Alaska were able to finance their operations
largely through corporate largesse and government earmarks. Faced with the national economic
downturn and declining state oil revenues, Alaskan nonprofits have had to develop a new model
of funding that includes increased focus on private provision.8 To facilitate this change, the state
of Alaska introduced the Permanent Fund Charitable Contributions Program (better known as
Pick.Click.Give.) in 2009 as a way to promote individual giving to nonprofits throughout the state.
The program was established as a three-year pilot project after which it was incorporated into the
Permanent Fund Dividend program. Pick.Click.Give. was managed by the Rasmuson Foundation
until 2015 when management of the program was turned over to the Alaska Community
Foundation. At that time, the state legislature instituted a coordination fee whereby 7 percent of
all donations would be used to cover the costs of administering the program.
         Pick.Click.Give. allows individuals to voluntarily donate any portion of their Permanent
Fund Dividend to eligible nonprofits of their choice. The eligibility requirements for nonprofit

7
  For example, in September 2013, the Anchorage Daily News projected an approximately $1800 dividend for 2014
(the year of our study) which was not much different than the $1884 dividend actually paid in October 2014.
http://www.adn.com/article/20130927/bigger-dividend-checks-likely-permanent-fund-swells-43-billion-2013
8
  According to data from the Urban Institute, Alaska has one of the lowest rates of giving of any state in the nation.
For example, the average contribution in 2013 for a household that itemized their tax return was $869 or approximately
1.4% of their overall income ­ a figure that ranked 47th nationwide.
https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/77671/2000608-Profiles-of-Individual-Charitable-
Contributions-by-State-2013.pdf

                                                          6
organizations include that (i) the organization was qualified as an exempt 501(c)(3) organization
for at least two years prior to the application, (ii) the organization is directed by a voluntary board
of directors or an advisory board for which a majority of the members are residents of the state,
and (iii) the organization receives at least $100K or five percent of its total annual receipts from
charitable contributions. Eligible organizations provide a diverse array of services that span seven
main sectors; (i) youth services and education, (ii) emergency response for victims of crime, (iii)
humanitarian services, (iv) animal shelters and zoos, (v) arts and culture, (vi) health services, and
(vii) community based services and organizations. In 2014, a total of 512 nonprofit organizations
from more than 50 communities around Alaska registered and received contributions through
Pick.Click.Give.9
         To be eligible to give through Pick.Click.Give, individuals must register for the Permanent
Fund Dividend online.10 Once the online PFD application is complete, individuals are provided a
link that guides them to a website where they can pledge donations through Pick.Click.Give.
Contributions made through Pick.Click.Give. are deducted from the individual's PFD return and
sent directly to the nonprofit by the Permanent Fund Division.
         The minimum allowable donation is $25, and increases in $25 increments up to the full
amount of the dividend payment. Since the exact amount of the PFD is not known at the time of
registration, donors who select multiple organizations to support must prioritize them. If total
pledges exceed the PFD, donations are processed in order of priority until the PFD is exhausted.
Although the PFD registration closes at the end of March, individuals can update their pledges
through Pick.Click.Give. through the end of August, at which time the pledge becomes a binding
commitment. Contributions made through the program are tax deductible and donors have the
option, when making their pledge, to check a box authorizing the state to send their name and
contact information to the organizations they have chosen to support.
         Table 1 provides information on both the rate of participation and aggregate donations for
the first five years of the program (2009 through 2013). As noted in the table, both participation
rates and aggregate donations have grown steadily over time. For example, whereas aggregate
contributions in 2009 totaled $400,000, this figure increased more than five-fold by 2013, when


9
  This represents an approximate 8.5 percent increase in the number of eligible recipients relative to the 2013 campaign
and an approximate 39 percent increase in the number of eligible recipients since the program's inception in 2009.
10
   In 2014, the year of our study, approximately 83 percent of all individuals who registered for the PFD did so online
and were thus eligible to give through Pick.Click.Give.

                                                           7
aggregate contributions totaled more than $2.3 million. During the first five years of the program
(2009-2013), Alaskan's contributed nearly $6.8 million to nonprofits throughout the state, which
accounts for nearly one percent of overall contributions to nonprofit organizations throughout the
state over this time period.11


III. Experimental Design and Results
        As aforementioned, there is a vibrant literature that explores the demand side of charitable
fundraising (see, e.g., Andreoni, 1995; List and Lucking-Reiley, 2002; Null, 2011; Ottoni-
Whilhelm, 2017; Singh et., 2019). Our goal is to extend this work to the Pick.Click.Give.
environment by leveraging the spirit of warm glow to examine whether targeted messages and
normative appeals affect donor behavior in a manner that is consonant with warm glow. To do so,
we designed a natural field experiment as part of the 2014 Pick.Click.Give. marketing campaign.
We randomly assigned every household in Alaska into either a control group (no postcard) or one
of two treatment groups that received a postcard that included a normative slogan designed to
highlight one of two main motivations for charitable giving ­ concerns for the benefits to self
(impure altruism or "warm-glow") or concerns for the benefits to others (pure altruism).12 As state
law prohibited the Permanent Fund Division from providing address-level data, randomization
occurred at the zip code level.
        In each treatment, households in pre-determined zip codes throughout the state of Alaska
were sent a postcard during the final week of December 2013. Importantly, every household within
a treatment zip code was mailed the assigned a postcard (see Figures 2 and 3). All postcards
contained information about Pick.Click.Give. and urged the recipient to share their Permanent
Fund Dividend. In addition, the front of each postcard contained a picture of either a heart or an
outline of the state of Alaska within which was written a corresponding message ­ "Warm your
heart. Share your PFD" or "Make Alaska better for everyone. Share your PFD". These same
appeals were printed on the back of the postcard along with a montage showing pictures of various
Alaska residents.

11
   Data on charitable giving in Alaska comes from a report by the Urban Institute profiling charitable giving across
different states, see, https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/77671/2000608-Profiles-of-Individual-
Charitable-Contributions-by-State-2013.pdf
12
   In this regard, our design and messages share similarity with work in marketing and social psychology exploring
the relative impact of self-benefit and other-benefit messages on altruism and pro-social behavior (e.g., White and
Peloza, 2009; Feiler et al., 2012; Baek et al., 2019).

                                                         8
        Table 2 summarizes our experimental design and corresponding sample size for each
treatment. As noted Panel B, our control group included data for 169,441 individuals living in one
of 89 distinct zip codes around the state. The benefits to others ("Make Alaska better for
everyone") treatment included data for 187,468 individuals residing in one of 90 distinct zip codes
around the state. The benefits to self ("Warm your heart") treatment included data for 183,215
individuals residing in one of 89 distinct zip codes around the state.
        Figure 4 provides a map of Alaska and shows the spatial distribution of our various
treatment groups throughout the state. Anchorage, Juneau, Fairbanks, and Kodiak Island had
multiple zip codes; each of the other communities only had a single zip code and were thus exposed
to a single treatment condition. Figure 5 shows the spatial distribution of treatments for these
statistical areas.
        Before proceeding to the results section, we should highlight a few important design issues.
First and foremost, privacy laws prohibited the Permanent Fund Division from releasing address-
level data for individuals that registered for the Permanent Fund Dividend. We were thus forced
to randomize at the zip code level which was the finest geographic indicator in the data. Second,
data for the experiment was provided by the Permanent Fund Division and includes a unique ID
code for every person who registered for a PFD along with (i) the date they registered for the PFD,
(ii) the filing method ­ mail or electronic, (iii) the name of any charity supported along with the
associated pledge amount, (iv) the age and gender of the individual, and (v) zip codes associated
with the individual's home residence and mailing address. We used data from 2013 to assign zip
codes to treatments and ensure balance along observable dimensions.
        Third, only those individuals who registered for the PFD online were eligible to donate
through Pick.Click.Give. We thus restrict our sample to the subset of individuals (83.3% in 2014)
who registered online. Fourth, households were assigned to treatment based on the zip from their
mailing address. For about 82% of the sample, the home and mailing zips are the same. However,
as college students, Olympic athletes and active duty military are eligible for the PFD, we observe
a small fraction of individuals for whom these zips do not match. In addition, people with post
office boxes usually have different mailing and physical addresses. Finally, we cannot observe
whether a given individual received a postcard, so we assign treatment based on the mailing zip
listed in the data. Our estimates thus capture an intent-to-treat effect and provide a lower bound of
the "true" effect of treatment.

                                                 9
Experimental Findings: Overall Patterns of Giving
        Panel B of Table 2 presents summary statistics for our experiment. For example, in 2014
we observe 169,441 individuals in our control group. Of these 4.4% (or 7,552) elected to donate a
portion of their Permanent Fund Dividend. The average contribution for individuals in the control
group is $4.77 which corresponds to $807,548 in aggregate contributions. In total, approximately
4.9% of all individuals made a donation and Pick.Click.Give. raised more than $3.1 million
(~$5.79 per person) for eligible nonprofits throughout the state.13 Relative to the 2013 campaign,
these figures correspond to an approximate 9.3 percent increase in the total number of donors and
a 23.9% increase in total dollars raised (which partly reflects an increase in PFD registration from
2013). For perspective, total charitable contributions by Alaska residents in 2014 was just under
$260 million dollars. Hence, donations made through Pick.Click.Give. in 2014 accounted for
approximately 1.2 percent of total giving statewide.
        Disaggregating the data further and exploring outcomes at the charity level, 512 registered
organizations received at least one donation.14 However, we observe significant heterogeneity
across organizations in terms of both the number of donations and total dollars received. For
example, in 2014 organizations received donations, on average, from approximately 88
individuals. Yet, we observe 48 charities that received donations from 10 or fewer people and
another 40 that received donations from at least 200 individuals. We observe similar heterogeneity
across charities in terms of dollars received. The average amount received was approximately
$6,400, there were 36 organizations that received $500 or less and another 29 organizations that
received $20,000 or more in total gifts.
        Table A1 in the appendix summarizes the 20 most popular recipients in terms of number
of donations (upper panel) and dollars received (lower panel) along with information on the cause
type for each of the charities. As noted in the table, 16 organizations appear amongst the 20 most
popular in terms of both the number of donations and donation amounts. Moreover, we observe a
distinct skewness in the distribution of gifts across charitable organizations. Whereas the top


13
   The total amount disbursed via the PFD in 2014 was approximately $1.2 billion. Contributions in our experiment
thus account for approximately 0.3% of this total.
14
   Recall that individuals are allowed to contribute to more than one charitable cause. During the 2014 campaign, we
observe a total of 44,978 contributions received from 26,610 unique donors.


                                                        10
twenty organizations receive nearly 35 percent of donations and 38 percent of overall dollars, the
five most popular charities account for more than half of these amounts. In fact, the most popular
recipient in terms of both the number of donations and dollars, Bean's Café, received more than
five percent of all total donations and dollars.15


Do Targeted Messages Work? Exploring Treatment Effects
        There is a growing body of work showing that targeted messages and normative appeals
can influence an array of pro-social behaviors. Our data are sufficiently rich to explore whether
framing who benefits from such actions influences the efficacy of such appeals. Evidence for such
comparison is contained in Table 3. As noted in the table, individuals residing in a zip code that
received our benefits to self message were approximately 29.5% more likely to give (5.7% versus
4.4%) than were counterparts in the control group. Moreover, average contributions for those in
the benefits to self treatment were approximately 54.4% greater ($7.35 versus $4.76) than that
observed for the control group. Figure 6 complements these data and provides a graphical depiction
of differences across treatments; the figures highlight that both participation rates and average
contributions are higher for individuals living in zip codes that received the benefits to self postcard
than for counterparts living in our control zip codes. These data lead to our first set of results and
provide evidence that targeted messages, particularly those that emphasize warm-glow
motivations, do influence charitable contributions:


        Result 1: Individuals receiving the benefits to self message ("Warm Your Heart") were
        more likely to give and provided larger gifts than those in the control group.
This first result shares similarity with prior work showing the influence of normative appeals on
behaviors such as environmental conservation (Goldstein et al., 2008; Nolan et al., 2008; Ferraro
and Price, 2013), honesty in markets (Pruckner and Sausgruber, 2013), or tax compliance
(Hallsworth et al., 2017). Result 1 also shares similarity with work in marketing showing that self-
benefit appeals increase the frequency with which laboratory subjects express willingness (or
likelihood) of supporting a charitable cause (White and Peloza, 2009; Fieler et al., 2012; Baek et
al., 2019). More broadly, our data suggests the importance of self-interests as a driver of donor


15
  Bean's Café is a nonprofit organization located in Anchorage whose mission is to "...feed the hungry and homeless
without discrimination during the day."

                                                        11
behavior; a finding consonant with prior work showing the importance of motives such as prestige
and concerns for social image (Harbaugh, 1998; Andreoni and Petrie, 2004; Ariely et al., 2009;
Lacetera and Macis; 2010; Karlan and McConnell, 2012; Gallus, 2017) or the impact of donor
gifts or other private benefits linked to the contribution itself (e.g., Morgan and Sefton, 2000;
Goeree et al., 2005; Landry et al., 2006; Carpenter et al., 2008; Elfenbein and McManus, 2010;
Landry et al., 2012; Sieg and Zhang, 2012; Eckel et al., 2014; Kessler and Milkman, 2014).
         To complement these unconditional insights, we estimate a series of linear regression
models that explicitly control for observable and unobservable differences across potential donors.
This analysis is important as such factors might systematically differ across treatment groups
leading to erroneous inference from a simple analysis of the raw data. For our baseline
specification, we restrict the sample to the years 2013 and 2014, and only include those individuals
who registered for a PFD in both years. We estimate a linear regression model of the amount
contributed for each individual that registered for the PFD online (including those who did not
give) on indicator variables for our experimental treatments and other covariates:16
                       = (1  + 2  )  2014 + 2014 +  + 
where, Dijt is the contribution level of the jth individual in the ith zip code in year t,  is an
indicator for receiving the benefits to others message,  is an indicator for receiving the
benefits to self message, 2014 is an indicator for the year 2014, and  are zip code fixed effects.
Note that non-interacted indicators for treatment are captured by zip code fixed effects. As such,
the estimated effect of receiving the benefits to others message is given by 1 and the effect of
receiving the benefits to self message is given by 2. To account for unobservable heterogeneities
at the zip code level, we cluster standard errors at the zip code level.
         Empirical estimates presented in Model (1) of Table 4 provide additional support for the
unconditional analysis, albeit with smaller magnitudes. Households in the benefits to self treatment
contributed approximately $0.927 more than did counterparts in the control group, a difference
that is statistically significant at the p < 0.001 level. For perspective, this effect corresponds to a
nearly 20% increase in average contributions.17 With 183,215 online filers in the benefits to self
group, distributing this message raised an estimated $0.926 x 183,215 = $169,657. Had all online

16
   A fundamental assumption underlying the validity of our empirical strategy is the assumption that receipt of a given
message did not impact the likelihood that the individual registers online. Table 3 provides support for this assumption.
As noted in the table, filing methods were uncorrelated with the treatment assignment.
17
   From Panel B of Table 2, the average donation in 2014 made by individuals in the control group was $4.76.

                                                           12
filers in the state received this message, we estimate that Pick.Click.Give. would have raised an
additional $0.926 x 540,124 = $500,154.
        To gain insights into the factors that influence the decision of individuals to contribute
through Pick.Click.Give., we estimate the linear probability of the contribution decision of
households that registered for the FPD online by replacing donation amount with the binary
decision of whether or not to give. Specifically, we replace  in our baseline estimation equation
with a binary indicator equal to unity for people that made a donation.
        Empirical estimates are presented in Table 5 and again indicate that messages that make
salient self-interests influence the decision to donate. For example, we find that individuals
residing in a zip that received the benefits to self message were roughly 0.2 percentage points (or
approximately 4.5 percent) more likely to make a donation through Pick.Click.Give. than were
counterparts in the control group ­ a difference that is statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level.
        A key identifying assumption for our baseline identification strategy is that there were no
significant differences in pre-existing trends in rates of giving across treatment groups. To test
these assumptions, and to provide a more nuanced and detailed description of the various treatment
effects, we estimate a variant of our baseline estimation equation that interacts the two treatment
indicators with year fixed effects:
                         2015

                 =  (1  + 2  ) +  +  +  ,
                        =2009

where 2013 is the reference year and treatment effects are estimated for all other years 2009-2015.
Zip code fixed effects are again given by  and year fixed effects by  . For this specification,
the effect of receiving the benefits to others postcard in year t is given by 1 and that for the
benefits to self postcard is given by 2 . Successful randomization of treatments requires that there
were no pre-existing trends such that 1 = 2 = 0 for all years except 2014, the year of
treatment (and possibly 2015 if treatment effects persisted over time). As with the baseline
specification, errors are clustered at the zip code level and the panel is balanced.
        The upper panel of Figure 7 gives the estimated treatment effects for the propensity to
donate, and the lower panel gives the results for donation size. These results largely complement
our baseline findings, and suggest that in 2014 subjects in the benefits to self treatment were
approximately 0.2 percent points more likely to participate in Pick.Click.Give. and give roughly
$1.00 more than subjects in the control group. While this specification uncovers some pre-existing

                                                   13
trend in in both the propensity to give and average donation size for the benefits to self group, for
the two years immediately preceding treatment, trend is negligible.
         Turning to the effects of messages highlighting benefits to others ("Make Alaska Better for
Everyone"), we report a second result:


         Result 2: The benefits to others message had the same positive impact on the likelihood of
         giving as the benefits to self message, but there was no effect on average donations relative
         to the control.
Heterogeneity in the response to our benefits to self and benefits to others treatments provides
evidence that donors are responding to the content of our messages and not only the receipt of a
message highlighting Pick.Click.Give. Importantly, this allows us to rule out models such as
bounded rationality (Gabaix et al., 2006; Gabaix, 2014) or observation ("Hawthorne") effects
(Levitt and List, 2007) as under any such model, the act of receiving a targeted message advertising
Pick.Click.Give. should lead to increased donations. Hence, we would expect to observe treatment
effects in both treatment groups.
         Summary statistics in Table 2 suggest that both average contributions ($5.21 versus $4.72)
and participation rates (4.5% versus 4.4%) for individuals in our benefits to others treatment are
statistically indistinguishable from those observed amongst counterparts in the control group (see
also Figure 6). But comparing unconditional means can obscure important pre-existing differences
in giving across treatments.
         To complement these raw statistics, we return to the empirical estimates outlined in Tables
4 and 5 which present linear regression models exploring the impact of treatment on average
contributions and underlying rates of giving, respectively. Model 1 of Table 4 shows that the
average donation made in the benefits to others treatment was approximately $0.37 more than that
observed amongst counterparts in the control ­ a difference that is not statistically significant at
any meaningful level. However, the approximate $0.56 difference in average contributions relative
to that observed in the benefits to self treatment is significant at the p < 0.10 level.18




18
   Because differences in treatment effects are linear combinations of multiple parameter estimates from the baseline
estimation equation, the delta method was used to construct confidence intervals (Stata post-estimation command
lincom).

                                                         14
       Considering average participation rates, we find similar treatment effects across the two
groups. As noted in Model 1 of Table 5, there is no discernable difference in the likelihood of
giving across those in the benefits to self and benefits to others treatments, and people in both
groups are more likely to contribute than those in the control.
       These two findings are jointly explained by larger average donations being given by
individuals in the benefits to self treatment. Model 1 of Table 6 shows that, conditional on
participation in the charitable program, individuals in the benefits to self group gave $10.07 more
than subjects in the control group (significant at the p < .05 level) and individuals in the benefits
to others group behaved statistically no differently than those in the control group. Figure 8 was
constructed similar to Figure 7, and reinforces these findings. Conditional on giving, subjects in
the benefits to self group made larger donations and that this effect was only significant in the year
of treatment, 2014.
       Taken together, our first two results provide evidence that targeted messages and normative
appeals can influence donor behavior. However, the efficacy of such appeals depends upon the
way in which the benefits of giving are framed; donors are more motivated by appeals that
highlight self-benefits than those that highlight how giving benefits others. Such differences are
consistent with findings from the marketing literature showing the superiority of self-benefit
appeals to give when the choice is made in private or in environments with low observability
(White and Peloza, 2009). Moreover, our findings share similarity with prior work using tests of
crowd-out to identify the relative importance of impure altruism or warm-glow versus altruism
and concerns for the well-being of others (e.g,. Kingma, 1989; Andreoni, 1993; Payne, 1998;
Andreoni and Payne, 2003, 2011; Eckel et al., 2005; Crumpler and Grossman, 2008; Andreoni et
al., 2014; Ottoni-Wilhelm et al., 2017). As in this prior work, donors in our experiment appear to
be motivated more by self-benefit concerns than the well-being of others.


Exploring Heterogeneity across Donor Types
       Our analysis thus far has examined behavior pooled across all donor types. However, as
noted in Landry et al. (2010) there are important differences in behavior across warm- and cold-
list households ­ prior donors are more likely to give and are less responsive to both conditional
and unconditional gifts. As we observe donations made through Pick.Click.Give. in 2013, our data
are sufficiently rich to allow us to explore heterogeneity across different donor types. To do so, we

                                                 15
augment our baseline regression models in Tables 4 and 5 to include an indicator variable for any
individual who made a contribution in 2013. Rather than interacting this variable with the
treatment and year indicators (which would require a triple interaction term), we re-estimate our
baseline equations restricting the data set to cold-list (Model 5) and then warm-list (Model 6)
donors. Results for these models suggest a third set of results:
        Result 3a: Prior donors are more likely to give and provide larger average gifts than
        prospective donors.
        Result 3b: Prospective donors in the benefits to self ("Warm Your Heart") treatment are
        more likely to give and provide larger gifts than counterparts in the control and benefits to
        others ("Make Alaska Better") group.
Support for Result 3a is provided in Model 2 of Tables 4 and 5. As noted in Table 4, average
donations for warm-list individuals are approximately $93.75 greater than that for a prospective
donor. As noted in Table 5, much of this difference is explained by dramatic differences in
participation rates. Whereas less than 2% of prospective donors give through Pick.Click.Give. (see
Panel B of Table 2), two-thirds of all warm-list individuals elect to give.
        Support for Result 3b is also provided in Tables 4 and 5. For example, as noted in Model
5 of Table 4, prospective ("Cold") donors in the benefits to self treatment provide average gifts
that are approximately $0.646 (44.5%) greater than those prospective donors observed in the
control group. For prior donors, the relative effect of the benefits to self message is less pronounced
­ such types provide average gifts that are approximately 9.8% greater than a warm-list counterpart
in the control group.19 Importantly, both of these differences are statistically significant at
conventional levels.
        We observe similar data patterns when exploring participation rates. As noted in Model 5
of Table 5, prospective donors in the benefits to self treatment are 0.43 percentage points (roughly
25%) more likely to give than a prospective donor in the control group ­ a difference that is
statistically significant at the p < 0.01 level. For prior donors (Model 6), the relative impact is again
less pronounced. There is an approximate 5.4% increase in the likelihood of giving for a warm-list
individual in the benefits to self treatment.



19
  From Table 4 Model 3 note that warm-list individuals that received the benefits to self postcard on average give
$7.93 more than warm-list individuals in control zip codes. This amounts to a 7.93/80.55 = 9.8% increase in the
average donation size.

                                                       16
       Figure 9 presents the estimated treatment effects by year (the second estimation equation)
for subjects that did and did not participate in Pick.Click.Give. at any point between 2009 and
2013. The upper panel shows that, for warm-list donors that gave at least once between 2009 and
2013, both treatments similarly increased the probability of donating. However, for subjects that
had never before participated in Pick.Click.Give., we see that only the benefits to self postcard
increased the probability of participating. These results are complemented by those reported for
donation size in Figure 10. For previous donors, we see that both treatment groups gave larger
average donations than the control, but this result is only significant for the benefits to self group.
We again see that, for individuals that had not previously participated in the program, receiving
the benefits to self message increased the average donation size and that receiving the benefits to
others message had no effect.
       Taken jointly, these differences suggest an interesting asymmetry. Whereas the benefits to
self message impacted both prospective and prior donors, the effects ­ on both the propensity to
donate and average donation size ­ were largest for people that did not previously participate in
Pick.Click.Give.
       A final result of interest concerns the impact of age and gender on donor behavior. As noted
in List (2004), there are marked differences in generosity across men and women ­ particularly
when exploring the behavior of young men. As we observe data on the age and gender of every
individual in our data, we can explore similar patterns. To do so, we augment our baseline
specifications to include indicators for women, those 50 and older, and those under the age of 18.
As noted in Model 3 of Table 4, women and those age 50 or older provided larger average gifts
than do other donor types. Moreover, average contributions for those under the age of 18 are
significantly lower than those 50 and over. We observe similar differences along the extensive
margin. As noted in Model 3 of Table 5, women and those age 50 or older were more likely to
give than were other donor types, while those under the age of 18 were less likely to give.
       Given that prior donors were more likely to give and provided larger average gifts than
others, one may be concerned that these demographic effects are capturing differences in the
likelihood an individual had given in the past. To rule out such possibility, we augment our
regression to include controls for past donors along with our indicators for age and gender. Results
from such specifications are included in column 4 of Tables 4 and 5. Conditional on past donations,
women and those aged 50 or older were more likely to give than other types, while those under

                                                  17
the age of 18 were less likely to give. However, whereas before women were more likely to give
larger gifts, conditional on past donations, we see that they give smaller average gifts.
       Interestingly, the observed gender differences are consistent with findings in Della Vigna
et al. (2013) who find differences in the distribution for altruism across men and women. In our
setting, women were more likely to give and provided larger average gifts. However, conditioned
on giving, it was men who provided more generous gifts. Taken jointly, this suggests that the
distribution of altruism for women was less disperse than the distribution for men; the precise
pattern identified by the structural estimates in Della Vigna et al. (2013).


Robustness Checks
       Recall that our randomization occurred at the zip code level. While we balanced on
observables, there may be unobserved differences across zip codes that could impact rates of
giving independent of treatment. For example, during the 2014 campaign, Pick.Click.Give.
sponsored a media campaign, particularly in the three largest markets in the state ­ Anchorage,
Juneau and Fairbanks, that used television and radio ads encouraging individuals to donate through
Pick.Click.Give. Unfortunately, we do not observe the timing or content of such advertisements
and thus are unable to directly control for any such efforts. Similarly, larger charities such as
Bean's Café and United Way of Anchorage conducted their own marketing campaigns targeting
potential donors.
       As a first set of robustness checks, we augment our baseline specifications by restricting
our sample to zip codes in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau and re-estimate our baseline set of
equations. Given the previous advertising campaigns delivered to these markets, this sub-sample
of individuals is more likely to be aware of the Pick.Click.Give. program. If treatment effects
simply reflect learning about the existence of Pick.Click.Give., then we may expect to find
negligent treatment effects for this specification. Table A2 shows that the effect of receiving either
message was smaller than before, but remains statistically significant for the benefits to self
message. Table A3 reinforces the idea that, within the three major Alaskan markets, only the
benefits to self message effectively increased the propensity to give.
       Our data includes both the home and mailing zips for every individual in our sample. For
most individuals, the home and mailing zips matched. However, for approximately 172,614 (18%)
of our 2013-2014 sample, the home and mailing zip codes do not match. For such individuals, it

                                                 18
is uncertain whether they would have received our treatment postcards and if they did receive a
postcard which postcard they would observe. As a third robustness check on our results, we thus
restrict the sample to the subset of individuals for whom the home and mailing zips matched and
re-estimate our models of interest.
        Results for this robustness check are contained in Tables A4 and A5 of the appendix.
Importantly, all three of our main results are unaffected if we restrict the sample to those with
matching home and mailing zips. Those receiving the benefits to self message are more likely to
provide larger average gifts than do counterparts in the control and benefits to others treatment. In
contrast, the average donation of those receiving the benefits to others postcard is no different from
that observed amongst counterparts in the control group. Though we again see that individuals in
both treatment groups were equally as likely to make a donation, and more likely to give a donation
than those individuals in the control group.
        A number of individuals also receive mail to a P.O. Box and so may have received a post
card with a lag, or may not have received it at all. Thus, we also exclude from the analysis
individuals whose mailing address is a P.O. Box and run our empirical models on the resulting
subsample of 389,501 individuals. Results for this robustness check are contained in Tables A6
and A7 of the appendix and are consonant with results from our main specifications. Those
receiving the benefits to self message were approximately 0.25 percentage points (about 5.3%)
more likely to make a donation and provided average donations that were about $1.07
(approximately 22%) greater than counterparts in the control. We again find that, while the
propensity to give was similarly affected by the two treatments, the benefits to self message was
more effective at increasing the average donation.
        As a final robustness check and plausible placebo test, we restrict our sample to those
individuals whose physical zip codes did not match their mailing zip codes in the year of the
treatment, 2014. Because some people with mis-matching zip codes may have still received a
mailer, we anticipate that this restriction in the data will not significantly affect estimated treatment
effects but may inflate the associated standard errors. These results are given in Tables A8 and A9
in the appendix and show that, while the point estimates are similar to before, treatment effects
mostly are not significant, as expected.




                                                   19
       Taken jointly, these robustness checks give us confidence that we are capturing a response
to our targeted messages rather than some unobserved heterogeneity across zips or rural areas that
may not have been familiar with Pick.Click.Give. prior to postcards being sent out.


Do Treatment Effects Persist?
       There is a growing body of work showing that behavioral interventions tend to wane over
time (e.g., Gneezy and List, 2006; Landry et al., 2010; Ferraro and Price, 2013; Allcott and Rogers,
2014). Given this body of work, it is important to explore whether the effects of our targeted
messages are sustained across campaigns and impact long-run patterns of giving. To better
ascertain the long-run impacts of our different messages, we use data on treatment assignment in
2014 and examine whether this impacts contributions through Pick.Click.Give. during the 2015
campaign. As with the original experiment, we restrict the sample to those individuals who
registered for the Permanent Fund Dividend online and were thus provided the opportunity to
given through Pick.Click.Give.
       Exploring differences across those who received the benefits to self message in 2014 and
those in our control group, we see the first evidence that treatment effects may persist. Figure 7
shows that, relative to counterparts that did not receive a message in 2014, those that received the
benefits to self message were approximately 0.28 percentage points (4.2%) more likely to donate
in 2015 than individuals that did not receive a message. Similarly, average donations in 2015 for
those in our benefits to self group were about $1.05 (14.7%) greater than those who did not receive
a message during the 2014 campaign. We observe similar differences if we compare the
contribution decisions of those originally assigned to our benefits to self treatment with
counterparts originally assigned to the benefits to others treatment.
       Separating the data according to previous participation in Pick.Click.Give., the effect of
the benefits to self message shows signs of persistence for both previous donors (people who gave
at least once between 2009 and 2013), and especially for those who had never participated in
Pick.Click.Give. before. For the latter group, subjects that received the benefits to self message
were 0.5 percentage points (18.5%) more likely to give in 2015. Similarly, from the lower panel
of Figure 4 we see that in 2015, subjects that received the benefits to self message gave $0.67
(35.7%) more on average than subjects in the control. Taken together, these results suggest the
effect of the benefits to self message is persistent, especially for first time givers. Yet, as in past

                                                  20
work (e.g., Ferraro and Price, 2013; Allcott and Rogers, 2014; Bernedo et al., 2014) the
effectiveness of the benefits to others "nudge" waned over time; subjects in this treatment group
behaved no differently than those in the control group in 2015.


IV. Conclusions
       A growing body of literature sets forth to explore the economics of charity and the
relationship between fundraisers and potential donors. Much of this work has focused on
measuring the effectiveness of different fundraising techniques such as charitable lotteries or
matching gifts that change the relative costs of benefits of giving. Our study extends this literature
by exploring the effect of targeted messages and normative appeals on donor behavior.
       To do so, we designed a natural field experiment in conjunction with the state of Alaska's
Pick.Click.Give. program. As part of the 2014 marketing campaign, we randomly allocated the
approximate 290,000 households in the state into either a control group or one of two treatment
groups that received a postcard that included a slogan to highlight either benefits to self ("Warm
your heart") or benefits to others ("Make Alaska better for everyone"). The slogans were designed
to reflect the two main motives for charitable giving ­ concerns for the benefits to self (impure
altruism or "warm-glow") or concerns for the well-being of others (pure altruism) ­ and provide a
way to disentangle the relative importance of each.
       Results from our experiment highlight the relative importance of benefits to self as a driver
of giving. Individuals who received the benefits to self message were approximately 4.5 percent
more likely to give than counterparts in the control group and tend to support more charitable
organizations. Moreover, average contributions in the benefits to self treatment were
approximately 20 percent greater than those in our baseline. Messages that highlight the benefits
to others, in contrast, had a similar impact on the likelihood of giving but had no impact on average
donations. Interestingly, these same data patterns are observed for both warm-list households who
gave through Pick.Click.Give. in 2013 and cold-list counterparts who did give in the prior year's
campaign ­ although the effects are more pronounced amongst cold-list households.
       For academics, our results are noteworthy in that they provide a deeper understanding of
individual behavior and what drives the private provision of public goods. Importantly, our
findings suggest that giving is motivated by self-interests rather than concerns for charitable output
per se. That said, we cannot rule out alternative explanations such as the identifiable victim effect

                                                 21
and motivational crowding that arises when one perceives the efficacy of their donation to be low
for the relative inefficacy of the "Make Alaska Better" message. Future work should explore this
possibility and identify why the benefits to others message had smaller effects on overall patterns
of giving.
       Our results are also noteworthy in that the distribution of gifts across cause types is
fundamentally different than the distribution of gifts across cause types nationwide. While
religious and education based causes receive the largest fraction of donations nationwide, the most
popular cause types in our data are human services and animals and the environment ­ each of
which receive more than 20 percent of all dollars. In part this can be explained by differences in
the composition of charities included in Pick.Click.Give. and the composition of charities
nationwide. Yet, the differences could also reflect the absence of fund-raising efforts and direct
asks in our experiment. Given past work highlighting the importance of social pressures and the
ask on donor behavior, future work should explore whether active solicitations influence the types
of causes donors select and the allocation of funds across organizations.
       For practitioners, our results are noteworthy in that they suggest ways to increase giving
using simple messages that appeal to the donor's self-interests and the good feelings triggered by
the act of giving. These findings are of particular interest to nonprofits in the state of Alaska and
the design of the Pick.Click.Give. program which was established to increase overall giving
statewide. If we had sent the benefits to self message to all households in the state, aggregate
contributions would have increased by more than $500,000.
       Yet, the charitable marketplace is comprised of numerous nonprofits that compete for
donations from a finite number of budget constrained agents. In such an environment, changes in
giving through Pick.Click.Give. could impact aggregate patterns of giving. Future work should
explore whether the dollars attracted via our appeal represent an increase in aggregate giving or
simply a substitution of funds across charities and/or time.




                                                 22
                                         References

Allcott, H. & Greenstone, M. (2017). "Measuring the Welfare Efects of Residential Energy
       Efficiency Programs," the National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
       23386.
Allcott, H. & Rogers, T. (2014). "The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral
       Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation," American Economic
       Review, 104(10), 3003-3037.
Allcott, H. (2011). "Social Norms and Energy Conservation," Journal of Public Economics,
       95(9-10), 1082-1095.
Alpizar, F., Carlsson, F., & Johansson-Stenman, O. (2008). "Anonymity, Reciprocity, and
       Conformity: Evidence from Voluntary Contributions to a National Park in Costa Rica,"
       Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-6), 1047-1060.
Altmann, S., Falk, A., Heidhues, P., Jayaraman, R., and Teirlinck, M. (2019). "Defaults and
       Donations: Evidence from a Field Experiment," Review of Economics and Statistics,
       101(5), 1-18.
Andreoni, J. (1989). "Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
       Equivalence.'' Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1447-58.
Andreoni, J. (1990). "Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-
       Glow Giving." The Economic Journal, 100(401), 464-477.
Andreoni, J. (1993). "An Experimental Test of the Public-Goods Crowding-Out Hypothesis."
       American Economic Review, 83(5), 1317-1327.
Andreoni, J. (1995). "Warm-Glow versus Cold-Prickle: The Effects of Positive and Negative
       Framing on Cooperation in Experiments," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1), 1-21.
Andreoni, J. (1998). "Toward a Theory of Charitable Fund-Raising." Journal of Political
       Economy, 106(6), 1186-1213.
Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2003). "Do Government Grants to Private Charities Crowd Out
       Giving or Fund-raising?." American Economic Review, 93(3): 792-812.
Andreoni, J. & Petrie, R. (2004). "Public Goods Experiments Without Confidentiality: A
       Glimpse Into Fund-Raising," Journal of Public Economics, 88(7-8), 1605-1623.
Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2011). "Is Crowding Out Due Entirely to Fundraising? Evidence
       from a Panel of Charities." Journal of Public Economics, 95, 334-343.

                                              23
Andreoni, J., Payne, A. A., & Smith, S. (2014). "Do grants to charities crowd out other income?
       Evidence from the UK." Journal of Public Economics, 114, 75-86.
Andreoni, J., Rao, J., & Trachtman, H. (2017). "Avoiding the Ask: A Field Experiment on
        Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving," Journal of Political Economy, 125(3), 625-
       653.
Andreoni, J. and Serra-Garcia, M. (2016). "Time Inconsistent Charitable Giving," NBER Working
       Paper #22824.
Ariely, D., Bracha, A. & Meier, St. (2009). "Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Motivation and
       Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially." American Economic Review, 99(1), 544-
       55.
Baek, T.H., Yoon, S., Kim, S., and Kim, Y. (2019). "Social Exclusion Influences on the
       Effectiveness of Altruistic Versus Egoistic Appeals in Charitable Advertising," Marketing
       Letters, 30, 75-90.
Benjamin, D. T., Choi, J. J. & Strickland, A. J. (2010). "Social Identity and Preferences."
       American Economic Review, 100(4), 1913-1928.
Bernedo, M., Ferraro, P., Price, M. (2014). "The Persistent Impacts of Norm-Based Messaging
        and Their Implications for Water Conservation," Journal of Consumer Policy, 37(3),
        437-452.
Beshears, J., Choi, J., Baibson, D. Madrian, B., & Milman, K. (2015), "The Effect of Providing
        Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions," The Journal of Finance, 70(3),
       1161-1201.
Bracha, A., Menietti, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2011). "Seeds to Succeed? Sequential Giving to
       Public Projects." Journal of Public Economics, 95(5-6), 416-427.
Breman, A. (2011). "Give More Tomorrow: Two Field Experiments on Altruism and
       Intertemporal Choice," Journal of Public Economics, 95(11-12), 1349-1357.
Brent, D., Cook, J., & Olsen, S. (2015). "Social Comparisons, Household Water Use, and
       Participation in Utility Conservation Programs: Evidence from Three Randomized
       Trials," Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2(4),
       597-627.




                                               24
Brunel, Frederic and Nelson, M. (2000). "Explaining Gendered Responses to "Help-Self" and
       "Help-Others" Charity Ad Appeals: The Mediating Role of World-Views," Journal of
       Advertising, 29(3), 15-28.
Carpenter, J., Holmes, J., & Matthews, P. (2008). "Charity auctions: a field experiment." The
       Economic Journal, 118(525), 92-113.
Castillo, M., Petrie, R., & Wardell, C. (2014). "Fundraising Through Online Social Networks: A
       Field Experiment on Peer-to-Peer Solicitation," Journal of Public Economics, 114, 29-
       35.
Chen, Yan, Xin Li, and Jeffrey K. Mackie-Mason. (2006). "Online Fundraising Mechanisms: A
       Field Experiment." Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(2), Article 4.
Chen, Y., Harper, F. M., Konstan, J., & Xin Li, S. (2010). "Social Comparisons and
       Contributions to Online Communities: A Field Experiment on MovieLens," American
       Economic Review, 100(4), 1358-98.
Chen, Y., Lu, F., & Zhang, J. (2017). "Social Comparisons, Status, and Driving Behavior,"
       Journal of Public Economics, 155, 11-20.
Costa, D. & Kahn, M. (2013). "Energy Conservation "Nudges" and Environmentalist Ideology:
       Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity Field Experiment," Journal of the
       European Economic Association, 11(3), 680­702.
Crumpler, H. & Grossman, Ph. J. (2008). "An Experimental Test of Warm Glow Giving,"
       Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-6), 1011-1021.
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., & Malmendier, U. (2012). "Testing for Altruism and
       Social Pressure in Charitable Giving." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1-
       56.
DellaVigna, S., List, J., Malmendier, U., & Roa, G. (2013). "The Importance of Being Marginal:
       Gender Differences in Generosity," American Economic Review, 103(3), 686-590.
Eckel, C. & Grossman, Ph. J. (2006). "Subsidizing Charitable Giving with Rebates or Matching:
       Further Laboratory Evidence." Southern Economic Journal, 72 (4), 794-807.
Eckel, C., Grossman, Ph. J., & Johnston, R. (2005). "An Experimental Test of the Crowding Out
       Hypothesis." Journal of Public Economics, 89(8), 1543-1560.
Eckel, C., Herberich, D., & Meer, J. (2014). "A Field Experiment on Directed Giving at a Public
       University." NBER Working Papers, No. 20180.

                                              25
Elfenbein, D. W. & McManus, B. (2010). "A Greater Price for a Greater Good? Evidence that
       Consumers Pay More for Charity-Linked Products." American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy, 2(2), 28-60.
Evans, W. & Moore, T. (2011). "The Short-term Mortality Consequences of Income Receipt,"
       Journal of Public Economics, 95(11-12), 1410-1424.
Falk, A. (2007). "Gift Exchange in the Field." Econometrica, 75(5), 1501-1511.
Feiler, D., Tost, L., and Grant, A. (2012). "Mixed Reasons, Missed Givings: The Costs of
       Blending Egoistic and Altruistic Reasons in Donation Requests," Journal of
       Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1322-1328.
Fellner, G., Sausgruber, R., & Traxler, C. (2013). "Testing Enforcement Strategies in the Field:
       Threat, Moral Appeal and Social Information," Journal of the European Economic
       Association, 11(3), 634­660.
Ferraro, P. & Price, M. (2013). "Using Nonpecuniary Strategies to Influence Behavior: Evidence
       from a Large-Scale Field Experiment," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(1),
       64-73.
Fisher, R., Vandenbosch, M., & Antia, K. (2008). "An Empathy-Helping Perspective on
       Consumers' Responses to Fund-Raising Appeals," Journal of Consumer Research, 35(3),
       519­531.
Frey, B. S. & Meier, S. (2004). "Social Comparisons and Pro-social Behavior: Testing
       "Conditional Cooperation" in a Field Experiment," American Economic Review, 94(5),
       1717-1722.
Gabaix, X. &Laibson, D. (2006). "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
       Suppression in Competitive Markets," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2),505­
       540.
Gabaix, X. (2014). "A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality," The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 129(4), 1661­1710.
Gallus, J. (2017). "Fostering Public Good Contributions with Symbolic Awards: A Large-Scale
        Natural Field Experiment at Wikipedia," Management Science, 63(12), 3999-4446.
Gneezy, U. & List, J. (2006). "Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift
       Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments," Econometrica, 74(5), 1365-1384.



                                               26
Goeree, J. K., Maasland, E., Onderstal, S. & Turner, J. L. (2005). "How (Not) to Raise Money,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), 897-926.
Goldsmith, S. (2010). "The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend: A Case Study in Implementation
       of a Basic Income Guarantee," Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of
       Alaska Anchorage.
Goldstein N., Cialdini R., & Griskevicius V. (2008). "A Room with a Viewpoint: Using Social
       Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels," Journal of Consumer
       Research, 35(3), 472­482.
Goswami, I. and Urminsky, O. (2016). "When Should the Ask Be a Nudge? The Effect of
       Default Amounts on Charitable Donations," Journal of Marketing Research , 53, 829-
       846.
Hahn, R., Metcalfe, R., Novgorodsky, D., & Price, M. (2016). "The Behavioralist as Policy
       Designer: The Need to Test Multiple Treatments to Meet Multiple Targets," the National
        Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 22886.
Hallsworth, M., List, J., Metcalfe, R., & Vlaev, I. (2017). "The Behavioralist as Tax Collector:
       Using Natural Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance," Journal of Public
       Economics, 148, 14-31.
Harbaugh, W. T. (1998). "What do Donations Buy? A Model of Philanthropy based on Prestige
       and Warm Glow." Journal of Public Economics, 67(2), 269-284.
Holladay, S., LaRiviere, J., Novgorodsky, D., & Price, M. (2019). "Prices Versus Nudges: What
       Matters for Search Versus Purchase of Energy Investments?" Journal of Public
       Economics, 172, 151-173.
Hsieh, C. (2003). "Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from the
       Alaska Permanent Fund." American Economic Review, 93(1): 397-405.
Huck, St. & Rasul, I. (2011). "Matched fundraising: Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment."
       Journal of Public Economics, 95(5-6), 351-362.
Imas, A. (2014). "Working for the Warm Glow: On the Benefits and Limits of Prosocial
       Incentives," Journal of Public Economics, 114, 14-18.
Ito, K., Ida, T., & Tanaka, M. (2018). "Moral Suasion and Economic Incentives: Field
       Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand," American Economic Journal: Economic
        Policy, 10(1), 240-267.

                                                27
Jones, D. & Marinescu, I. (2018). The labor market impacts of universal and permanent cash
       Transfers: Evidence from the Alaska permanent fund (No. w24312). National Bureau of
       Economic Research.
Karlan, D., & List, J .A. (2007). "Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving? Evidence from a
       Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment." American Economic Review, 97(5): 1774-1793.
Karlan, D. & McConnell, M. (2012). "Hey Look at Me: The Effect of Giving Circles on Giving."
       NBER Working Papers, No. 177737.
Kessler, J. & Milkman, K. L. (2014). "Identity in Charitable Giving." Working Paper.
Kingma, B. R. (1989). "An Accurate Measurement of the Crowd-Out Effect, Income Effect, and
       Price Effect for Charitable Contributions," Journal of Political Economy, 97(5), 1197-
       1207.
Knutsson, M. Martinsson, P. & Wollbrant, C. (2013). "Do People Avoid Opportunities to
       Donate? A Natural Field Experiment on Recycling and Charitable Giving." Journal of
       Economic Behavior & Organization, 93, 71-77.
Kueng, L. (2015). "Explaining Consumption Excess Sensitivity with Near-Rationality: Evidence
        from Large Predertermined Payments," the National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Working Paper No. 21772.
Kueng, Lorenz. (2018). "Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers." The Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, 133(4), 1693-1751.
Lacetera, N. & Macis, M. (2010). "Social Image Concerns and Prosocial Behavior: Field
       Evidence from a Nonlinear Incentive Scheme." Journal of Economic Behavior &
       Organization, 76(2), 225-237.
Landry, C. E., Lange, A., List, J., Price, M. K., & Rupp, N. G. (2006). "Toward an
       Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field Experiment."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 747-782.
Landry, C. E., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M. K., & Rupp, N. G. (2010). "Is a Donor in Hand
       Better than Two in the Bush? Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment," American
       Economic Review, 100 (2010): pp. 958-983.
Landry, C. E., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M. K., & Rupp, N. G. (2012). "Using Donor Gifts to
       Drive Fundraising: Theory and Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment," Working
       Paper.

                                              28
Levitt, S. & List, J. (2007). "What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences
       Reveal About the Real World?" Journal of Economic Perpectives, 21(2), 153-174.
List, J. A. (2004). "Young, Selfish and Male: Field Evidence of Social Preferences." The
       Economic Journal, 114(492), 121­149.
List, J. A. (2011). "The Market for Charitable Giving." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       25(2), 157-80.
List, J. A. & Lucking-Reiley, D. (2002). "The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on Charitable
       Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign," Journal of
       Political Economy, 110(1), 215-233.
Meer, J. (2011). "Brother, Can You Spare a Dime: Peer Pressure in Charitable Solicitation."
       Journal of Public Economics. 95(7-8), 926-941.
Meier, St. (2007). "Do Subsidies Increase Charitable Giving in the Long Run? Matching
       Donations in a Field Experiment." Journal of the European Economic Association,
       5(6), 1203-1222.
Morgan, J. (2000). "Financing Public Goods by Means of Lotteries." Review of Economic
       Studies, 67(4), 761-784.
Morgan, J. & Sefton, M. (2000). "Funding Public Goods with Lotteries: Experimental
       Evidence." Review of Economic Studies, 67(4), 785-810.
Nolan, J. M., Schultz, P. W., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2008).
       "Normative Social Influence is Underdetected," Personality and Social Psychology
       Bulletin, 34(7), 913­923.
Null, C. (2011). "Warm Glow, Information, and Inefficient Charitable Giving," Journal of
       Public Economics, 95, 455-465.
Ottoni-Wilhelm, M., Vesterlund, L., & Xie, H. (2017). "Why do People Give? Testing Pure and
       Impure Altruism," American Economic Review, 107(11), 3617-3613.
Payne, A. A. (1998). "Does the Government Crowd-out Private Donations? New Evidence from
       a Sample of Nonprofit Firms." Journal of Public Economics, 69(3), 323-345.
Potters, J., Sefton, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). "Leading-by-example and Signaling in
       Voluntary Contribution Games: An Experimental Study." Economic Theory, 33(1), 169-
       182.



                                                29
Pruckner, G. & Sausgruber, R. (2013). "Honesty on the Streets: A Field Study on Newspaper
       Purchasing," Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(3), 661­679.
Scharf, K. & Smith, S. (2014). "The Price Elasticity of Charitable Giving: Does the Form of Tax
       Relief Matter?" International Tax and Public Finance, February 2014, 1-32.
Seira, E., Elizondo, A., & Laguna-Muggenburg, E. (2017). "Are Information Disclosures
       Effective? Evidence from the Credit Card Market," American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy, 9(1), 277-307.
Shang, J. & Croson, R. (2009). "A Field Experiment in Charitable Contribution: The Impact of
       Social Information on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods." The Economic Journal,
       119(540), 1422-1439.
Sieg, H. & Zhang, J., (2012). "The Importance of Managerial Capacity in Fundraising: Evidence
       from Land Conservation Charities," International Journal of Industrial Organization,
       30(6), 724-734.
Singh, J., Teng, N., and Netessine, S. (2019). "Philanthropic Campaigns and Customer Behavior:
       Field Experiments on an Online Taxi Booking Platform," Management Science, 65(2),
       913-932.
Smith, S., Windmeijer, F., & Wright, E. (2013). "Peer Effects in Charitable Giving: Evidence
       from the (Running) Field," The Economic Journal, 125(585), 1053-1071.
Tonin, M. and Vlassopoulos, M. (2010). "Disentangling the Sources of Pro-Socially Motivated
       Effort: A Field Experiment," Journal of Public Economics, 94, 1086-1092.
Tonin, M. and Vlassopoulos, M. (2014). "An Experimental Investigation of Intrinsic Motivations
       for Giving," Theory and Decision, 76, 47-67.
Vesterlund, L. (2003). "The Informational Value of Sequential Fundraising." Journal of Public
       Economics, Vol. 87(3-4), 627-657.
Watson, B, Guettabi, M. & Reimer, M. (2019). "Universal Cash and Crime." Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 1-45.
White, K., & Peloza, J. (2009). "Self-Benefit versus Other-Benefit Marketing Appeals: Their
       Effectiveness in Generating Charitable Support," Journal of Marketing, 73(4), 109­124.




                                              30
                                          Figure 1: Permanent Fund Dividend Amounts (1982-2015)
               1500




                                                                                                              2000
  Total Dispursed ($ Millions)




                                                                                                   Per Person Dividend ($)
                                                                                                                    1500
                     1000




                                                                                                      1000
     500




                                                                                                              500
               0




                                 1980   1985    1990     1995          2000   2005   2010   2015                             1980   1985   1990   1995          2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                Year                                                                                     Year



                                         (a) Total Disbursement                                                                      (b) Per Person Dividend



Note:                              Panel (a) gives information on total annual disbursements and panel (b) gives the
per person dividend amount. Data provided by the Permanent Fund Division of the Alaska
Department of Revenue.




                                               Table 1: Historic Patterns of Giving to Pick.Click.Give


                                                                        # of Donors Total Dollars Contributed
                                                        2009               4,005            $400,385
                                                        2010               7,657            $697,099
                                                        2011              15,863           $1,317,431
                                                        2012              20,436           $1,991,565
                                                        2013              24,336           $2,381,650
                                                        2014              26,610           $3,132,583
                                                        2015              31,587           $3,490,455
                                                       Note :  Cell entries provide data on historic patterns of giving
                                                       through the Pick.Click.Give program. Cell entries can be read
                                                       as follows: in 2009 there were 4,005 donors who gave a combined
                                                       $400,385 to eligible nonprots in the state.




                                                                                               1
                Figure 2: Treatment Postcard Benets to Others




Note: The upper frame shows the front page and the lower frame the back page of the Benets
to Others postcard. Treatment letters were delivered as standard-sized postcards. Variation
in framing is presented graphically on the front page and verbally on the back page.




                                             2
                  Figure 3: Treatment Postcard Benets to Self 




Note: The upper frame shows the front page and the lower frame the back page of the Benets
to Self  postcard. Treatment letters were delivered as standard-sized postcards. Variation in
framing is presented graphically on the front page and verbally on the back page.




                                             3
Figure 4: Geographic Overview of Experimental Population and Treatment Assignment




    Note: Alaskan ZIP codes are shaded according to their random treatment assignment. Light
    gray represents control (C) ZIP codes, medium gray Make Alaska Better (Others) ZIP codes,
    and dark gray Warm Your Heart (Self ) ZIP codes. White spaces are due to national parks or
    areas with very low population density, which were excluded from the randomization. Circles
    represent all PO boxes and their respective treatment assignment.




                                                4
Figure 5: Geographic Overview of Experimental Population and Treatment Assignment




                    (a) Anchorage                                (b) Fairbanks




                       (c) Juneau                                 (d) Kokiak



   Note: Alaska's main metropolitan area ZIP codes are shaded according to their random treat-
   ment assign- ment. Light gray represents control (C) ZIP codes, medium gray Make Alaska
   Better (MAB) ZIP codes, and dark gray Warm Your Heart (WYH) ZIP codes. White spaces
   are due to national parks or areas with very low population density, which were excluded from
   the randomization. Circles represent PO boxes and their respective treatment assignment.




                                                 5
            Table 2: Summary Statistics for 2014 Treatment Assignment


                                                          Control Others                Self
          Panel A: 2013
          Individuals                                     152,916 165,377             164,871
          Donors                                           7,103   7,589               9,644
          Donation Rate                                    0.046   0.045               0.058
          Total Donations                                 648,475 733,300             999,875
          Average Donation                                 4.240   4.434               6.064
          Panel B: 2014 [Year of Treatment]
          Individuals                                     169,441 187,468 183,215
          Donors                                            7,552  8,498    10,560
          Donation Rate                                     0.044  0.045     0.057
          Donation Rate (Warm-list)                        0.668   0.685     .704
          Donation Rate (Cold List)                         0.017  0.018     0.021
          Total Donations                                 807,548 976,725 1,348,310
          Average Donation                                 4.766   5.210    7.359
          Average Donation (Warm-list)                     80.555 91.429 100.871
          Average Donation (Cold-list)                      1.449  1.572     2.163
          Zip Codes                                          89      90        89
          Panel C: 2015
          Individuals                                     154,169 167,359 166,441
          Donors                                           9,304    9,985     12,298
          Donation Rate                                    0.060     .059     0.073
          Total Donations                                 941,137 1,084,536 1,464,782
          Average Donation                                 6.104    6.480     8.800
         Note :   Summary statistics are presented for campaign years 2013 (Panel A), 2014 (Panel
         B), and 2015 (Panel C). All cell entries are based on the random assignment of the 2014
         campaign. Treatment postcards were only delivered in 2014. Statistics are for online lers
         only.




                                        Table 3: Means Tests


                          (1)                      (2)        (3)                p-value
                       Control                   Others      Self     (1):(2)    (1):(3)       (2):(3)
  Propensity to Donate 0.044                     0.045      0.057      0.871      0.002         0.008
                        (.003)                   (.004)     (.004)
  Average Donation      4.765                    5.209      7.358      0.612      0.001         0.028
                        (.461)                   (.874)     (.780)
  Registered Online     0.823                    0.815      0.843     0 .767      0.487         0.241
                        (.022)                   (.026)     (.029)
Note : Cell entries in columns 1-3 provide variable means in 2014. Registered Online is the share of
people ling for their PFD online, which is necessary to participate in the PCG program. We present
p-values of two-sample t-tests comparing dierent treatment groups in the last three columns. Standard
errors are clustered at the zip code level.




                                                     6
                                                                 Table 4: Donation: 2013-2014


                                                                         Full Data                                    Cold List Warm List
                                                        (1)             (2)        (3)                          (4)      (5)       (6)
                   2014                                .7795          .7795 .7066                            .7436      1.340    -10.740
                                                      (.1844)        (.1844) (.1836)                        (.1838)    (.1181) (2.593)
                   Others×2014                         .3684          .3684 .3737                            .3710      .1124     5.542
                                                      (.2910)        (.2910) (.2911)                        (.2911)    (.1973) (3.543)
                   Self×2014                           .9267          .9267 .9221                             .9244     .6459     7.933
                                                      (.2769)        (.2769) (.2762)                        (.2765)    (.1989) (3.096)
                   Donor 2013                                         93.749                                 93.219
                                                                     (3.147)                                (3.132)
                   Female                                                        2.131                       -.2404
                                                                               (.1230)                      (.1010)
                   Under 18                                                     -3.612                       -1.211
                                                                               (.3074)                      (.1360)
                   Over 49                                                       4.942                       2.436
                                                                               (.3447)                      (.2586)
                   (Self-Others)×2014 .5583                           .5583 .5483                            .5534   .5335                   2.390
                                      (.3056)                        (.3056) (.3050)                        (.3053) (.2249)                 (2.949)
                   R2                   .004                           .189       .009                         .190   .003                    .018
                   N                  966,328                        966,328 966,328                        966,328 917,656                 48,672
                           Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
                           the zip code level. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49).
                           Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                        Figure 6: Average Donation and & Propensity to Donate
           .06




                                                                                                8
                                                                                                6
Propensity to Donate (%)
                  .04




                                                                                         Average Donation
                                                                                               4
 .02




                                                                                                2
           0




                                                                                                0




                              Control       Make Alaska Better     Warm Your Heart                          Control    Make Alaska Better    Warm Your Heart



                                (a) Propensity to Donate                                                    (b) Average Donation Amount




                                                                                     7
                         Table 5: Propensity to Donate: 2013-2014


                               Full Data                                        Cold List Warm List
                      (1)     (2)        (3)    (4)                                (5)       (6)
2014                .0003 .0003 -.0000 .0003                                      .0165    -.3319
                   (.0005) (.0005) (.0005) (.0005)                               (.0010) (.0078)
Others×2014         .0021 .0021 .0021 .0021                                       .0012     .0174
                   (.0007) (.0007) (.0007) (.0007)                               (.0015) (.0110)
Self×2014           0.0020 .0020 .0020 .0020                                      .0043     .0365
                   (.0009) (.0009) (.0009) (.0009)                               (.0014) (.0107)
Donor 2013                  .8337              .832
                           (.0025)           (.0025)
Female                                 .0246 .0034
                                     (.0009) (.0002)
Under 18                              -.0251 -.0036
                                     (.0014) (.0003)
Over 49                                .0248 .0025
                                     (.0013) (.0003)
(Self-Others)×2014 -.00009 -.00009 -.0001 -.0001                                   .0031            .0191
                   (.0009) (.0009) (.0009) (.0009)                                (.0014)          (.0106)
R 2                  .006    .685       .017   .685                                 .010             .193
N                  966,328 966,328 966,328 966,328                                917,656          48,672
  Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
  the zip code level. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49).
  Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                       8
                 Table 6: Donation Conditional on Giving: 2013-2014


                               Full Data                                        Cold List Warm List
                             (1)
                             (2)        (3)                          (4)           (5)       (6)
2014                       42.007
                           42.007 41.408                           41.518        81.084    22.151
                           (3.259)
                           (3.259) (3.220)                        (3.227)        (5.321) (3.380)
Others×2014                 5.286
                            5.286 5.319                             5.313         .8357     6.511
                           (5.127)
                           (5.127) (5.106)                        (5.109)        (7.208) (5.321)
Self×2014                  10.076
                           10.076 10.010                          10.022         13.979     9.412
                           (4.287)
                           (4.287) (4.241)                        (4.249)        (6.875) (4.288)
Donor 2013                 75.404                                 69.964
                           (2.882)                                (2.912)
Female                                -9.758                      -13.008
                                     (1.888)                      (1.896)
Under 18                             -47.347                      -41.391
                                     (3.302)                      (2.976)
Over 49                               35.119                      28.698
                                     (3.604)                      (3.574)
(Self-Others)×2014 4.789 4.789 4.691                               4.7090        13.143            2.901
                   (4.839) (4.839) (4.819)                       (4.8231)        (6.525)          (4.884)
R 2                 .036 .075 .058                                  .091          .126              .027
N                  50,392 50,392 50,392                            50,392        16,908           33,484
  Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
  the zip code level. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49).
  Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                       9
                                   Figure 7: Treatment Eects by Year




                                                             .007
  .007




                                                             .002
  .002




                                                             -.003
  -.003




                                                             -.008
  -.008
  -.013




                                                             -.013
  -.018




                                                             -.018




          2008          2010     2012      2014       2016           2008        2010       2012       2014     2016
                                 Year                                                       Year



                 (a) Others: Propensity to Donate                           (b) Self: Proptensity to Donate
  2




                                                             2
  1




                                                             1
  0




                                                             0
  -1




                                                             -1
  -2




                                                             -2
  -3




                                                             -3




          2008          2010     2012      2014       2016           2008        2010       2012       2014     2016
                                 Year                                                       Year



                      (c) Others: Donation                                        (d) Self: Donation



Note:            The reference year is 2013. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. For
both average donation size and the propensity to give, treatment eects are estimated using
a balanced panel and           N = 2, 120, 251.   For the upper panel           R2 = .556   and for the lower panel
 2
R = .524.




                                                        10
                  Figure 8: Donation, Conditional on Giving by Year
  20




                                                     20
  15




                                                     15
  10




                                                     10
  5




                                                     5
  0




                                                     0
  -5




                                                     -5
  -10




                                                     -10
  -15




                                                     -15




        2008   2010        2012    2014     2016           2008   2010           2012       2014   2016
                           Year                                                  Year



                      (a) Others                                           (b) Self



Note: The reference year is 2013. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. Data is
restricted to those individuals that gave in 2014.    N = 128, 261       and   R2 = .552.




                                              11
Figure 9: Propensity to Donate by Year: Conditional on Previous Participation
  .08




                                                               .08
  .055




                                                               .055
  .03




                                                               .03
  .005




                                                               .005
  -.02




                                                               -.02
  -.045




                                                               -.045




          2008       2010      2012        2014         2016           2008         2010      2012           2014       2016
                               Year                                                           Year



                 (a) Others: Previously Gave                                      (b) Self: Previously Gave
  .01




                                                               .01
  .005




                                                               .005
  0




                                                               0
  -.005




                                                               -.005




          2008       2010      2012        2014         2016           2008         2010      2012           2014       2016
                               Year                                                           Year



           (c) Others: Did Not Previously Give                                (d) Self: Did Not Previously Give



Note: The reference year is 2013. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. Previ-
ously Gave indicates that a subject gave at least once from 2009 to 2013. Treatment eects
are estimated using a balanced panel. For the upper panel                          N = 175, 007      and   R2 = .411.   For
                                                   2
the lower panel         N = 1, 945, 244   and     R = .208.




                                                          12
           Figure 10: Donation by Year: Conditional on Previous Participation
  15




                                                                   15
  10




                                                                   10
  5




                                                                   5
  0




                                                                   0
  -5




                                                                   -5
  -10




                                                                   -10
  -15




                                                                   -15




        2008       2010      2012        2014               2016         2008         2010      2012           2014       2016
                             Year                                                               Year



               (a) Others: Previously Gave                                          (b) Self: Previously Gave
  1.1




                                                                   1.1
  .9




                                                                   .9
  .7




                                                                   .7
  .5




                                                                   .5
  .3




                                                                   .3
  .1




                                                                   .1
  -.1




                                                                   -.1
  -.3




                                                                   -.3
  -.5




                                                                   -.5




        2008       2010      2012        2014               2016         2008         2010      2012           2014       2016
                             Year                                                               Year



         (c) Others: Did Not Previously Give                                    (d) Self: Did Not Previously Give



Note: The reference year is 2013. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. Previ-
ously Gave indicates that a subject gave at least once from 2009 to 2013. Treatment eects
are estimated using a balanced panel. For the upper panel                            N = 175, 007      and   R2 = .526.   For
                                                    2
the lower panel       N = 1, 945, 244   and     R       =.198.




                                                              13
1   Appendix

                      Table A.1: The 20 Most Popular Recipients

                                                      # of Donations            Cause Type
         Beans Café: The Children's Lunchbox               2253               Human Services
         KSKA Alaska Public Media                          1554        Arts, Culture, and Humanities
         Abused Women's Aid in Crisis Inc.                 1380               Human Services
         Food Bank of Alaska                               1248               Human Services
         Alaska Dog and Puppy Rescue                       1208                   Animals
         Brother Francis Shelter Clare House                916               Human Services
         Friends of Pets                                    900                   Animals
         Planned Parenthood of the Great Northwest          826                    Health
         Alaska SPCA                                        635                   Animals
         American Red Cross                                 559               Human Services
         Fairbanks Animal Shelter Fund                      507                   Animals
         The Salvation Army                                 476               Human Services
         Alaska Zoo                                         469                   Animals
         Adopt a Cat                                        442                   Animals
         Fairbanks Community Food Bank                      440               Human Services
         Make a Wish Foundation                             425                    Health
         Aiding Women in Abuse and Rape Emergencies         412               Human Services
         Hospice of Anchorage                               360                    Health
         Alaska Special Olympics                            348               Human Services
         Standing Together Against Rape                     339                Public Benet
                                                       Total Dollars            Cause Type
         Beans Café: The Chilren's Lunchbox              $161,025             Human Services
         KSKA Alaska Public Media                        $147,500      Arts, Culture, and Humanities
         Food Bank of Alaska                             $117,800             Human Services
         Brother Francis Shelter Clare House             $90,225              Human Services
         Abused Women's Aid in Crisis                    $85,925              Human Services
         Planed Parenthood of Great Northwest            $70,275                   Health
         Alaska Dog and Puppy Rescue                     $63,000                  Animals
         Friends of Pets                                 $55,800                  Animals
         Alaska SPCA                                     $41,875                  Animals
         American Red Cross                              $39,725              Human Services
         The Salvation Army                              $38,725              Human Services
         University of Alaska, Fairbanks                 $35,250                 Education
         Fairbanks Animal Shelter Fund                   $31,500                  Animals
         Fairbanks Community Food Bank Service            $29,525             Human Services
         Adopt a Cat                                     $28,775                  Animals
         Hospice of Anchorage                            $28,400                   Health
         Kenai Peninsula Food Bank                       $25,950              Human Services
         Aiding Women in abuse and Rape Emergencies       $25,650             Human Services
         University of Alaska, Anchorage                 $24,600                 Education
         Big Brothers Big Sisters of Alaska              $23,950              Human Services
        Note : All outcomes measured in 2014.




                                                      1
                         Table A.2: Donation: 2013-2014 (Cities)


                                             Full Data                         Cold List   Warm List
                              (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
2014                        1.412         1.412          1.325       1.366      1.833       -5.313
                           (.1859)       (.1859)      (.1847)      (.1851)      (.1382)     (1.725)
Others×2014                 .0757         .0757          .0749       .0753      -.0363       1.529
                           (.4360)       (.4360)      (.4354)      (.4356)      (.2777)     (4.031)
Self×2014                   .6334         .6334          .6346       .6288      .4461        3.883
                            (.347)       (.3478)      (.3457)      (.3466)      (.2650)     (2.739)
Donor 2013                               103.02                    102.392
                                         (3.914)                   (3.905)
Female                                                   2.476      -.5330
                                                      (.2009)      (.1545)
Under 18                                               -5.122       -1.775
                                                      (.4368)      (.2224)
Over 49                                                  5.913       3.119
                                                      (.4898)      (.4262)
(Self-Others)×2014          .5577         .5577          .5497       .5535      .4824        2.353
                           (.4918)       (.4918)      (.4908)      (.4913)      (.3304)     (4.220)
R2                          .0026          .189          .008        .190        .002        .009
N                          474,682      474,682       474,682      474,682     446,302      28,380
 Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered
 at the zip code level. Only zip codes in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau are included. Individuals
 younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49). Columns 5 and 6 give the results
 after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                     2
                Table A.3: Propensity to Donate: 2013-2014 (Cities)


                                             Full Data                         Cold List   Warm List
                              (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
2014                        .0009         .0009          .0005       .0008      .0210       -.3202
                           (.0005)       (.0005)      (.0005)      (.0005)      (.0003      (.0084)
Others×2014                 .0011         .0011          .0011       .0011      -.0007       .0118
                           (.0007)       (.0007)      (.0007)      (.0007)      (.0016)     (.0134)
Self×2014                   .0021         .0021          .0021       .0021      .0017        .0305
                           (.0010)       (.0010)      (.0010)      (.0010)      (.0011)     (.0112)
Donor 2013                                .8380                      .8366
                                         (.0026)                   (.0026)
Female                                                   .0283       .0037
                                                      (.0012)      (.0004)
Under 18                                               -.0320       -.0047
                                                      (.0014)      (.0005)
Over 49                                                  .0246       .0017
                                                      (.0017)      (.0005)
(Self-Others)×2014          .0009         .0009          .0009       .0009      .0024        .0186
                           (.0010)       (.0010)      (.0010)      (.0010)      (.0019)     (.0128)
R2                          .0032          .690          .014        .690        .011        .179
N                          474,682      474,682       474,682      474,682     446,302      28,380
 Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered
 at the zip code level. Only zip codes in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau are included. Individuals
 younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49). Columns 5 and 6 give the results
 after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                     3
Table A.4: Donation: 2013-2014 (Matching on Physical and Mailing Zip Code)


                                               Full Data                           Cold List      Warm List
                                (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)              (6)
2014                           .7357        .7357        .6591         .6983         1.277           -10.470
                             (.1951)       (.1951)      (.1948)       (.1950)       (.1154)          (3.018)
Others×2014                    .4311        .4311        .4352         .4331         .1646            5.992
                             (.3141)       (.3141)      (.3144)       (.3143)       (.1953)          (4.146)
Self×2014                      .9717        .9717        .9651         .9685         .7135            7.703
                             (.2919)       (.2919)      (.2913)       (.2916)       (.2204)          (3.401)
Donor 2013                                 94.286                     93.709
                                           (3.432)                    (3.410)
Female                                                   2.119        -.2209
                                                        (.1253)       (.1106)
Under 18                                                 -3.649       -1.244
                                                        (.3346)       (.1478)
Over 49                                                  5.183         2.529
                                                        (.4036)       (.2925)
(Self-Others)×2014             .5406        .5406        .5298         .5353         .5489            1.710
                             (.3282)       (.3282)      (.3279)       (.3280)       (.2451)          (3.247)
R2                             .004          .192         .010          .192          .003             .018
N                            793,714      793,714       793,714      793,714        753,280          40,434
     Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
     the zip code level. Only those individuals with matching mailing and physical zip codes are included in
     the sample. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49). Columns
     5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                         4
Table A.5: Propensity to Donate: 2013-2014 (Matching on Physical and Mailing Zip Code)


                                                    Full Data                           Cold List      Warm List
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)              (6)
     2014                           .0004        .0004        .0000         .0003         .0160            -.3238
                                  (.0006)       (.0006)      (.0006)       (.0006)       (.0012)          (.0080)
     Others×2014                    .0020        .0020        .0020         .0020         .0015            .0149
                                  (.0009)       (.0009)      (.0009)       (.0009)       (.0017)          (.0118)
     Self×2014                      .0023        .0023        .0023         .0023         .0051            .0352
                                  (.0010)       (.0010)      (.0010)       (.0010)       (.0016)          (.0110)
     Donor 2013                                  .8371                      .8357
                                                (.0026)                    (.0026)
     Female                                                   .0242         .0033
                                                             (.0010)       (.0003)
     Under 18                                                 -.0250       -.0036
                                                             (.0015)       (.0003)
     Over 49                                                  .0261         .0025
                                                             (.0014)       (.0004)
     (Self-Others)×2014             .0003        .0003        .0003         .0003         .0036            .0203
                                  (.0010)       (.0010)      (.0010)       (.0010)       (.0015)          (.0116)
     R2                             .007          .690         .018          .690          .010             .189
     N                            793,714      793,714       793,714      793,714        753,280          40,434
          Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
          the zip code level. Only those individuals with matching mailing and physical zip codes are included in
          the sample. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49). Columns
          5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                              5
                      Table A.6: Donation: 2013-2014 (No P.O. Boxes)


                                               Full Data                       Cold List      Warm List
                                (1)          (2)             (3)     (4)           (5)             (6)
2014                          .7651         .7651        .6882      .7269         1.367         -11.102
                             (.2208)      (.2208)       (.2199)    (.2202)      (.1357)         (2.980)
Others×2014                   .4290         .4290        .4336      .4312         .1281          6.256
                             (.3479)      (.3479)       (.3482)    (.3481)      (.2236)         (4.139)
Self×2014                     1.073         1.073        1.067      1.070         .7280          8.978
                             (.3190)      (.3190)       (.3183)    (.3186)      (.2299)         (3.400)
Donor 2013                                 94.614                  94.046
                                          (3.624)                  (3.605)
Female                                                   2.128     -.2949
                                                        (.1307)    (.1136)
Under 18                                                -3.795     -1.263
                                                        (.3664)    (.1568)
Over 49                                                  5.282      2.621
                                                        (.4049)    (.3057)
(Self-Others)×2014            .6647         .6447        .6336      .6392         .5998          2.721
                             (.3540)      (.3540)       (.3537)    (.3538)      (.2569)         (3.307)
R2                             .003         .191         .009       .192          .002            .015
N                            779,002      779,002      779,002     779,002      738,182          40,820
     Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
     the zip code level. All zip codes corresponding to a P.O. Box are dropped. Individuals younger than 18
     (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49). Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting
     the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                         6
          Table A.7: Propensity to Donate: 2013-2014 (No P.O. Boxes)


                                            Full Data                        Cold List      Warm List
                             (1)           (2)            (3)      (4)           (5)             (6)
2014                        .0005        .0005           .0001    .0004        .0171           -.3275
                           (.0005)      (.0005)      (.0005)     (.0005)      (.0012)         (.0088)
Others×2014                 .0028        .0028           .0028    .0028        .0016           .0211
                           (.0009)      (.0009)      (.0009)     (.0009)      (.0017)         (.0120)
Self×2014                   .0025        .0025           .0025    .0025        .0047           .0399
                           (.0010)      (.0009)      (.0009)     (.0009)      (.0015)         (.0113)
Donor 2013                               .8369                    .8355
                                        (.0027)                  (.0027)
Female                                                   .0251    .0035
                                                     (.0010)     (.0002)
Under 18                                              -.0262     -.00372
                                                     (.0017)     (.0004)
Over 49                                                  .0257    .0021
                                                     (.0014)     (.0004)
(Self-Others)×2014         -.0002        -.0002       -.0003     -.0002        .0031           .0187
                           (.0010)      (.0010)      (.0010)     (.0010)      (.0015)         (.0107)
R2                           .005         .687           .015     .687          .010            .183
N                         779,002       779,002      779,002     779,002      738,182         40,820
 Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered at
 the zip code level. All zip codes corresponding to a P.O. Box are dropped. Individuals younger than 18
 (older than 49) are dened as Under 18 (Over 49). Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting
 the data to cold-list and warm-list donors, respectively.




                                                     7
               Table A.8: Donation: 2013-2014 (Zip Mismatch Only)


                                            Full Data                         Cold List      Warm List
                             (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)             (6)
2014                       .9810        .9810           .9166     .9492          1.595          -9.817
                          (.2403)      (.2403)      (.2375)      (.2380)        (.1575)         (3.332)
Others×2014                .1700        .1700           .1787     .1743         -.0550           3.072
                          (.6612)      (.6612)      (.6575)      (.6594)        (.5647)         (5.921)
Self×2014                  .9505        .9506           .9508     .9507          .4547           9.645
                          (.6935)      (.6935)      (.6899)      (.6917)        (.3675)         (9.602)
Donor 2013                              99.908                   99.5643
                                       (6.576)                   (6.550)
Female                                                  2.813     -.2855
                                                    (.4828)      (.2836)
Under 18                                             -3.845       -1.151
                                                    (.7308)      (.4125)
Over 49                                                 3.926     1.938
                                                    (.5322)      (.4867)
(Self-Others)×2014         .4846        .7804           .7720     .7763          .5098           6.573
                          (.8237)      (.7916)      (.8908)      (.8934)        (.6359)        (10.249)
R2                          .005         .184           .009       .184          .003             .045
N                         105,440      105,440      105,440      105,440       100,064           5,376
 Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered
 at the zip code level. The sample is restricted to individuals for which their 2014 mailing zip code did
 not match their physical zip code. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under
 18 (Over 49). Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list
 donors, respectively.




                                                    8
       Table A.9: Propensity to Donate: 2013-2014 (Zip Mismatch Only)


                                            Full Data                         Cold List      Warm List
                             (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)             (6)
2014                       -.0006       -.0006       -.0009       -.0006         .0189          -.3597
                          (.0011)      (.0011)      (.0011)      (.0011)        (.0013)         (.0222)
Others×2014                .0018        .0018           .0019     .0019         -.0011           .0179
                          (.0015)      (.0015)      (.0015)      (.0015)        (.0029)         (.0269)
Self×2014                  .0005        .0005           .0005     .0005         -.0013           .0248
                          (.0024)      (.0024)      (.0024)      (.0024)        (.0028)         (.0264)
Donor 2013                              .8247                     .8232
                                       (.0056)                   (.0057)
Female                                                  .0300     .0044
                                                    (.0023)      (.0008)
Under 18                                             -.0253       -.0030
                                                    (.0031)      (.0009)
Over 49                                                 .0191     .0027
                                                    (.0027)      (.0010)
(Self-Others)×2014         -.0013       -.0014       -.0014       -.0014        -.0002           .0196
                          (.0023)      (.0022)      (.0023)      (.0023)        (.0036)         (.0232)
R2                          .009         .680           .018       .680          .013             .215
N                         105,440      105,440      105,440      105,440       100,064           5,376
 Note : Columns 1-6 include zip code xed eects. Panels are balanced and standard errors clustered
 at the zip code level. The sample is restricted to individuals for which their 2014 mailing zip code did
 not match their physical zip code. Individuals younger than 18 (older than 49) are dened as Under
 18 (Over 49). Columns 5 and 6 give the results after restricting the data to cold-list and warm-list
 donors, respectively.




                                                    9
