                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CAPITAL CONTROLS:
                         A SURVEY OF THE NEW LITERATURE

                                     Alessandro Rebucci
                                         Chang Ma

                                     Working Paper 26558
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26558


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




Paper prepared for the Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. For useful
comments and discussions, we are grateful to the Editor (Kenneth Kletzer), an anonymous
referee, Gianluca Benigno, Kristin Forbes, Michael Klein, Anton Korinek, and Nico Magud.
Alessandro Rebucci gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Johns Hopkins Catalyst
Award Grant Program. Chang Ma gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Shanghai
Pujiang Program. The usual disclaimers apply. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alessandro Rebucci and Chang Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Controls: A Survey of the New Literature
Alessandro Rebucci and Chang Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 26558
December 2019
JEL No. F38,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper reviews selected post-Global Financial Crisis theoretical and empirical contributions on
capital controls and identifies three theoretical motives for the use of this policy tools: pecuniary
externalities in models of financial crises, aggregate demand externalities in new-Keynesian models of
the business cycle, and terms of trade manipulation in open economy models with pricing power.
Pecuniary and demand externalities offer the most compelling case for the adoption of capital controls,
but macroprudential policy can also address the same distortion. So, in general, capital controls are not
the only instrument that can do the job. If evaluated through the lenses of the new theories, the
empirical evidence reviewed suggests that capital controls can have the intended effects, even though
the extant literature is inconclusive as to whether the effects documented amount to a net gain or loss
for the economies that adopted these policies. Terms of trade manipulation also provides a clear cut
theoretical case for the use of capital controls, but this motive is less compelling because of the
spillover and coordination issues inherent with the use of control on capital flows for this purpose.


Alessandro Rebucci
Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER
arebucci@jhu.edu

Chang Ma
Fudan University,
Fanhai International School of Finance
Shanghai 200433
CHINA
machang.china@gmail.com
1    Background and Motivation
One lesson learned from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the accompanying great reces-
sion of 2007-2009, as well as the emerging market crises of the 1990s and the 2000s, is that
financial crises are very difficult and costly to resolve -- see, for instance, Rogoff and Reinhart
(2009) and Cerra and Saxena (2008). As a result of these dramatic experiences, academic in-
terest has turned to policies aimed at preventing financial crises, including the so-called macro-
prudential policies and capital controls. On the policy front, crisis-prevention policies had been
discussed in international policy circles at least since the Asian crisis, but only more recently
the leading international organizations and central banks have become more open to consider
the prudential use of older-fashioned capital controls that discriminate between residents and
non-residents. The IMF, in particular, historically a strong supporter of free capital mobility,
changed its institutional view in 2012 -- e.g., IMF (2012) -- adopting a more open-minded
attitude toward these policies.
     The extant pre-GFC literature on capital controls was mostly empirical and not firmly
grounded in theory. It also tended to conclude that these instruments are not effective and
possibly costly. For example, in their survey, Magud, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2018) identify four
rationales for the use of capital controls: (i) fear of appreciation; (ii) fear of hot money; (iii) fear
of large inflows; and (iv) fear of loss of monetary autonomy -- all based on observable policy
objectives. In a meta-analysis of close to 40 papers, they conclude that capital controls may
provide some space for monetary policy independence and may be able to alter the composition
of capital flows. However, capital controls alone (i.e., without reserve accumulation) did not
seem effective at managing the real exchange rate in the face of excessive upward or downward
pressures or at affecting total flows.
     The post-GFC literature on capital controls is grounded in theory more firmly. The focus of
the new theoretical literature is on alternative justifications for the adoption of capital controls
and the analysis of the welfare gains associated with their optimal use in calibrated general
equilibrium models. The new empirical literature describes policies pursued by governments
and also aims at quantifying the causal effects of controls (in partial equilibrium settings) on
observable variables identified in the policy debate, or featuring the theoretical models.
     This survey reviews post-GFC theoretical and empirical contributions on capital controls.
To the extent possible, the survey focuses on capital controls narrowly defined. In particular, in
this paper, the term "capital controls" refers to quantity- or price-based restrictions on financial
asset and liability transactions (i.e., purchases or sales) between residents and non-residents.
It is important to note here that capital controls so defined are a narrower set of the so-called


                                                   2
"capital flow management" measures (CFMs). The latter also includes restrictions and regu-
lations on foreign exchange denominated instruments or other financial instruments that may
affect capital flows and the exchange rate, but do not discriminate between residents and non-
residents -- see IMF (2012) for specific CFM examples. As a consequence, this survey covers
mostly theoretical and empirical contributions that focus on capital controls narrowly defined,
even though papers on macroprudential policy more broadly defined will be discussed to the
extent to which they are critical for the exposition.1
    The discussion of the theoretical contributions is organized around alternative justifications
for the adoption of capital controls. The first group of papers focuses on financial stability
concerns arising from pecuniary externalities in models of financial crises with occasionally
binding borrowing constraints. A second group includes contributions that justify capital con-
trols as a means to address aggregate demand deficiency when monetary policy is constrained in
New-Keynesian models of the business cycle, giving rise to the so-called demand externalities.
Under this heading also falls the discussion of papers that justify the use of capital controls with
the time-honored issue of the trilemma of international finance, i.e., papers that justify capital
controls with the desire of seeking or preserving monetary policy independence. There is also
a portion of the new theoretical literature that analyzes capital controls, together with mone-
tary or exchange rate policy, in the presence of both pecuniary and demand externalities. A
last group of papers motivates capital controls with the objective of affecting the terms-of-trade
open economies with pricing power. The discussion of the new empirical literature is organized
around two lines. The first concentrated on describing what capital control policies countries
pursue. The second on the traditional question of capital controls effectiveness. The paper also
highlights and discusses references for further reading and on this topic and promising areas of
future research. The lessons learned are summarized in the concluding section.


2     Capital Controls and Pecuniary Externalities
In a series of recent papers, capital controls have been proposed as a macroeconomic policy
tool to address financial stability concerns in the face of volatile capital flows. In particu-
lar, researchers have investigated the pros and cons of taxes on foreign debt, interpreted as
economy-wide capital controls, to address the consequences of pecuniary externalities arising
from occasionally binding collateral constraints.
    The normative analysis of capital controls motivated by a financial stability concern is based
    1 See Erten, Korinek, and Ocampo (forthcoming) and Engel (2016) for surveys of the literature on capital
controls more broadly defined as CFMs and macroprudential policies.


                                                     3
on variants of a common theoretical framework, with occasionally binding leverage or collateral
constraints, proposed and quantitatively investigated by Mendoza (2002) and Mendoza (2010).
With occasionally binding leverage constraints, financial crises are endogenous, nested in reg-
ular business cycles, identified as rare events in which capital flows come to a sudden stop and
output drops more than in a typical recession. When a small negative shock hits the economy,
if leverage is high enough, the constraint can bind. A binding leverage constraint amplifies the
effects of the triggering shock through fire sales dynamics, and debt deflation spirals driven by
declining collateral valuations as in Fisher (1933). Because this modeling environment nests
both crisis events and regular business cycles, it is a particularly well-suited laboratory to study
the role of crisis-prevention policies, called macro-prudential policies in the literature.2 These
are policies that are implemented in normal times to contain the frequency and the severity of
amplification and fire-sale dynamics in crisis times.3
     With occasionally binding constraints, atomistic private agents that do not internalize the
effect of their decisions on the aggregate borrowing limit give rise to pecuniary externalities
and inefficient resource allocation. Pecuniary externalities can arise through redistributive or
allocative mechanisms induced by the impact of individual decisions on the market value of
the collateral (D´avila and Korinek (2018)). To keep the exposition simple and conserve space,
however, in what follows, we focus only on pecuniary externalities working through the al-
locative effects induced by the presence of a relative price in the specification of the borrowing
constraint.4
     The atomistic behavior of private agents is generally immaterial (and hence the pecuniary
nature of the externality). However, when the collateral constraint binds, as Korinek (2007)
showed, the individual borrowing decision has an external effect on the relative market price of
collateral and thus also on the aggregate resource allocation in the competitive equilibrium of
the economy because the collateral value determines borrowing and hence expenditure.5 In this
environment, a social planner who faces the same borrowing constraint as the private agents
    2 The  term "macroprudential" is used in analogy with the microeconomic prudential regulations traditionally
applied to banks.
     3 See Bordo and Jeanne (2002) for an early formulation and analysis of this problem in a simplified version of

Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).
     4 See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003), Caballero and Lorenzoni (2014) and Lorenzoni (2008) for exam-

ples of pecuniary externalities working through redistributive effects. See Erten et al. (forthcoming) for a survey
of the theoretical literature on pecuniary externalities working through both mechanisms in the context of a simple
reduced-form model.
     5 More generally, pecuniary externalities are consequential for the resource allocation, and the equilibrium is

inefficient, if markets are incomplete, there is imperfect information, and there are multiple goods, thus failing to
meet the conditions for the first welfare theorem -- see for instance Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) and Geanakoplos
and Polemarchakis (1986).



                                                         4
(i.e., a constrained social planner, or SP for brevity) but takes into account the consequences
of her choices on the market value of collateral would generally achieve less volatility and
financial amplification relative to a competitive equilibrium (CE). Moreover, in certain model
setups, the social planner chooses to restrict borrowing ex-ante relative to the private agents.
As a result, borrowing in the CE can be inefficiently larger than in the SP, and the economy
displays "overborrowing", which is quantified by comparing savings in the two allocations.6
     In models with occasionally binding constraints, however, overborrowing is neither neces-
sary nor sufficient for the inefficiency of the decentralized equilibrium.7 Similarly, as D´   avila
and Korinek (2018) point out, amplification and fire sales dynamics too are neither sufficient
nor necessary for the inefficiency of the competitive equilibrium. Indeed, excess amplification
and fire sales can also happen with underborrowing -- e.g., Benigno et al. (2013). Moreover, fi-
nancial crises and amplification also feature the SP but, compared with the CE, they are smaller
and less frequent.
     In an endowment economy version of the model in Mendoza (2002), Bianchi (2011) and
Korinek (2018) show that there is overborrowing and capital controls can implement the SP
allocation. In this sense, capital controls, modeled as distortionary taxes on external debt rebated
with lump-sum transfers, can be desirable for financial stability purposes from the perspective of
the pecuniary externality literature. Consider, for instance, the infinite horizon model of Bianchi
(2011). This is a small open economy with two types of goods, tradables and nontradables,
and an international borrowing constraint that depends on the relative price of nontradables,
typically interpreted as the real exchange rate. Bianchi (2011) shows that, in this economy,
under certain parameter restrictions, the competitive equilibrium always entails overborrowing,
and that a prudential tax on debt can support the SP allocation as a decentralized equilibrium.
The capital control policy that decentralizes the SP allocation is a small state-contingent tax
when the constraint is not binding, but expected to bind in the future with positive probability,
and otherwise equal to zero.8 Capital control policy reduces the frequency and severity of
financial crises in the model. Consequently, this policy is welfare improving despite introducing
a tax distortion in the economy. However, as Mendoza (2010) and Schmitt-Groh´           e and Uribe
(2016a) noted, in this class of models, the welfare differences between the CE and SP are very
    6 See  Uribe (2006) for an early discussion of this concept, distinguishing between individual and aggregate
specifications of the borrowing constraint.
     7 See, for instance, Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2010, 2013), Davila, Hong, Krusell, and

R´ios-Rull (2012), Schmitt-Groh´ e and Uribe (2016b).
     8 Note that the tax is zero also when the constraint binds. This is because of two reasons. First, in this

endowment economy, the SP and CE allocations coincide when the constraint binds or it does not bind and is not
expected to bind in the future. Crises, therefore, are efficient events in this setup, while the run-up to the crisis is
not. Second, the tax on debt cannot affect the borrowing constraint when it binds.


                                                           5
small, typically in the order of 0.1% permanent increase in annual consumption. The welfare
gains become even smaller when the model is calibrated to typical emerging market economies
data like Mexico, which have lower income volatility and more patience than the calibrated
value of these parameters for Argentina (see Benigno et al. (2010)).
    Jeanne and Korinek (2018) and Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) analyze models in which do-
mestic assets rather than income are pledged as collateral for borrowing and focus on macro-
prudential policies rather than capital controls. Thus, the pecuniary externality arises because
private agents fail to internalize the effect of their decisions on a domestic asset price entering
the collateral constraint, rather than a relative good price. Specifying the borrowing constraint
as a function of an asset price introduces time-consistency considerations, which enrich the
policy analysis but also add significant computational complexity. However, the main policy
implications of the analysis are similar to those of Bianchi (2011) and Korinek (2018).
    In a series of papers, Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2010, 2012, 2013, 2019a)
study the effects of pecuniary externalities and the desirability of alternative ex-ante and ex-
post policies to remedy their consequences, based on the production model of Mendoza (2002).
They show that, with a production margin that affects the collateral value in the borrowing
constraint, capital controls alone cannot restore constrained efficiency and are generally sub-
optimal policy instruments.9 For example, the benchmark production economy of Benigno
et al. (2013), calibrated to Mexico, always underborrows. In that context, they also show that
imposing a fixed one percent tax on borrowing in "tranquil times" is welfare-reducing, despite
the fact that it reduces the probability of a crisis to zero. This illustrates that a lower probability
of a financial crisis is not necessarily associated with higher welfare in this class of models,
and might be a misleading indicator of the desirability of capital controls policy in empirical
studies. More generally, Benigno et al. (2019a) show that, in the same production economy of
Benigno et al. (2013) and Mendoza (2002), capital controls are not necessary to implement the
SP allocation.
    Benigno et al. (2013) also show that, with endogenous production affecting the borrowing
constraint, the behavior of the economy during normal times depends crucially on how the econ-
omy is expected to behave during crisis times. Therefore, the desirability of ex-ante prudential
policies must depend on the set of ex-post tools available in crisis times. For example, an effec-
tive bailout policy, not only can mitigate crisis severity, but can also reduce the social value of
    9 Bianchi (2011) reports a robustness exercise extending his model to production.   However, this is a production
structure in which the only variable input is an inelastically supplied and exogenously priced imported intermediate
good, and the planner is not allowed to chose it, making the production economy isomorphic to the endowment
case. Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) also have production. The wage bill, however, does not enter the specification
of the working capital constraint, and the production margin becomes irrelevant for the solution of Ramsey planner
problem they study.


                                                         6
precautionary saving in tranquil times, and hence the desirability of any prudential intervention,
including capital controls. Of course, in reality, there are constraints on crisis resolution policies
that introduce additional distortions. These considerations range from issues of effectiveness of
crisis resolution tools to availability of financing and moral hazard induced by the insurance
nature of ex-post interventions such as bailout policies (e.g., Bianchi (2016)). The point here is
that the interaction between ex-post and ex-ante interventions is critical for the optimal policy
design in this class of models.
    For example, Benigno et al. (2016) compare capital controls with the exchange rate policy
in the same endowment economy analyzed by Bianchi (2011). They find that, when managing
the exchange rate is costless, there is no need to use capital controls, as exchange rate policy
can remove the borrowing constraint altogether. Interventions on the real exchange rate through
taxes (or subsidies) on consumption financed (or rebated) with lump-sum transfers (i.e., fiscal
devaluations or appreciations) dominate capital controls because they can affect the borrowing
constraint when it binds, while capital controls cannot. However, if managing the exchange
rate entails an efficiency loss stemming from the consequence of its distortionary financing on
other margins, capital controls policy must be part of the optimal policy mix. In this case, the
optimal mix combines prudential capital controls in tranquil times with exchange rate appreci-
ation in crisis times. Importantly, in this more realistic case, both instruments are applied less
intensively than when used as the sole tool of intervention, showing that they complement each
other. Interestingly, the optimal policy mix is associated with more borrowing, fewer and less
severe financial crises, and much higher welfare than with capital controls alone. The planner
achieves these outcomes by allocating total consumption across sectors differently than the pri-
vate sector, thus, illustrating that the sector allocation of resources matter more than the total
quantity borrowed by the economy; a result that is consistent with the policy adage that the
sector allocation of the borrowed resources is more critical than the total amount of borrowing.
    Similarly, Jeanne and Korinek (forthcoming) analyze the interaction of ex-ante and ex-post
interventions in a three-period economy with pecuniary externalities. In their set up, ex-post
interventions are effective in reducing the cost of crises but generate moral hazard. Corrective
ex-ante policy action is therefore needed to contain it, and the optimal policy mix balances these
two forces. Like in Benigno et al. (2016), the optimal policy requires a combination of both ex-
ante and ex-post interventions. However, in the setup of Jeanne and Korinek (forthcoming), in
which the instrument that can be used ex-post cannot be used ex-ante and vice-versa, ex-ante
and ex-post interventions are substitutes rather than complements.
    Korinek and Sandri (2016) compare capital controls with macroprudential policy. They set
up a model with pecuniary externalities in which both types of policy can play a role. The model


                                                  7
has both a domestic and an international lender. The difference between the two instruments is
that macroprudential policy restricts borrowing by domestic agents independently of whether
the credit is provided by the domestic or the foreign lender. In contrast, capital controls restrict
only borrowing from the international lender. When the pecuniary externality arises from the
presence of the real exchange rate in the collateral constraint, both macroprudential policy and
capital controls play a role, since they help curtail credit to domestic borrowers and increase
saving by domestic savers. In this case, the pecuniary externality is affected by the net worth of
both domestic borrowers and savers, and two policy instruments are needed since the contribu-
tion of borrowers and savers to the externality differs. However, when the pecuniary externality
arises from the presence of a domestic asset price in the borrowing constraint, there is no role
for capital controls to play, and only macroprudential policy remains effective. This is because
only the net worth of domestic borrowers matter in this case.
    Bengui and Bianchi (2019) emphasize that capital controls and macroprudential policies
are constrained by imperfect enforcement, possibly due to shadow banking, regulatory arbi-
trage, or other circumvention strategies and means. They show that introducing leakages in the
typical pecuniary externality analysis undermines the effectiveness of macroprudential taxes,
even though interventions designed taking this into account can still mitigate vulnerability to
financial crises.
    Ma (2020) studies the effects of capital controls in an endogenous growth model with a
borrowing constraint and pecuniary externalities. In normal periods, when the borrowing con-
straint is slack, the growth rate is at its efficient level since private agents can borrow freely to
finance their expenditure plans. During crisis times, however, the growth rate falls since ex-
penditure plans are financially constrained. By introducing endogenous growth in an otherwise
standard open economy model with occasionally binding borrowing constraints, this model can
match the persistent output loss typically associated with financial crises. Moreover, in the
model, there is a trade-off between cyclical and trend consumption growth. Capital controls
can smooth cyclical growth at the cost of lowering trend growth. Quantitatively, however, the
trend growth cost is small, with an average annual output growth decline of 0.01%, while the
benefit in terms of smoother cyclical consumption is more sizable with a reduction of the crisis
probability of two-thirds. As a result, on net, the optimal capital control policy, in this econ-
omy, generates small welfare gains equivalent to a 0.06% of a permanent increase in annual
consumption, comparable to the gains reported in the extant literature. The optimal capital con-
trols can have a larger impact on growth and welfare if there is also a growth externality (such
as learning by doing) in the model in addition to the pecuniary externality.
    Ma and Wei (2019) consider the quality of domestic institutions. They argue that the level of


                                                 8
institution quality determines the capital structure of a country, and hence also its vulnerability
to financial crises. A country with a relatively low level of institutional quality finds it harder
to issue equity-like securities and has to rely on debt-like securities, which results in a higher
probability of a financial crisis. In this case, capital controls can help countries to reduce excess
volatility and amplification in the face of volatile capital flows. However, when the level of
institutional quality is high enough, countries can rely on equity financing to avoid costly finan-
cial crises. In this case, there is no role for capital controls, consistent with the fact that virtually
no advanced economy uses capital controls for financial stability purposes -- e.g., Klein (2012)
and Fern´ andez et al. (2015).


3    Capital Controls and Aggregate Demand Externalities
A second new rationale for the adoption of capital controls is the presence of aggregate demand
externalities, a notion ultimately dating back to Keynes. The key friction in this type of model
is a price or wage rigidity, which implies that the economy is demand-driven, combined with
a constraint on the optimal use of monetary policy, such as a liquidity trap or a fixed exchange
rate. In these economies, private agents are too small to internalize the aggregate demand
effects of their decisions. As a result, they may boost aggregate demand excessively during the
expansionary phase of the cycle, which makes the economy relatively more vulnerable during
the contractionary phase. If during a boom, monetary policy cannot address the distortions
induced by relative price rigidity, prudential interventions in financial markets become desirable
to manage the expansion to reduce the cost of the contraction.
    Farhi and Werning (2016) provide a general theory of prudential interventions in financial
markets, including capital controls, justified by the presence of aggregate demand externalities.
They show that the competitive equilibrium of a heterogeneous-agent economy with nominal
stickiness is generally inefficient when the monetary (or fiscal) policy is subject to constraints
that prevent it from achieving the first best, like in relatively simple benchmark closed and
open-economy New Keynesian models. The source of nominal rigidity can be either in the
good or the labor market. The constraint on monetary policy can arise from a policy choice,
such as a fixed exchange rate regime (e.g., Schmitt-Groh´  e and Uribe (2016a)), or a more natural
limitation such as the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates (e.g., Korinek and Simsek
(2016)). The result is that the economy cannot fully adjust to shocks using monetary policy
alone. In this environment, there can be a clear-cut case for capital control policy to correct the
aggregate demand externality, even abstracting from pecuniary externalities. However, capital
controls are not the only tool that can address the inefficiency as other interventions in financial


                                                   9
markets can complement monetary policy, such as macroprudential policy.
    Importantly, the framework proposed by Farhi and Werning (2016) can be used to analyze
both the aggregate demand externality that they identify and the pecuniary externality that we
discussed in the previous section under incomplete markets.10 Moreover, they characterize
optimal macroprudential interventions in financial markets as a function of sufficient statistics,
such as marginal propensities to spend, elasticities of substitution, and wedges that can, in
principle, be backed up from the data to calibrate the policy interventions.
    Schmitt-Groh´ e and Uribe (2016a) studied the optimal use of capital controls to address a
demand externality, even though they do not label it as such and focus on its overborrowing
implications. The model is a small open economy with a fixed exchange rate and a downward
nominal wage rigidity that induces disequilibrium in the labor market in response to contrac-
tionary shocks. In their model, the aggregate demand externality arises from the joint presence
of these two constraints and free capital mobility. As a result, during good times, private agents
push up the nominal wage and borrow excessively. When bad times arrive, there is inefficiently
high and persistent demand-driven unemployment. Prudential capital controls are beneficial
here because they can slow down wage growth during expansions to reduce the inefficient un-
employment losses during recessions. Note also that, with downward wage rigidity, there is
equilibrium unemployment in the crisis phase of the cycle, and the welfare gains from setting
optimal capital controls are much larger than in the pecuniary externality literature.
    Korinek and Simsek (2016) analyze the case for macroprudential policy in an economic
setting with a good price rigidity and a zero-lower bound on interest rates. In this paper, there
is a link between deleveraging and the aggregate demand externality. When some agents are
forced to cut leverage for exogenous reasons, there will be an inefficient demand drop since the
interest rate cannot adjust enough to allow other agents in the economy to pick up the resulting
slack in aggregate demand. Macroprudential policy is useful here because it reduces the exces-
sive leverage ex-ante, the economy becomes less likely to run into the liquidity trap, and the
consequences of the liquidity trap are mitigated. Korinek and Simsek (2016) also show that a
contractionary monetary policy is inferior to a macroprudential policy intervention in address-
ing the excessive leverage ex-ante. The reason is that monetary policy, in this setting, reduces
the net worth of borrowers, thereby strengthening their need to borrow external resources.
    The broad message of this literature is fairly general and holds whenever a stabilization
policy cannot perfectly keep aggregate demand in line with the efficient level of production.
The result does not even require an explicit constraint on the monetary policy instrument; for
    10 Indeed, Section 5 of Farhi and Werning (2016) provides specific examples under floating or fixed exchange

rates, complete or incomplete markets, with a detailed discussion of the mapping of the particular set up to the
general model.


                                                      10
example, having multiple sectors or having both good and labor markets nominal rigidity could
be enough. As a consequence, several other contributions in the new literature on capital con-
trols could be folded under the broad umbrella of "aggregate demand externality," even though
most of them were developed without explicit reference to this framework. Nonetheless, for
the sake of exposition, in the rest of this section, we review separately contributions that re-
visited the role of capital controls in providing monetary policy independence in the traditional
Mundellian sense.


3.1    Capital Controls and the Trilemma of International Finance
Assume for the sake of comparison that monetary policy can fully address nominal rigidity and
achieve the efficient level of output. Then, it is well known that a country can pursue only two of
the following three policy objectives: a fixed exchange rate, free capital mobility, independent
monetary policy from the rest of the world -- the so-called "trilemma" of international finance.
According to this traditional Mundellian view, a country committed to free capital mobility
must choose between autonomy in setting its monetary policy optimally and exchange rate
stability. In other words, when monetary policy can achieve the first best, capital controls are
redundant under flexible exchange rates. Under fixed exchange rates, instead, capital controls
are necessary to allow domestic monetary policy to diverge from foreign policy.
    The traditional view was challenged on empirical grounds for being too optimistic by Rey
(2013), who argued that countries, in fact, have to choose between monetary policy autonomy
and capital mobility, even if they have flexible exchange rates. This is because capital flows co-
move very strongly across countries and asset classes, and the so-called "global financial cycle"
dwarfs any attempt to insulate individual open economies with domestic stabilization policies.
According to this alternative view, all economies except the ones issuing anchor currencies need
to control capital flows or use macroprudential policy to secure any degree of monetary policy
independence; the trilemma of international finance is, in effect, only a "dilemma" according to
this alternative view.
    Farhi and Werning (2014) formalize this argument in the context of a specific model nested
in the general framework of Farhi and Werning (2016). They analyze the optimal use of capi-
tal controls in a standard open-economy New Keynesian framework with nominal rigidity. In
particular, they study the economic effects of a risk premium shock, assuming alternative ex-
change rate regimes and price-setting behaviors. The model is a small open economy with
nominal rigidities in which monetary policy cannot achieve first best because the financial mar-
kets are incomplete. Consistent with the traditional view, they find that the exchange rate regime
matters and a flexible exchange rate does allow for a degree of monetary policy independence.

                                                11
However, they also find that capital controls are still desirable, even when the exchange rate
is floating, consistent with the "dilemma" view. Capital controls are beneficial in their set up
because they can help the external adjustment to the risk premium shock by affecting the terms
of trade. Thus, capital controls can complement a flexible exchange rate in this setup.
     Chang, Liu, and Spiegel (2015) study the effect of capital controls policy on optimal mon-
etary policy in a DSGE model of the Chinese economy. In their set up, capital controls prevent
households from achieving full risk-sharing and creating a wedge between holding domestic
and foreign assets. The government has to accumulate foreign reserves to keep the exchange
rate fixed. Such intervention comes at the cost of the difference between domestic and foreign
interest rates. Thus, there is a trade-off between costly sterilization of reserve accumulation and
the benefits of domestic price stability. Chang, Liu, and Spiegel (2015) quantify this trade-off
by looking at the impulse response to foreign interest and demand shocks. They find that both
capital account liberalization and exchange rate flexibility can generate some welfare gains
by ameliorating the policy trade-off faced by the policymaker. However, they also find that
adopting a more flexible exchange rate regime generates larger welfare gains than just lowering
capital controls, suggesting that the former is a more effective tool than the latter at insulating
the economy from external shocks.


4    Capital Controls with both Pecuniary and Demand Exter-
     nalities
A few papers focused on the joint use of optimal capital controls and monetary or exchange rate
policy in the presence of both pecuniary and demand externalities. For example, Fornaro (2015)
studies alternative exchange rate policy rules in an economy with downward wage rigidity and
a pecuniary externality arising from a collateral constraint defined on household landholdings.
He finds that a flexible exchange rate regime is preferable to a fixed one. During a financial
crisis, exchange rate flexibility has a positive impact on welfare because the stimulus provided
by the depreciation by lowering the real wage supports output, employment, and land prices,
and hence the value of collateral and access to the international credit markets.
    Similarly, Ottonello (2015), introduces pecuniary externalities arising from a collateral con-
straint defined on the real exchange rate, as in Benigno et al. (2013), into the framework of
Schmitt-Groh´  e and Uribe (2016a). In his model, during the crash, the exchange rate policy
must trade-off relaxing the collateral constraint when it binds with containing unemployment.
The exchange-rate depreciation necessary to achieve full employment in the presence of down-


                                                12
ward wage rigidity would further tighten the binding borrowing constraint during crisis times.
In the quantitative analysis of this trade-off, the optimal policy favors more depreciation during
crisis times since the welfare cost stemming from unemployment is larger than the cost of the
pecuniary externality. In this setup, capital controls are welfare improving as they help contain
the size of the crash and hence can ameliorate the trade-off between monetary and financial
stability.
    Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2011) set up a three-period economy with
both a nominal rigidity and a pecuniary externality arising from a collateral constraint that
depends on both the nominal exchange rate and the domestic value of equity. Unlike in Korinek
and Simsek (2016), the monetary policy here is not constrained by the liquidity trap, and the
exchange rate is floating freely. Benigno et al. (2011) illustrate analytically that, in this setup,
when the constraint does not bind, leaning against the wind with the monetary policy interest
rate and a tax on debt work essentially in the same way. As a result, prudential capital controls
provide tiny welfare gains relative to monetary policy used alone, even though monetary policy
alone cannot achieve the first best.
    Cesa-Bianchi and Rebucci (2017) propose a model that features both an interest rate rigidity
in the banking system, as a way to give rise to a macroeconomic stabilization motive, and a
pecuniary externality that provides a financial stability motive as we discussed above. The
paper then analyzes the interaction between monetary and macro-prudential policy or capital
controls. They show that adding interest rate rigidity to the pecuniary externality increases
the probability of a financial crisis in response to a contractionary aggregate demand shock
to the economy, while it can act as an automatic macro-prudential stabilizer in response to an
expansionary shock. Moreover, when the interest rate is the only available instrument, monetary
policy faces a trade-off between macroeconomic and financial stability. Only with a second
instrument, such as a capital control or reserve requirement on domestic banks, efficiency in the
economy can be restored when both frictions are at work.
    Monetary policy procyclicality is an important feature of emerging market economies (e.g.,
Kaminsky et al. (2005)). Coulibaly (2018) proposes a theory of monetary procyclicality in a
model in which access to foreign financing depends on the real exchange rate via non-tradable
income used as collateral and the government lacks commitment. Discretionary monetary pol-
icy is procyclical in this set up to mitigate balance sheet effects originating from exchange rate
depreciation during sudden stops. In this context, committing to an inflation targeting regime
increases welfare by reducing the frequency of financial crises, despite making crises more se-
vere. Capital controls support a less procyclical discretionary monetary policy and hence bring
about higher welfare relative to inflation targeting alone by reducing both the frequency and the


                                                13
severity of crises.
     In a similar vein, Davis and Presno (2017) study the extent to which capital controls can
support monetary policy autonomy in a country with a floating currency, nominal rigidities, and
collateral constraints. Exogenous changes in capital flows lead to volatility in asset prices and
credit supply. A central bank with the interest rate as its only instrument finds it optimal to use it
procyclically to stabilize the value of the collateral. Capital account restrictions can ameliorate
this trade-off, especially in the face of shocks to the foreign interest rate.
     Devereux and Yu (2017) and Devereux, Young, and Yu (2018) study the optimal policy un-
der both discretion and commitment in an infinite horizon model with both a nominal rigidity
(either in the good or the labor market) and a pecuniary externality arising from a collateral
constraint defined on the domestic currency value of capital. Devereux and Yu (2017) find that
floating the exchange rate is superior to pegging it, with the welfare gains arising from states
of the world in which the collateral constraint is binding and depreciations support aggregate
demand. Devereux et al. (2018), however, find that the optimal policy never involves pruden-
tial taxes on capital inflow or a departure from price stability, whether or not commitment is
available to the policymaker. They show that this negative result on capital controls hinges on
the timing of the asset price entering the borrowing constraint. Following Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), Iacoviello (2005) and Liu et al. (2013), they specify a collateral constraint that depends
on the expectation of the future asset price, rather than on the current price, as for instance
Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) or Jeanne and Korinek (2018). Then, they show that, when the
current rather than the future asset price enters the borrowing constraint, there is a case for pru-
dential taxes on inflows and subsidies during a crisis. Similarly, Benigno et al. (2016) show
that if the borrowing constraint is defined in terms of net rather than gross income, the relative
properties of capital controls and exchange rate policy are turned around. An important lesson
of these analyses, therefore, is that the details of the specification of the financial friction matter
for the result of the normative analysis and the optimal policy design.


5    Capital Controls and Terms of Trade Manipulation
A third new motive for the use of capital controls could be the desire to affect a country's terms
of trade. Terms of trade manipulation can be intratemporal, when the price of imports in terms
of exports is being manipulated, or intertemporal when the world price of current consumption
in term of future consumption is targeted.
    Costinot, Lorenzoni, and Werning (2014) study how capital controls might affect the in-
tertemporal terms of trade. In an infinite-horizon, endowment, two-country world economy,


                                                  14
they argue that one country may have the incentive to use capital controls to manipulate the
world interest rate in its favor. In particular, a country may want to tax capital inflows or sub-
sidize capital outflows when its income grows faster than the rest of the world. The intuition
is as follows. When the home country grows faster than the rest of the world between any two
periods, it has a larger future trade surplus (or smaller deficit) than the present one. Thus, the
home country has an incentive to lower the world interest rate between today and tomorrow by
lowering current consumption and hence running a smaller current trade deficit (or larger trade
surplus). In this case, a tax on capital inflows or a subsidy to outflows in the current period is
desirable as it increases current savings and can shift consumption from today to tomorrow. The
quantitative differences in the consumption allocation and welfare gain, however, are small. In
an example with CRRA preferences and aggregate fluctuations, Costinot et al. (2014) find that
the optimal capital control tax is less than 1 percent and has a small impact on consumption and
welfare, with an order of magnitude similar to the gains from financial integration reported in
the literature, usually considered very small.
    As Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) noted, the use of capital controls for terms of trade manipu-
lation is similar to the optimal tariff argument in trade theory. The optimal tariff interpretation
says that the home country has an incentive to tax capital inflows (outflows) when borrow-
ing and the trade balance is in deficit (lending and the trade balance is in surplus) to decrease
(increase) world interest rate in its favor. Unlike the analysis of capital control policy in a two-
period model of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), where the use of capital controls depends on the
country's status as a borrower or lender, Costinot et al. (2014) emphasize the importance of
the contemporaneous rate of growth compared to its trading partners in determining the use of
capital controls. Their key insight is that capital controls should not be set based on the absolute
desire to alter the intertemporal prices of goods in a given period, but rather based on the relative
strength of this desire between two periods.
    De Paoli and Lipinska (2012) focus on how capital controls can affect the intratemporal
terms of trade. When output supply falls because of a negative productivity shock, a planner
that maximizes the welfare of the domestic economy wants to tax foreign borrowing to support
the consumption of domestic goods, and thereby improve the terms of trade. The terms of
trade improvement permits to lower labor effort and, via this channel, increase welfare in a
counter-cyclical fashion.
    The terms of trade manipulation motive for capital controls is most suitable to explain cases
of countries that have pricing power in international markets because of their size. For instance,
China's capital controls have often been interpreted as aimed at achieving a certain level of
competitiveness in recent years but could be reinterpreted in this framework. The consequence


                                                 15
of using capital controls in this manner is to generate spillover effects on other countries, a
typical problem of "beggar-thy-neighbor" policies. As a result, countries on the receiving end
of such spillovers also have an incentive to impose capital controls as a response, possibly
leading to coordination issues and dynamics sometimes referred to as "currency wars" in the
policy debate.
     A few theoretical contributions focused on the welfare costs of capital control competition
or the gains from cooperation. For example, Heathcote and Perri (2016) use a standard two-
country international business cycle model with incomplete markets to evaluate the welfare
effects of capital controls competition. They conclude that the welfare impacts are ambiguous
and depend on the specifics of the calibration and and the properties of the country-specific
shock processes. Giordani, Ruta, Weisfeld, and Zhu (2017) also focus on a coordination prob-
lem among the countries imposing controls on capital inflows. They show that inflow restric-
tions deflect international capital flows to other countries and that these spillovers may lead to
a policy response in the receiving countries.
     On the other hand, Jeanne (2018) provides a tractable model of a global economy with
downward nominal rigidity and a liquidity trap to analyze the welfare cost of currency and
trade wars. He finds that the welfare cost of the trade wars is higher than that of the currency
wars, suggesting that the case for capital account policy coordination based on spillover effects
need to be made with caution. As a benchmark, Korinek (2016) spells out three conditions under
which there is no case for policy coordination even in a world with spillover effects. The logic
is similar to the one in the first welfare theorem. The global market outcome is Pareto efficient
as long as (i) policymakers act competitively in the international market; (ii) policymakers have
sufficient external policy instruments; (iii) and international markets are free of imperfections.
These are strict conditions often violated in practice suggesting that it is more likely than not
that coordination would be beneficial. Nevertheless, they provide a useful benchmark for the
analysis of specific inefficiencies that can be addressed by policy coordination.


6    Post-GFC Empirical Evidence
The post-GFC literature on capital controls also includes empirical contributions. The new
empirical literature has evolved along two lines: one focused on constructing metrics to de-
scribe capital control and macroprudential policies and to characterize how countries use these
instruments; the other concerned with the more traditional question of capital control effective-
ness relative to stated objectives. Note here that, while the first stream of empirical research is
grounded more firmly on the new theories, the contributions in the second stream continued to


                                                16
benchmark the analysis to observable variables identified in the policy debate like capital flows,
the level of the exchange rate, credit growth and leverage, as well as composition of capital
flows and likelihood of financial distress in partial equilibrium setups.


6.1     Characterizing Capital Control Policy
Most of the empirical work on measuring capital controls is based on the IMF's Annual Re-
port on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER), which describes the
set of de jure restrictions in place in each of the IMF member countries on a wide range of
international transactions.
    For example, building on the independent AREAER-based classification work of Schindler
(2009), Klein (2012) and Fern´    andez, Rebucci, and Uribe (2015), Fern´  andez, Klein, Rebucci,
Schindler, and Uribe (2016) constructed a set of capital control indexes for 10 asset categories
in 100 countries during the 1995-2017 period, covering both inflows and outflows.11 The coding
algorithm uses dummy variables to classify whether or not restrictions on a particular category
of cross-border transactions are in place in any given country-year. The authors then constructed
a set of indexes on the extensive margin of capital control policy by adding up the dummy
variables by asset classes, by all controls on inflows or outflows.12
    Klein (2012) classifies countries based on their use of capital controls as "open," "walls"
and "gates" depending on whether capital controls are never used, are applied on a broad range
of assets or liabilities and always kept on, or imposed on selected transactions temporarily.
He then documents that most advanced economies belong to the first group, while many low-
income countries are in the second. Only some middle-income countries use capital controls
intermittently, on select asset categories, possibly consistent with some of the theories discussed
in the previous sections.
    Fern´andez, Rebucci, and Uribe (2015) describe actual capital control policy in a sample
of 78 countries over the period 1995­2011 and ask whether countries have used these tools
   11 The  data set covers equities, bonds with an original maturity of more than one year, money market instru-
ments, collective investment securities such as mutual funds and investment trusts, derivatives, commercial credits,
financial credits, guarantees, sureties and financial back-up facilities, direct investment, and real estate transactions.
It is periodically updated and can be found at http://www.columbia.edu/~mu2166/fkrsu/.
     12 Two other annual indexes of capital account openness with broad country coverage are the Dennis (1997)

(subsequently extended and updated by Dennis and Toyoda (2008)) and the Chinn and Ito (2006) indexes. The
Chin and Ito and the Quinn indexes have a much longer time coverage than the indexes constructed by Fern´           andez
et al. (2016), starting in 1950 and 1970, respectively. The Quinn Index also captures the intensive margin of
capital control policy, albeit imperfectly, while the Chin and Ito index also covers the largest sample of low-
income countries available. Both indexes, however, are highly aggregated by asset class and do not distinguish
between controls on inflows and outflows, which is crucial to relate these empirical measures to their theoretical
counterparts.


                                                           17
countercyclically, as suggested by several of the theoretical contributions reviewed in this paper.
They find that, in general, there is no evidence of countercyclical use of capital controls, a
conclusion independently reached also by Eichengreen and Rose (2014). As these authors
point out, this could be a case of "theory ahead of policy practice", or alternatively suggests that
the theories reviewed above may not be capturing relevant economic or political factors that
determine the cyclical properties of optimal capital controls, thus pointing to the importance to
study capital controls with additional distortions other than pecuniary or demand externalities.13
    By comparison, based on a novel quarterly dataset for 52 countries for the period 1970-
2011, Federico, Vegh, and Vuletin (2014) analyze the use and cyclical properties of reserve
requirements, which is a typical macroprudential policy instrument often considered in DSGE
models, and whether in practice this instrument substitutes or complements monetary policy.
They find that about 2/3 of developing countries have used reserve requirements as a macroeco-
nomic stabilization tool compared to just 1/3 of industrial countries (with no industrial country
since 2004). Moreover, most developing countries that rely on this tool use it countercyclically.
Given that in many developing countries, monetary policy is procyclical, reserve requirements
appear to have substituted for monetary policy as a countercyclical tool. Federico et al. (2014)
interpret the latter finding as reflecting the need for many emerging markets to raise interest
rates in bad times to defend the currency and not raise or lower the interest rate in good times
to prevent further currency appreciation. Under these circumstances, reserve requirements rep-
resent a second instrument that substitutes for monetary policy.
    Similarly, based on IMF survey data, Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven (2017) document the
use of macroprudential policies in 119 countries over the 2000-2013 period, covering many
instruments. They find that emerging economies use macroprudential instruments most fre-
quently, especially foreign exchange related ones, while advanced countries use borrower-based
tools more. Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (2018) construct an index of macroprudential policy
in 57 advanced and emerging economies covering the period 2000:Q1-2013:Q4, with tightening
and easing measures recorded separately. They show that macroprudential policies have been
used far more actively after the GFC in both sets of countries, usually changed in tandem with
reserve requirements, capital controls, and monetary policy.
    Overall, this evidence suggests that countries have adopted macroprudential policies con-
sistent with the new theoretical literature. However, they might be reluctant to discriminate
   13 As Erten et al. (forthcoming) note, a certain degree of time-invariant capital account "closure," as observed
in many low-income countries (i.e. the wall cases on Klein (2012)), can also have prudential benefits theoretically.
The problem with this approach to prudential capital control policy is that, if fixed capital controls are imposed sub-
optimally, they can reduce welfare even if they eliminate financial crises. See Benigno et al. (2013) for an example
in which the probability of a crisis goes to zero with a fixed tax on net flows, but welfare declines significantly.



                                                         18
between home and foreign residents for reasons that are not present in simple models with
pecuniary or demand externalities. This is also consistent with the view that imposing capi-
tal controls may indicate readiness to adopt investor-unfriendly policies in the future as in the
signaling model of Bartolini and Drazen (1997).14


6.2     Capital Control Policy Effectiveness
The post-GFC crisis cross-country and country-specific evidence is broadly in line with the pre-
crisis one. The theories of capital controls that provide alternative rationales for the adoption
of controls on capital flows, however, provide new benchmarks against which to evaluate their
benefits and costs. As stated in the introduction, one way to summarize the consensus before
the GFC is to say that capital controls may have some effects on the currency or maturity
composition of the inflows, but limited ability to affect total flows and are generally not effective
at preventing excessive appreciations or depreciation of the exchange rate. They also tend to
raise the cost of capital for smaller borrowers and have leakages and side effects. This was
brought out most clearly by the detailed case studies based on the more prominent examples
of countries that used capital controls, including Chile (e.g., Edwards (2004), De Gregorio
et al. (2000), and Forbes (2007b)) and Malaysia (e.g., Dornbusch (2002)) in the second half
of the 1990s.15 In particular, Forbes (2007b) analyzed the effect of the Chilean Encaje, a tax
on short-term capital inflows imposed by Chile from 1991 to 1998, on the financing cost of
publicly-traded firms and found that smaller firms experienced a significant increase in financing
cost during that period. Forbes (2007a) provided a detailed survey of the literature on the
microeconomic effects of capital controls, finding that capital controls can generate additional
unintended consequences with unexpected costs in addition to increased financing.

Cross-country evidence New cross-country studies tend to find evidence of capital control
effectiveness consistent with the new theories, albeit with leakages as stressed by both macroe-
conomic theory (Bengui and Bianchi (2019)) and microeconomic evidence (Forbes (2007a)).
For example, Ostry, Ghosh, Chamon, and Qureshi (2012) show that tighter capital controls and
FX-related macroprudential measures are associated with a lower share of foreign exchange de-
nominated lending in total domestic bank credit, and with a lower proportion of debt liabilities
   14 Theoretically,    Bartolini and Drazen (1997) take capital controls as a signal of future government policies.
They show that present lower capital controls point to fewer future controls, which tends to increase investment.
They argue that a currently relatively more open capital account signals less reliance on the inflation tax in the future
-- and more generally looser fiscal constraints -- thus stimulating investment. Consistent with this mechanism,
Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995) report pre-GFC evidence that controls on capital flows are associated with higher
fiscal deficits, inflation, and seigniorage revenue.
    15 For a comparative analysis of these and other case studies, see IMF (2000).



                                                          19
in total liabilities. To the extent to which portfolio debt is associated with a higher probability
of a financial crisis, as suggested by the theory, capital controls can enhance financial stability
by affecting the external capital structure of a countries' portfolio. Similarly, Bruno, Shim, and
Shin (2017) document that capital flow management interventions in the banking sector, are
effective in slowing down banking inflows in a sample of 12 Asia-Pacific economies over the
period 2004-2013. One issue here is that CFMs are not the same as capital controls, as specified
in the theoretical models. CFMs, in fact, include both measures narrowly based on residency
criteria and measures based on the currency denomination of the transactions.
    Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven (2017) also report that the use of macroprudential tools is
generally associated with lower credit growth, and notably household credit growth. However,
these associations are weaker in financially more developed and open economies, and usage is
also correlated with higher cross-border borrowing, possibly suggesting leakage and avoidance,
consistent with the microeconomic evidence surveyed by Forbes (2007a).
    Using a propensity-score matching technique to address endogeneity, Forbes, Fratzscher,
and Straub (2015) find that most CFMs do not significantly affect the exchange rate, total
flows, monetary policy independence, and volatility. However, the authors also find that these
measures can reduce financial vulnerability, consistent with the prediction of the new theories,
which suggest that small differences between the constrained efficient and market-determined
allocations can have a potentially large impact on the probability of financial crises. The issue
here is that richer models with multiple margins, like for instance in Benigno et al. (2013), a
lower probability of a financial crisis is not necessarily associated with higher welfare.
    Ahnert, Forbes, Friedrich, and Reinhardt (2018) evaluate the effectiveness and unintended
consequences of macroprudential foreign exchange regulations, testing the predictions of a sim-
ple model of bank and market lending in domestic and foreign currency. They find that foreign
currency regulations are effective in reducing borrowing in foreign currency by banks, but have
the unintended consequence of simultaneously causing firms to increase their foreign exchange
exposure. Similarly, Bacchetta, Cordonier, and Merrouche (2019) analyze the role of capital
controls and macroprudential policies in determining the foreign currency exposure of corpo-
rate bond issuances in emerging economies. Using firm-level data on corporate bond issuances
in 17 EME between 2003 and 2015, they document strong evidence of the global financial cy-
cle at work, with companies more likely to issue bonds in foreign currency when US interest
rates are low. Capital controls on bond inflows, however, significantly decrease the likelihood
of issuing debt in foreign currency, insulating issuances from low US interest rates. As in
Ahnert et al. (2018), macroprudential foreign exchange regulations tend to increase foreign cur-
rency issuances of nonfinancial corporates, although this cross-asset spillover effect is reduced


                                                20
if macroprudential policies are accompanied by capital controls.
    Very few new cross-country studies focus on controls on outflows. Forbes and Klein (2015),
using propensity-score matching techniques, estimate how significant reserve sales, currency
depreciation, changes in policy interest rates, and increased controls on capital outflows affect
real GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation during two periods marked by crises, 1997-2001
and 2007-11. The paper shows that large interest rate hikes and new capital controls can cause
a significant decline in GDP growth. In contrast, a sharp currency depreciation may raise GDP
growth over time, but only with a significant lag and after an initial contraction.

New case studies One of the most active countries using taxes on capital flows during and
after the GFC crisis period was Brazil. The Brazil case is particularly interesting because the
Brazilian Imposto Sobre Operacoes Financeiras (IOF), a tax on specific financial instruments
applied with varying intensity, very similar to the tax rates in the theoretical models, was used
countercyclically since the early 1990s.
    Chamon and Garcia (2016) estimate the impact of the IOF tax rate increases since February
2009, after a period in which they had been set to zero during the GFC. The authors report that
the tightening cycle they focus on had some success in segmenting Brazilian capital markets
from the rest of the global financial system, as measured by the spread between onshore and
offshore dollar interest rates or the ADR premium relative to the underlying local stocks. How-
ever, the measures adopted from late 2009 to mid-2011 did not translate into significant changes
in the exchange rate, suggesting limited success in mitigating exchange rate appreciation pres-
sure. Even though the Brazilian Real sharply depreciated after a tax on the notional amount of
derivatives was introduced in mid-2011. The authors suggest that, cumulatively, the measures
studied may have depreciated the Brazilian real in the 4-10 percent range. Nevertheless, they
also contemplate that this strong response might have been driven by a complementarity with an
unexpected easing in monetary policy that occurred at the same time, consistent with the cross-
country evidence reported by Federico et al. (2014) and many of the theoretical contributions
reviewed in the first part of the paper.
    Consistent with the extant literature on Chile, other studies find that the imposition of con-
trols on inflows after the GFC in Brazil entailed a significant increase in financing costs, as also
implied by the new theories. For example, Alfaro, Chari, and Kanczuk (2017) estimate the effect
of the IOF on portfolio debt and equity on firm-level stock returns during the period 2008-2013.
They document that stock returns fall following capital controls announcements. Moreover, the
negative impact is more pronounced for smaller firms, in line with Forbes (2007b). While it
is tempting to see these differential costs as a side effect of capital controls policy, if looking
through the lenses of the new theories, an increased cost of capital is an intended consequence

                                                21
of the policy intervention.
    Keller (2018) study whether CFMs imposed on banks to limit their foreign exchange expo-
sure end up inducing firms to borrow more in foreign currency in the case of Columbia. She
shows that, indeed, capital controls encourage firms to take on more foreign currency loans.
This evidence is clear evidence of leakage and spillover to other transactions, consistent with
the cross-country evidence of Ahnert et al. (2018) and Bacchetta et al. (2019), raising questions
as to whether controls can narrowly target a specific transaction that is deemed to pose more
risk to financial stability as often assumed in the theoretical models. It is unclear, however, from
a theoretical standpoint, that shifting foreign exchange rate risk to firms is an undesirable side
effect. Firms, in fact, might have access to natural hedges, financial and non-financial hedging
techniques, and a shareholding structure and base that, unlike depositors, is capable of bearing
financial risk.
    Epure, Mihai, Minoiu, and Peydr´     o (2018) investigate whether macroprudential policies af-
fect the level and composition of household credit with granular microdata from Romania. They
show that macroprudential interventions can also affect (ex-ante) riskier borrowers and dampen
the transmission of external financial conditions to the local household credit cycle. These pol-
icy actions also reduce the sensitivity of riskier types of credit when external conditions are
loose, and foreign monetary policy rates are low. The effects reported vary by type of interven-
tion, with measures targeting households seemingly more potent than measures targeting banks,
thus showing that macroprudential policy can also substitute for capital controls and, above all,
that the details of the policy design and implementation matter for the final outcomes.
    The problem here, which is common to all country studies reviewed, is that there are no
observable measures that net out the intended costs and benefits of capital controls and corre-
late unambiguously with welfare as evaluated in the theoretical models used to justify capital
controls. In other words, while case studies can establish effects and side-effects of capital con-
trol policy causally, they remain reduced-form, partial equilibrium's assessments that are not
informative on the desirability of the interventions.

Trilemma vs. Dilemma A critical mass of empirical research focused on the trilemma hy-
pothesis. For example, Klein and Shambaugh (2015) consider whether partial capital controls
and limited exchange rate flexibility allow for full monetary policy autonomy in the context of
a broad cross-section study. They find that partial capital controls do not generally allow for
greater monetary control than fully open capital accounts unless the controls are quite exten-
sive. In contrast, a moderate degree of exchange rate flexibility does allow for some degree of
monetary autonomy, especially in emerging and developing economies.
    Han and Wei (2018) re-examine international transmissions of monetary policy shocks from

                                                22
advanced economies to emerging economies. They document a pattern between the trilemma
and the dilemma: without capital controls, a flexible exchange rate offers some monetary auton-
omy when the center country tightens its monetary policy, yet it fails to do so when the center
country loosens policy. In contrast, capital controls help to insulate periphery from monetary
policy shocks from the center even when the latter lowers its interest rate.
    Pasricha, Falagiarda, Bijsterbosch, and Aizenman (2018) built a quarterly indicator for 16
emerging countries of CFM tightening and loosening actions around the time of the GFC, from
2001Q1 to 2012Q4. Tightening and loosening CFM actions are then aggregated by weight-
ing with the share of international assets or liabilities affected by the measure in total assets or
liabilities. Pasricha et al. (2018) then focus on the domestic and multilateral effects of these
interventions. As far as the domestic effects of capital controls are concerned, they find that in-
creases in capital account openness are associated with reduced monetary policy autonomy and
increased exchange rate stability, confirming the constraints of the monetary policy trilemma,
and that both gross inflows and outflows rise, while the effect on net capital flows is ambiguous.
    Zeev (2017) investigates whether capital controls can help countries mitigating the impact
of an international credit shock. Specifically, he focuses on the differential output impulse
response of a global credit shock and finds a statistically significant difference between countries
at the 75th percentile of the capital inflow control index distribution, relative to countries at the
25th percentile. Zeev (2017) interprets this difference as evidence of a shock-absorbing capacity
of capital controls even if they are not used in a counter-cyclical manner and are always in place
like the "walls" of Klein (2012). However, Cesa-Bianchi and Rebucci (2017) shows that, while
loan-to-value and foreign exchange denomination limits are associated with lower consumption
sensitivity to an international credit supply shock in a broad cross-section of both advanced and
emerging insulate, controls on capital inflows are not, except for a few exceptional cases like
China. Klein (2012) reach a similar conclusion, reporting no evidence that "gate" countries fare
better than others in terms of reduced vulnerability to external shocks.
    Related to this, Ma, Rogers, and Zhou (2019) study a specific stock market liberalization
episode in China in the mid-2010s, the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect. The connect
program allowed investors based in China, Hong Kong residents, and foreign investors to trade
some stocks listed on both markets, through exchange and clearing houses in their home market.
Using a difference-in-difference approach, Ma et al. (2019) show that, after the introduction of
the program, firm-level investment in China became negatively affected by contractionary US
monetary policy shocks, even though equity prices increase and borrowing costs decline. The
result suggests that the controls were adequate before their removal under this program, as
postulated by the trilemma hypothesis.


                                                 23
Spillovers The empirical literature find not only evidence of capital control policy spillovers
across assets but also across countries, raising important coordination issues. One possible
channel is through the portfolio rebalancing of global mutual funds. Consistent with the results
from other country studies, Forbes, Fratzscher, Kostka, and Straub (2016) find evidence that
capital control policy in Brazil had cross-asset spillovers, with interventions targeting bond in-
flows affecting the foreign purchase of Brazilian equities. Moreover, Forbes, Fratzscher, Kostka,
and Straub (2016) also illustrate that mutual fund managers decreased their portfolio allocations
to Brazil and increased their investment in other countries, once Brazil imposed capital controls
during the 2008-2013 period, even though the authors acknowledge that other Brazil-specific
risk factors might have triggered such reallocation.
    Along this line, Pasricha et al. (2018) illustrate that capital inflow restrictions generated
significant cross-country spillovers, especially in the post-2008 environment of abundant global
liquidity. Furthermore, they also uncover domestic policy responses to foreign capital control
changes in countries that are affected by these spillovers. Giordani, Ruta, Weisfeld, and Zhu
(2017) evaluate a coordination model empirically using data on inflow restrictions and gross
capital inflows for a large sample of developing countries between 1995 and 2009. Like Pasricha
et al. (2018), they find evidence that capital controls deflect capital to other countries with
similar economic characteristics. However, Giordani et al. (2017) do not report evidence of a
policy responses to such spillovers.


7    Open Research Questions and Further Readings
Pecuniary and demand externalities provide new and distinct theoretical justifications for the
use of capital controls to prevent and manage financial crisis and business cycles, especially in
emerging market economies that face tighter financial frictions and more constraints on macroe-
conomic policy making than advanced economies. Several questions remain open in this new
literature that are important areas of ongoing and future research.
     First, while only a few countries have adopted the use of capital controls in a countercyclical
manner (Fern´  andez et al. (2015) and Eichengreen and Rose (2014)), many have used macropru-
dential policy tools countercyclically (Federico et al. (2014), Cerutti et al. (2017) and Akinci
and Olmstead-Rumsey (2018)). This fact is puzzling for the new capital control theories. One
possible explanation is that intervention in foreign exchange markets can achieve similar goals.
For example, departing from the observation that foreign exchange intervention is used exten-
sively both before and during financial crises (e.g., Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2019)), a few



                                                24
papers explore the role of this instrument in addressing pecuniary and demand externalities.16
    Another possibility is that capital controls have additional costs omitted from the simple
models reviewed, such as signaling effects, leakages, spillovers, and retaliation risks. For in-
stance, Magud, Spilimbergo, and Werner (forthcoming) show evidence of a strong association
in Latin America between the adoption of capital controls and populist policies, such as pro-
cyclical fiscal and monetary policy, the imposition of exchange rate restrictions and the adop-
tion of fixed exchange rate arrangements, consistent with the signaling model of Bartolini and
Drazen (1997) and previous evidence on populism in Latin America (see Dornbusch and Ed-
wards (1990)). The framework with two distortions of Ma and Wei (2019) is also in line with
this view and suggests that adding political economy considerations to the models reviewed
is a promising area of future research to explain the gap in the countercyclical usage between
macroprudential and capital control policies.
    Second, both the theory and evidence reviewed in this paper suggest that capital controls can
at best complement exchange rate flexibility, but there is no compelling case that capital control
policy can substitute for exchange rate policy. Protecting monetary policy independence is the
longest standing and best understood motivation for the use of capital controls, with China being
the "case in point." The available evidence suggests that capital controls are necessary to escape
the trilemma under fixed exchange rates. However, the case for capital controls based on the
dilemma argument under exchange rate flexibility is much weaker, and more research is needed
to evaluate this important hypothesis.
    There is evidence of a global financial cycle (e.g., Rey (2013) and Cerutti et al. (2017)),
which is consequential for consumption and output variability (e.g., Cesa-Bianchi, Ferrero, and
Rebucci (2018) and Cesa-Bianchi, Pesaran, and Rebucci (forthcoming)), but the inability of
floating exchange rates to provide adequate insulation is not an established fact (see, for in-
stance, Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2015)). The research reviewed in this paper suggests that, if the
exchange rate is allowed to work, it can go a long way toward providing monetary policy in-
dependence and supporting adjustment to external shocks. However, when nominal rigidities
and borrowing constraints in foreign currency interact with frictions on currency invoicing in
international trade (e.g., Gopinath and Stein (2018)), the exchange rate can lose its expenditure
switching properties at the core of most theoretical models reviewed as in the local currency
pricing environment of Devereux and Engel (2003). Under these conditions, capital controls
might be the only policy tool left to insulate the economy from external financial shocks and
avoid the dilemma. Considering the role of currency invoicing combined with financial con-
   16 See, for instance, Cavallino (2019), Fanelli and Straub (forthcoming), C´
                                                                              espedes, Chang, and Velasco (2017)
and Cespedes and Chang (2019), Arce et al. (2019), and Benigno, Rebucci, and Yu (2019c).



                                                      25
straints in the international transmission of US monetary policy shocks (e.g., Senay and Suther-
land (2015)) thus seems particularly important are of future research.17 This also raises the
empirical question of whether capital controls are more beneficial in countries with invoicing
constraints.
    Third, it is challenging to evaluate the costs and benefits of capital control policy empir-
ically. Lots of progress has been made in establishing the causal effects of capital controls.
Researchers constructed capital control indexes disaggregated by asset classes, indexes trying
to capture the intensive margin, and indexes measuring policy at a quarterly frequency. Re-
searchers also used very rich micro-level datasets on firms and households and developed so-
phisticated techniques to address endogeneity issues. These efforts led to better measurement
and credible identification of the causal effects of capital controls and provided a better under-
standing of the mechanisms at work.
    Nonetheless, the partial equilibrium reduced-form approach predominantly used in the ex-
tant empirical literature is not informative on the overall welfare impact of capital control policy.
For example, metrics like the probability of a financial crisis and the level of borrowing or its
rate of growth are not sufficient statistics for the net benefit or cost of the policy intervention. On
the other hand, welfare evaluations in calibrated general equilibrium models in which capital
controls are not the only instrument capable of supporting the constrained efficient allocation
are particularly fragile (e.g., Benigno et al. (2016)). To address the latter issue, Benigno et al.
(2019a) suggest to evaluate the welfare properties of capital control and macroprudential poli-
cies by computing Ramsey optimal policy, as for example in Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) and
Benigno et al. (2012), rather than seeking policy rules that decentralize the constrained efficient
allocation as done in much of the theoretical literature reviewed in this paper. Another route to
capital control policy evaluation is horse-racing alternative policies in larger, data-congruent,
general equilibrium models with multiple distortions in the spirit of the inflation-targeting lit-
erature on monetary policy. A notable new development, in this direction, is the possibility to
estimate structural models with occasionally binding collateral constraints as in Bocola (2016)
or Benigno, Foerster, Otrok, and Rebucci (2019b).


8      Concluding Remarks
A new theoretical literature motivates the use of controls on capital flows to help prevent and
manage financial crises and business cycles triggered by real, monetary and financial shocks.
    17 An
        example of research going in this direction is the Integrated Policy Framework of the IMF outlined by
Gopinath (2019).


                                                     26
This paper reviewed selected post-Global Financial Crisis theoretical and empirical contribu-
tions. A few lessons can be drawn from the review.
     Pecuniary and demand externalities provide clear theoretical rationales to consider adopting
capital controls. The welfare properties of capital control policy, however, depend on the struc-
ture of the economy, the availability of and the interaction with alternative policy instruments
and country characteristics, including particularly the exchange rate regime, fiscal policy, and
the level of institutional development. Most importantly, capital controls are generally not the
only instrument that can do the job. The consequences of pecuniary and demand externalities
can be corrected also with other instruments, and some interventions seem to be much more
effective than others from a theoretical standpoint. This is also reflected in the empirical work
reviewed, which shows that the details of the policy framework matter, including particularly the
degree of exchange rate flexibility, whether capital controls are used as "gates" or "walls" and
are defined narrowly like in this paper or more broadly as capital flow management measures.
It is therefore important to include in the analysis explicit constraints on the use of fiscal, mon-
etary and exchange rate policies, or macroprudential policy, together with the specific frictions
that the policy is addressing.
     Second, contrary to prevailing consensus, if evaluated through the lenses of the new the-
ories, the empirical literature suggests that capital controls can have the intended effects. In
other words, more clearly spelled out theoretical motivations for the use of capital controls and
mechanisms through which they can work permit to make sense of the old and new empirical
evidence on the causal effects of capital control policy. Nevertheless, assessing empirically in
any given context whether or not capital controls are a welfare-enhancing policy tool, and have
a unique ability to do so, remains an elusive task. According to the new theories, the effects
on total flows need not be large to have significant impacts on crisis probabilities. The em-
pirical literature finds small impact on total flows and significant effects on the likelihood of
financial crises. According to the new theories, capital controls can tilt borrowers' capital struc-
ture toward longer-term equity-like liabilities, or away from foreign exchange denomination.
These effects accompanied by increases in the relative costs of using the financial instruments
that policy tries to discourage. The empirical literature confirms that capital controls can alter
the composition of country portfolios in these directions. Several empirical studies find that
capital controls increase financing costs especially for smaller and more financially constrained
firms. It remains unclear whether lower crisis probabilities associated with slower borrow-
ing and higher financing costs, albeit consistent with some of the new theories, amount to a
net welfare gain or a loss. The observable variables used in the empirical research in partial
equilibrium set ups cannot be mapped into welfare in the theoretical models. Moreover, some


                                                27
theoretical analyses show that focusing on the amount of borrowing, the likelihood of crises, or
the financing costs per se may be misleading.
    Terms of trade manipulation also provides a clear case for the use of capital controls, but
the practical relevance of this theoretical motive is less compelling. The logic of this motivation
applies to large economies able to affect the world interest rate or their terms of trade. Yet again,
we observe that most large advanced economies do not use capital controls (and similarly do
not engage in exchange rate intervention). Both theory and evidence suggest that the use of
such tools for the purpose of manipulating international relative prices could trigger retaliation
and contentious policy coordination issues.




                                                 28
References
A HNERT, T., K. F ORBES , C. F RIEDRICH , AND D. R EINHARDT (2018): "Macroprudential
  FX Regulations: Shifting the Snowbanks of FX Vulnerability?" NBER Working Paper No.
  25083.

A KINCI , O. AND J. O LMSTEAD -RUMSEY (2018): "How Effective are Macroprudential Poli-
  cies? An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Financial Intermediation, 33, 33­57.

A LFARO , L., A. C HARI , AND F. K ANCZUK (2017): "The Real Effects of Capital Controls:
  Firm-level Evidence from a Policy Experiment," Journal of International Economics, 108,
  191­210.

A RCE , F., J. B ENGUI , AND J. B IANCHI (2019): "A Macroprudential Theory of Foreign Re-
  serve Accumulation," NBER Working Paper No. 26236.

BACCHETTA , P., R. C ORDONIER , AND O. M ERROUCHE (2019): "The Rise in Foreign Cur-
 rency Bonds: The Role of Capital Controls," manuscript.

BARTOLINI , L. AND A. D RAZEN (1997): "Capital-Account Liberalization as a Signal," Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 87, 138.

B ENGUI , J.   AND   J. B IANCHI (2019): "Macroprudential Policy with Leakages," Manuscript.

B ENIGNO , G., H. C HEN , C. OTROK , A. R EBUCCI , AND E. R. YOUNG (2010): "Revisiting
  Overborrowing and Its Policy Implications," Analysis and Economic Policies Series, 14.

------ (2011): "Monetary and Macro-prudential Policies: An Integrated Analysis," Paper
  prepared for the 2011 IMF ARC Conference.

------ (2012): "Optimal Policy for Macro-Financial Stability," CEPR Discussion Paper
  DP9223.

------ (2013): "Financial Crises and Macro-Prudential Policies," Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 89, 453­470.

------ (2016): "Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary
  Externality Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 147­165.

------ (2019a): "Optimal Policy for Macro-Financial Stability," NBER Working Paper No.
  26397.

B ENIGNO , G., A. F OERSTER , C. OTROK , AND A. R EBUCCI (2019b): "Estimating Macroe-
  conomic Models of Financial Crises: An Endogenous Regime Switching Approach," Tech.
  rep.

B ENIGNO , G., A. R EBUCCI , AND C. Y U (2019c): "Optimal FX Intervention for Macro-
  Financial Stability," Manuscript.


                                               29
B IANCHI , J. (2011): "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle," Amer-
   ican Economic Review, 101, 3400.
------ (2016): "Efficient Bailouts?" American Economic Review, 106, 3607­59.
B IANCHI , J. AND E. G. M ENDOZA (2018): "Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Pol-
   icy," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 588­634.
B OCOLA , L. (2016): "The Pass-Through of Sovereign Risk," Journal of Political Economy,
  124, 879­926.
B ORDO , M. D. AND O. J EANNE (2002): "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices: Does Benign
  Neglect Make Sense?" International Finance, 5, 139­164.
B RUNO , V., I. S HIM , AND H. S. S HIN (2017): "Comparative Assessment of Macroprudential
  Policies," Journal of Financial Stability, 28, 183­202.
C ABALLERO , R. J. AND A. K RISHNAMURTHY (2003): "Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
  Development and Underinsurance," Journal of Finance, 58, 867­893.
C ABALLERO , R. J. AND G. L ORENZONI (2014): "Persistent Appreciations and Overshooting:
  A Normative Analysis," IMF Economic Review, 62, 1­47.
C AVALLINO , P. (2019): "Capital Flows and Foreign Exchange Intervention," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 127­70.
C ERRA , V. AND S. C. S AXENA (2008): "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recov-
  ery," American Economic Review, 98, 439­457.
C ERUTTI , E., S. C LAESSENS , AND L. L AEVEN (2017): "The Use and Effectiveness of Macro-
  prudential Policies: New Evidence," Journal of Financial Stability, 28, 203­224.
C ESA -B IANCHI , A., C. L. F ELIPE , AND A. R EBUCCI (2015): "Global Liquidity, House
  Prices, and the Macroeconomy," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 301­335.
C ESA -B IANCHI , A., A. F ERRERO , AND A. R EBUCCI (2018): "International Credit Supply
  Shocks," Journal of International Economics, 112, 219­237.
C ESA -B IANCHI , A., M. H. P ESARAN , AND A. R EBUCCI (forthcoming): "Uncertainty and
  Economic Activity: A Multi-country Perspective," Review of Financial Studies.
C ESA -B IANCHI , A. AND A. R EBUCCI (2017): "Does Easing Monetary Policy Increase Finan-
  cial Instability?" Journal of Financial Stability, 30, 111­125.
C ESPEDES , L. F. AND R. C HANG (2019): "Optimal Foreign Reserves and Central Bank Policy
  Under Financial Stress," Manuscript.
 ´ SPEDES , L. F., R. C HANG , AND A. V ELASCO (2017): "Financial Intermediation, Real
CE
  Exchange Rates, and Unconventional Policies in an Open Economy," Journal of International
  Economics, 108, S76­S86.

                                             30
C HAMON , M. AND M. G ARCIA (2016): "Capital Controls in Brazil: Effective?" Journal of
  International Money and Finance, 61, 163­187.

C HANG , C., Z. L IU , AND M. M. S PIEGEL (2015): "Capital Controls and Optimal Chinese
  Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 74, 1­15.

C HINN , M. D. AND H. I TO (2006): "What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Con-
  trols, Institutions, and Interactions," Journal of Development Economics, 81, 163­192.

C OSTINOT, A., G. L ORENZONI , AND I. W ERNING (2014): "A Theory of Capital Controls as
  Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation," Journal of Political Economy, 122, 77­128.

C OULIBALY, L. (2018): "Monetary Policy in Sudden Stop-prone Economies," Manuscript.
  ´
D AVILA  , E. AND A. KORINEK (2018): "Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Financial
  Frictions," Review of Economic Studies, 85, 352­395.

DAVILA , J., J. H. H ONG , P. K RUSELL , AND J.-V. R´
                                                    I OS -RULL (2012): "Constrained Effi-
 ciency in the Neoclassical Growth Model with Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Shocks," Econo-
 metrica, 80, 2431­2467.

DAVIS , J. S. AND I. P RESNO (2017): "Capital Controls and Monetary Policy Autonomy in a
 Small Open Economy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 85, 114­130.

D E G REGORIO , J., S. E DWARDS , AND R. O. VALDES (2000): "Controls on Capital Inflows:
  Do They Work?" Journal of Development Economics, 63, 59­83.

D E PAOLI , B. AND A. L IPINSKA (2012): "Capital Controls: A Normative Analysis," in Federal
  Reserve Bank of San Francisco Proceedings, Nov, 1­36.

D ENNIS , Q. (1997): "The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation," The
  American Political Science Review, 91, 531­551.

D ENNIS , Q. AND A. M. T OYODA (2008): "Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to
  Growth?" Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1403­1449.

D EVEREUX , M. B. AND C. E NGEL (2003): "Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited:
  Price Setting and Exchange-Rate Flexibility," The Review of Economic Studies, 70, 765783.

D EVEREUX , M. B., E. R. YOUNG , AND C. Y U (2018): "Capital Controls and Monetary
  Policy in Sudden-stop Economies," Journal of Monetary Economics.

D EVEREUX , M. B. AND C. Y U (2017): "Exchange Rate Adjustment in Financial Crises," IMF
  Economic Review, 65, 528­562.

D ORNBUSCH , R. (2002): "Malaysia's Crisis: Was It Different?" in Preventing Currency Crises
  in Emerging Markets, University of Chicago Press, 441­460.



                                            31
D ORNBUSCH , R. AND S. E DWARDS (1990): "Macroeconomic Populism," Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics, 32, 247­277.

E DWARDS , S. (2004): "Financial Openness, Sudden Stops, and Current-Account Reversals,"
   American Economic Review, 94, 59­64.

E ICHENGREEN , B. AND A. ROSE (2014): "Capital Controls in the 21st Century," Journal of
   International Money and Finance, 48, 1­16.

E NGEL , C. (2016): "Macroprudential Policy under High Capital Mobility: Policy Implications
   from an Academic Perspective," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 42,
   162­172.

E PURE , M., I. M IHAI , C. M INOIU , AND J.-L. P EYDR O ´ (2018): "Household Credit, Global
   Financial Cycle, and Macroprudential Policies: Credit Register Evidence from an Emerging
   Country," .

E RTEN , B., A. KORINEK , AND J. A. O CAMPO (forthcoming): "Capital Controls: Theory and
   Evidence," Journal of Economic Literature.

FANELLI , S. AND L. S TRAUB (forthcoming): "A Theory of Foreign Exchange Interventions,"
  Review of Economic Studies.

FARHI , E. AND I. W ERNING (2014): "Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange
  Rates with Volatile Capital Flows," IMF Economic Review, 62, 569­605.

------ (2016): "A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence of Nominal Rigidities,"
  Econometrica, 84, 1645­1704.

F EDERICO , P., C. A. V EGH , AND G. V ULETIN (2014): "Reserve Requirement Policy over the
   Business Cycle," Tech. rep., NBER Working Paper No. 20612.
      ´
F ERN ANDEZ  , A., M. W. K LEIN , A. R EBUCCI , M. S CHINDLER , AND M. U RIBE (2016):
   "Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset," IMF Economic Review, 64, 548­574.
       ´
F ERN ANDEZ  , A., A. R EBUCCI , AND M. U RIBE (2015): "Are Capital Controls Countercycli-
   cal?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 76, 1­14.

F ISHER , I. (1933): "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions," Econometrica, 337­
   357.

F ORBES , K., M. F RATZSCHER , T. KOSTKA , AND R. S TRAUB (2016): "Bubble Thy Neigh-
   bour: Portfolio Effects and Externalities from Capital Controls," Journal of International
   Economics, 99, 85­104.

F ORBES , K., M. F RATZSCHER , AND R. S TRAUB (2015): "Capital-flow Management Mea-
   sures: What Are They Good For?" Journal of International Economics, 96, S76­S97.



                                             32
F ORBES , K. J. (2007a): "The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch,"
   in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices and Con-
   sequences, University of Chicago Press, 171­202.

------ (2007b): "One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial Constraints
  for Smaller Traded Firms," Journal of International Economics, 71, 294­323.

F ORBES , K. J. AND M. W. K LEIN (2015): "Pick Your Poison: The Choices and Consequences
   of Policy Responses to Crises," IMF Economic Review, 63, 197­237.

F ORNARO , L. (2015): "Financial Crises and Exchange Rate Policy," Journal of International
   Economics, 95, 202­215.

G EANAKOPLOS , J. AND H. P OLEMARCHAKIS (1986): "Existence, Regularity, and Con-
  strained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market is Incomplete,"
  Uncertainty, Information and Communication: Essays in Honor of KJ Arrow, 3, 65­96.

G IORDANI , P. E., M. RUTA , H. W EISFELD , AND L. Z HU (2017): "Capital Flow Deflection,"
   Journal of International Economics, 105, 102­118.

G OPINATH , G. (2019): "A Case for An Integrated Policy Framework," Proceedings - Economic
  Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy
  Symposium.

G OPINATH , G. AND J. C. S TEIN (2018): "Banking, Trade, and the Making of a Dominant
  Currency," NBER Working Paper No. 24485.

G REENWALD , B. C. AND J. E. S TIGLITZ (1986): "Externalities in Economies with Imperfect
  Information and Incomplete Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 229­264.

G RILLI , V. AND G. M. M ILESI -F ERRETTI (1995): "Economic Effects and Structural Deter-
  minants of Capital Controls," IMF Staff Papers, 42, 517­551.

H AN , X. AND S.-J. W EI (2018): "International Transmissions of Monetary Shocks: Between
  a Trilemma and a Dilemma," Journal of International Economics, 110, 205­219.

H EATHCOTE , J. AND F. P ERRI (2016): "On the Desirability of Capital Controls," IMF Eco-
  nomic Review, 64, 75­102.

I ACOVIELLO , M. (2005): "House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
   Business Cycle," American Economic Review, 95, 739­764.

I LZETZKI , E., C. M. R EINHART, AND K. S. ROGOFF (2019): "Exchange Arrangements Enter-
   ing the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor will Hold?" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   134, 599­646.

IMF (2000): "Capital Controls: Country Experiences with Their Use and Liberalization," Oc-
  casional Paper No. 190.

                                            33
------ (2012): "The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Institutional View,"
  .

J EANNE , O. (2018): "Currency Wars, Trade Wars and the Global Demand," Manuscript.

J EANNE , O. AND A. KORINEK (2018): "Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian
   Taxation Approach," Journal of Monetary Economics.

------ (forthcoming): "Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up after the Crash," Re-
  view of Economic Studies.

K AMINSKY, G. L., C. M. R EINHART, AND C. A. V EGH (2005): "When It Rains, It Pours:
  Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies," NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  2004, 11.

K ELLER , L. (2018): "Capital Controls and Risk Misallocation: Evidence from a Natural Ex-
  periment," Manuscript.

K IYOTAKI , N.   AND   J. M OORE (1997): "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 105.

K LEIN , M. W. (2012): "Capital Controls: Gates versus Walls," Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 317­350.

K LEIN , M. W. AND J. C. S HAMBAUGH (2015): "Rounding the Corners of the Policy
  Trilemma: Sources of Monetary Policy Autonomy," American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics, 33­66.

KORINEK , . (2007): "Excessive Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets: Balance Sheet Effects
 and Macroeconomic Externalities," Ph.D. Dissertation, Columbia University.

KORINEK , A. (2016): "Currency Wars or Efficient Spillovers? A General Theory of Interna-
 tional Policy Cooperation," NBER Working Paper No. 23004.

------ (2018): "Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View," Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 111, 61­80.

KORINEK , A. AND D. S ANDRI (2016): "Capital Controls or Macroprudential Regulation?"
 Journal of International Economics, 99, S27­S42.

KORINEK , A. AND A. S IMSEK (2016): "Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage," American
 Economic Review, 106, 699­738.

L IU , Z., P. WANG , AND T. Z HA (2013): "Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic Fluctua-
   tions," Econometrica, 81, 1147­1184.

L ORENZONI , G. (2008): "Inefficient Credit Booms," Review of Economic Studies, 75, 809­
   833.



                                               34
M A , C. (2020): "Financial Stability, Growth and Macroprudential Policy," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 122, 103259.

M A , C., J. ROGERS , AND S. Z HOU (2019): "The Effect of the China Connect," Manuscript.

M A , C. AND S.- J . W EI (2019): "Domestic Institutions and the Volatility of International Cap-
  ital Flows," Manuscript.

M AGUD , N., A. S PILIMBERGO , AND A. W ERNER (forthcoming): "Populism in Latin Amer-
  ica: Economic and Institutional Consequences," IMF Working Paper.

M AGUD , N. E., C. M. R EINHART, AND K. S. ROGOFF (2018): "Capital Controls: Myth and
  Reality," Annals of Economics and Finance, 19, 1­47.

M ENDOZA , E. G. (2002): "Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop,"
  in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, University of Chicago Press, 335­392.

------ (2010): "Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage," American Economic Review,
  100, 1941­66.

O BSTFELD , M. AND K. S. ROGOFF (1996): Foundations of International Macroeconomics,
  vol. 30, MIT press Cambridge, MA.

O STRY, J. D., A. R. G HOSH , M. C HAMON , AND M. S. Q URESHI (2012): "Tools for Manag-
  ing Financial-stability Risks from Capital Inflows," Journal of International Economics, 88,
  407­421.

OTTONELLO , P. (2015): "Optimal Exchange Rate Policy under Collateral Constraints and
 Wage Rigidity," Manuscript.

PASRICHA , G. K., M. FALAGIARDA , M. B IJSTERBOSCH , AND J. A IZENMAN (2018): "Do-
  mestic and Multilateral Effects of Capital Controls in Emerging Markets," Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 115, 48­58.

R EY, H. (2013): "Dilemma not Trilemma: the Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
  Independence," Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, 285­333.

ROGOFF , K. S. AND C. M. R EINHART (2009): "The Aftermath of Financial Crises," American
 Economic Review.

S CHINDLER , M. (2009): "Measuring Financial Integration: A New Data Set," IMF Staff Pa-
   pers, 56, 222­238.

S CHMITT-G ROH E ´ , S. AND M. U RIBE (2016a): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency
   Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1466­1514.

------ (2016b): "Multiple Equilibria in Open Economy Models with Collateral Constraints:
  Overborrowing Revisited," NBER Working Paper No. 22264.

                                               35
S ENAY, O. AND A. S UTHERLAND (2015): "Local Currency Pricing, Foreign Monetary Shocks
   and Exchange Rate Policy," Open Economies Review, 633­661.

U RIBE , M. (2006): "On Overborrowing," American Economic Review, 96, 417­421.

Z EEV, N. B. (2017): "Capital Controls as Shock Absorbers," Journal of International Eco-
   nomics, 109, 43­67.




                                           36
