                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FINANCIAL RISK CAPACITY

                                          Saki Bigio
                                       Adrien d'Avernas

                                      Working Paper 26561
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26561


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




We would like to thank Viral Acharya, Andy Atkeson, Gadi Barlevy, Marco Bassetto, Alberto
Bisin, Jeff Campbell, Varadarajan V. Chari, Ross Doppelt, Douglas Gale, Manolis Galenianos,
Mark Gertler, Veronica Guerrieri, Urban Jermann, Larry Jones, Jennifer La'O, Guido Lorenzoni,
Alessandro Lizzeri, Kinimori Matsuyama, Matteo Maggiori, Cecilia Parlatore, Thomas
Phillippon, Tano Santos and Philipp Schnabl as well as seminar participants during seminars at
U. Penn, Northwestern, Wharton, Kellogg, U. Chicago, Princeton, Duke, Fuqua, UCLA,
Columbia Business School, UMN, Einaudi Institute, the Bank of Portugal Conference on
Monetary Economics, the Di Tella International Finance Workshop, The Money and Payments
Workshop at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the ITAM summer workshop for useful
comments. Larry Christiano, Bob Hall, Todd Keister, Sergei Kovbasyuk, and Alberto Martin
provided excellent discussions of this paper. Adrien d'Avernas gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Nasdaq Nordic Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Saki Bigio and Adrien d'Avernas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Risk Capacity
Saki Bigio and Adrien d'Avernas
NBER Working Paper No. 26561
December 2019
JEL No. E32,E44,G01,G21

                                           ABSTRACT

Financial crises are particularly severe and lengthy when banks fail to recapitalize after bearing
large losses. We present a model that explains the slow recovery of bank capital and economic
activity. Banks provide intermediation in markets with information asymmetries. Large equity
losses force banks to tighten intermediation, which exacerbates adverse selection. Adverse
selection lowers bank profit margins which slows both the internal growth of equity and equity
injections. This mechanism generates financial crises characterized by persistent low growth. The
lack of equity injections during crises is a coordination failure that is solved when the decision to
recapitalize banks is centralized.


Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu

Adrien d'Avernas
Stockholm School of Economics
adrien.davernas@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Financial crises that originate from extreme bank losses are severe in depth and
duration.1 These episodes suggest that the recapitalization of banks is critical for
the recovery of overall economic activity. After the recent financial crisis, the slow
recovery of bank equity has been a major concern for policy makers, academics, and
practitioners.2 When the then Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, was
asked when the crisis would be over, he answered, "When banks start raising capital
on their own."3 But why do banks struggle to recapitalize after a financial crisis?
  To answer this question, macroeconomic theory introduces frictions that prevent
banks from raising equity or barriers to entry that deter the creation of new banks.
This explains why banks don't recapitalize, but does not rationalize why banking
crises last so long. To explain slow recoveries, any theory must also rely on low profit
margins from intermediation after banks suffer equity losses. Otherwise, high profit
margins translate into rapid revenue retentions that accelerate the recovery of inside
equity. Recent macroeconomic theories of financial intermediation cannot explain
declines in bank profit margins, because frictions only limit the ability to raise debt
and equity.4 A simple supply-demand analysis suggests that financial intermediation
profits should rise, not fall, when equity capital is limited. Thus, those models predict
an accelerated recovery of bank equity and, in turn, of economic activity. A theory
of low profit margins during crises is required.
  In this paper, we present a model that explains the slow recovery of bank capital
and economic activity. We show that asymmetric information can explain persistent
low economic growth after financial crises, even though bankers have the funds to
recapitalize their banks.
  A natural role for banks is to deal with asymmetric information between borrowers

    1
      See Cerra and Saxena (2008); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
    2
      The slow recovery of intermediary capital is the subject of Darrell Duffie's 2010 Presidential
Address to the American Finance Association (Duffie, 2010) and a centerpiece of Bagehot (1873).
    3
      "The Chairman," 60 Minutes, CBS News, March 15, 2009.
    4
      In most macroeconomic models of intermediation developed after the crisis, banks cannot
raise equity because bankers are fully invested specialists who face agency frictions. See below for
a review of the literature.

                                                 2
and lenders. Banks can diversify transaction risks caused by asymmetric information,
because they can exploit their scale to pool assets.5 Yet, banks are not immune to
large losses. When banks lose their financial risk capacity, they must scale down their
operations. This decline in intermediation volumes exacerbates adverse selection. In
turn, heightened adverse selection lowers profit margins for banks and incentives to
recapitalize. Eventually, the financial system recovers--but this only comes through
retained earnings, an essentially lethargic process when volumes and profit margins
are low. This mechanism delivers financial crises characterized by persistent low
economic growth.
   An outcome of our theory is that the depth and length of financial crises can be
mitigated if bankers coordinate their equity injections. When an individual banker
observes low net worth in the banking sector, he takes as given that adverse selection
is strong, and therefore profit margins are low. Thus, the crisis persists even when
capital is readily available to recapitalize banks. If bankers would coordinate to
recapitalize banks, they would factor in that their equity injections could moderate
adverse selection and improve profits for the industry, alleviating the severity of the
crisis.
   We do not provide an ultimate theory of financial crises, but rather present a mech-
anism that delivers long-lasting recessions after a banking crisis with a minimal set
of ingredients: (i) reallocation of capital across sectors fuels growth to link financial
and real activity; (ii) banks face a limited liability constraint to tie financial activity
to bank equity; (iii) intermediation is risky such, that bank equity can suffer losses;
and (iv) financial intermediation is subject to asymmetric information, which lowers
profitability when bank financial risk capacity is low. Thus, our theory attributes
the lack of entry to the decline in profitability. We argue that low profit margins
would exacerbate other explanations of slow-moving equity. For example, low profits
reduce the value for outside investors, worsen debt-overhang problems (Myers, 1977),
and add stress to agency frictions that limit the ability to raise equity. These include
moral hazard (Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997), limited enforcement (Hart and Moore,

   5
    This view is rooted in classic banking theory: for example, Freixas and Rochet (2008), Leland
and Pyle (1977), Diamond (1984), or Boyd and Prescott (1986).

                                               3
1994), or asymmetric information (Myers and Majluf, 1984).
  This paper is related to two branches of financial macroeconomics. The first links
the net worth of the financial sector to the amount of financial intermediation through
agency frictions. This literature builds on earlier work by Bernanke and Gertler
(1989) that focused on financial factors affecting firms.6 Since the onset of the Great
Recession, several papers have incorporated similar intermediaries into state-of-the-
art business cycle models. Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010) study business cycle effects after intermediaries suffer equity losses. This
paper is closer to the continuous-time models of He and Krishnamurthy (2011) and
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), because those papers also stress the non-linear
nature of intermediation dynamics. In He and Krishnamurthy (2011), equity shocks
are amplified through a substitution of equity financing for debt. In Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2014), amplification operates through fire sales. This paper differs
from the literature in some important respects. First, intermediaries do not operate
production; they reallocate capital. Second, they issue liabilities that become means
of payment. Third, frictions do not limit the ability to raise equity; here bankers have
equity, but choose not recapitalize banks. These elements bring the model closer to
institutional details of banking. Yet, nonlinear effects still emerge from the interplay
between low bank capital, asymmetric information, and low profitability. Finally,
the source of the inefficiency is different. Typically, models introduce pecuniary
externality that operate through collateral constraints. Rather, here the externality
stems from the individual impact on the average quality of capital.
  The second branch investigates the effects of asymmetric information in financial
market intermediation. Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) investigate asymmetric information
on the side of borrowers. This paper is closely related to Eisfeldt (2004), who stud-
ies an asset market with asymmetric information. There, adverse selection induces

   6
     Fire-sale phenomena were first described by Shleifer and Vishny (1992). A feedback between
losses in intermediary capital and reductions in asset values is also a theme in Gromb and Vayanos
(2002) and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008). Maggiori (2017) extends this framework to a two-
country setup to study current account dynamics. Diamond and Rajan (2011) study strategic
behavior by banks to exploit fire sales by their competitors. Vayanos and Wang (2011) introduce
asymmetric information to a related setup.

                                                4
a cost to insure against investment risks. Bigio (2015) and Kurlat (2013) study
models in which assets are also sold under asymmetric information, but to fund
production. The novelty here is the interaction between intermediary capital and
asymmetric information. This interaction is important, because those models lack a
strong internal propagation: The persistence of adverse selection corresponds exactly
to the persistence of exogenous shocks. Here, low bank equity leads to a persistent
aggravation of adverse selection.7 This feature is connected to the business cycle de-
compositions in Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014) and Ajello (2016), who find
a prevalence of exogenous shocks that exacerbate asymmetric information. Although
those models lack intermediaries, their filtering exercises find that dates associated
with stronger adverse selection coincide with dates on which financial institutions
were in distress. Stiglitz, Stiglitz, and Greenwald (2003) argue that credit quality
deteriorates when banks provide little intermediation, and regards this as being es-
sential to understanding cycles, monetary policy, and the evolution of bank equity
and profits after crises. Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2013) study an environment
in which intermediaries increase leverage when they can mutually insure against id-
iosyncratic credit risk. However, their higher leverage increases aggregate credit risk.
In Martinez-Miera and Suarez (2012) and Begenau (2019), banks can choose the risk
of their assets directly. As an outcome, those models deliver procyclical credit risk,
but they cannot explain declines in margins in crises. In this paper, credit risk and
returns are endogenous. Finally, the mechanism here relates to the mechanisms in
Gorton and Ordonez (2014) and Dang, Gorton, Holmstr¨       om, and Ordonez (2017). In
those models, the equity of constrained agents determines their incentives to acquire
information. Thus, equity losses may trigger adverse selection because the economy
swings from states in which information is symmetric and assets are liquid to states
in which information is asymmetric and assets illiquid. Here, what triggers adverse
selection is that low bank equity induces low volumes of intermediation.
  The next section provides an intuitive description of the mechanics of the model.
The model is laid out in Section 3 and characterized in Section 4. Section 5 presents

   7
    Other models that study lemons markets, such as Hendel and Lizzeri (1999), Guerrieri and
Shimer (2014), Plantin (2009), or Daley and Green (2012), obtain persistence through learning.

                                              5
the model's dynamics. Section 6 discusses the failure to coordinate banks' recapital-
ization after a financial crisis, and Section 7 concludes.


2    Nutshell
Fisher (1933) compares financial crises to the capsizing of a boat that "under ordinary
conditions, is always near a stable equilibrium but which, after being tipped beyond a
certain angle, has no longer this tendency to return to equilibrium." In the aftermath
of the Great Depression, Fisher was providing us with a rudimentary description
of the nonlinear nature of financial crises. The main insight of this paper is that
asymmetric information can induce these "rocking boat" dynamics. We illustrate
the underlying mechanism in Figures 1 and 2.
           (a) Symmetric Information                    (b) Asymmetric Information




        Figure 1: Financial Intermediation wth and without Asymmetric Information


  In Figures 1a and 1b, the two curves represent aggregate demand and supply
schedules for intermediation of capital, D(Q) and S (Q), respectively. In any inter-
mediated market, intermediaries buy assets from suppliers and resell assets to final
buyers. For a given aggregate quantity of trade Q, the intermediaries' marginal profit
(Q) is the distance between supply schedule price to the demand schedule price:
(Q) = S (Q) - D(Q). If some friction imposes a limit on the volume of intermedi-

                                           6
   (a) Profits per Unit of Net Worth (Q) × Q/N         (b) Volume of Intermediation Q(N )



                              equity injection
                              financial inaction
                              dividend payout




       Figure 2: Profits and Volume of Intermediation under Asymmetric Information


ation, there is a positive arbitrage. In models with financial frictions, the net worth
of intermediaries caps Q. Thus, the quantity of intermediation is increasing in the
financial sector's net worth and Q can be represented as a function of bankers' net
worth.
   The shapes of the demand and supply schedules govern the behavior of marginal
profits. In Figure 1a, without information asymmetries, marginal profits are de-
creasing in Q, and thus also in net worth. Conversely, the evolution of net worth is
influenced by marginal profits in two ways: directly, by affecting retained earnings,
and indirectly, by attracting outside equity injections.
   To understand this relation, suppose that there is a level of marginal profits below
which dividends are paid out. Similarly, suppose there is another profitability thresh-
old above which equity injections are attracted. Whenever net worth is above the
level that induces exit-threshold profits, dividends are paid out. The opposite occurs
whenever net worth is below the level that induces entry-threshold profits: Equity
injections replenish net worth. Because the entry and exit profit levels are not the
same, there is also an intermediate inaction region in which intermediaries neither
pay dividends nor raise equity. Within that region, equity has a tendency to increase,
but only through retained earnings. This illustrates an economic force that triggers


                                                   7
financial stability. If anything reduces net worth below (above) the equity entry
(exit) point, intermediaries raise (decrease) equity. In that world, intermediation,
equity, and profits live within a bounded region.
   Asymmetric information alters this stabilizing force. This situation is depicted in
Figure 1b, and emerges from an environment in which intermediaries buy individual
assets under asymmetric information and resell them as a pool of homogeneous qual-
ity. When intermediaries purchase capital under asymmetric information, both the
quantity and the quality of assets increase with the purchase price. This is why the
supply schedule is also increasing. However, what has changed is that the demand
faced by the intermediaries has a backward-bending portion. Standard consumer
theory dictates that on the margin, the value of a unit of any normal good--savings
instruments included--is lower than the marginal value of the previous unit, pro-
vided that all units are homogeneous. When qualities improve with quantities, the
marginal valuation may actually rise with quantities--if qualities improve sufficiently
fast. The result is an "effective" demand curve that can be backward bending. A
direct consequence of this backward-bending demand is that marginal profits are no
longer necessarily decreasing, as in Figure 2a. Instead, marginal profits are poten-
tially hump-shaped. In the case of Figure 1a, the hump shape in marginal profits
generates two inaction regions instead of the single region found in Figure 1b.
   The inaction regions impair the stability of financial intermediation. Assume that
net worth is in the rightmost inaction region of Figure 2a. In that region, the
dynamics of equity and intermediation depend on the size of intermediation losses, as
in Fisher's rocking-boat analogy. A shock that produces equity losses, but only sends
the economy to the neighboring injection region to the left, will be counterbalanced
by quick equity injections. As a result, small shocks are stabilized, as in Figure 1a.
However, if losses are large enough to send the economy to the leftmost inaction
region, the economy loses the tendency to return to equilibrium. Because profits
are low, intermediaries lack individual incentives to inject equity. All in all, large
shocks can capsize this economy. Eventually, this economy can recover, but slowly
as intermediaries retain earnings.
   The next section presents the dynamic environment for which Figures 1 and 2 are

                                          8
                                                           CAPITAL
                                          BANKERS                      ASYMMETRIC
                                                                       INFORMATION




                     C-PRODUCERS                            K-PRODUCERS
                                              IOUs



Figure 3: Flow of Funds between Bankers and K -producers. K -producers sell pools of capital
under asymmetric information to bankers in exchange of riskless IOUs.


the solution. The rest of the paper characterizes the dynamics of the model.


3       Model
Time is discrete and the horizon is infinity. There are two goods: consumption
goods (the numeraire) and capital goods. There is an aggregate shock, t   
{1 , 2 , . . . , N }, that affects capital depreciation and follows a Markov process with
standard assumptions. The model is populated by a continuum of producers and
bankers. The banking sector intermediates capital from capital-goods producers to
consumption-goods producers. The source of risk for intermediaries follows from the
assumption that t is realized after funding decisions are made.


3.1     Environment
Demographics There are two populations of agents: producers and bankers. Each
population has unit mass. At the beginning of each period, producers are randomly
segmented into two groups: capital-goods producers (k -producers) and consumption-
goods producers (c-producers). Producers become k -producers with probability ,
independent of time and t .8 Each agent carry a capital stock kt , and because agents
    8
    The real sector is directly borrowed from Kiyotaki and Moore (2019). These random assign-
ments reduce the state space of the model.

                                             9
                                         BANKERS




                                         C-GOOD
                    C-PRODUCERS                             K-PRODUCERS


                                             IOUs

Figure 4: Flow of Funds between K -producers and C -producers. K -producers buy consumption
goods from c-producers in exchange for riskless bankers' IOUs.


operate linear technologies, their problem is homogeneous within their own group.

Producers Producers have logarithmic preferences over their stream of consump-
tion ct with time discount rate  :

                                        
                                  Et          t log(c ) .
                                        =t


C -producers operate a linear technology that produces akt units of consumption.
Their output may be consumed or converted into capital by k -producers. In turn,
k -producers have access to a linear investment technology that transforms  units
of consumption good into one unit of new capital. Each type of producer can only
operate their corresponding technology.
   The segmentation of production induces the need for trade: On the one hand, k -
producers need consumption goods to operate their investment technologies. On the
other hand, c-producers produce those resources but lack access to the investment
technology. Consumption goods must flow from c-producers to k -producers, and
capital must flow in the opposite direction.

Capital At the beginning of each period, capital kt is divided into a uniform dis-
tribution of capital units, each identified by some quality   [0, 1] that can be sold


                                             10
                          CAPITAL
                                                 BANKERS




                      C-PRODUCERS            IOUs               K-PRODUCERS




Figure 5: Flow of Funds between C -producers and Bankers. Bankers settle their IOUs by selling
homogeneous units of capital to c-producers. Bankers' profits or losses arise from the difference
between the proceeds of the sale of depreciated capital to c-producers and the debt contracted with
k -producers.


individually. The quality  and the realization of t determine the depreciation rate
of each capital unit through the function  : [0, 1] ×   R+ . In particular, (, t )
denotes the capital that will remain out of a -unit given t . Once a -unit of cap-
ital is scaled by (, t ), it becomes homogeneous capital and can be merged with
other units to form the next period stock of capital.9 Thus, after realization of the
depreciation shock t on the stock of capital kt , the remaining capital available for
production next period is given by
                                                 1
                                       kt            (, t )d.
                                             0


  However, a producer can sell individual -units of capital. This decision is sum-
marized by the indicator 1() : [0, 1]  {0, 1} where 1() takes a value of 1 if  is
sold. Thus, the producer sells
                                                     1
                                            kt           1()d                                  (1)
                                                 0




   9
     This assumption greatly simplifies the state space, as we do not need to keep track of the
distribution of qualities over time.

                                                         11
and keeps
                                         1
                               kt            (1 - 1())(, t )d.
                                    0

   To discipline our analysis, we make four assumptions on the depreciation function.
Assumption 1 normalizes the depreciation function and facilitates the characteriza-
tion in Section 4. Assumption 2 is without loss of generality and allows us to order
-units of capital from the lowest to the highest quality. Assumption 3 preserves the
ordinality of depreciation shocks  over the whole range of . Assumption 4 allows
the analysis to focus on intermediation risk and abstract from aggregate depreciation
risk.

Assumption 1. The depreciation function is such that (0, ) = 0.

Assumption 2. The depreciation function (, ) is monotone and increasing in
.

Assumption 3. If the following holds for   [0, 1]:

                                                                
                                  (, )d                            (,  )d,
                           0                                0


then it is also true for any other   [0, 1].
                                                                              1
Assumption 4. There is no aggregate depreciation risk:                       0
                                                                                  (, )d =   .

Private Information The quality  of each capital unit is known only to its
owner. Buyers can only observe the quantity of a pool of sold units, as given in
equation (1), but cannot discern the composition of -units within that pool. After
t is realized, the remaining capital available for production next period from that
pool is given by
                                                 1
                                    kt               1()(, t )d.
                                             0

As stated in Proposition 1, this information asymmetry between the seller and the
buyer of capital incentivizes the seller to always sell the worst -units of capital


                                                       12
first.10 In equilibrium, agents can infer the threshold quality t by observing the
aggregate quantity of capital intermediated.

Proposition 1. The decision to sell as a function of quality 1() is decreasing.
Thus, it is equivalent to choose a threshold quality t under which each unit of capital
is sold. See Appendix A for the proof.

Bankers Risk-neutral bankers provide intermediation by buying capital from k -
producers and reselling these units to c-producers after the realization of the de-
preciation shock t . Banks issue money to finance these investments and pay k -
producers with riskless IOUs. These IOUs can be thought of as inside money and
entitle their holders to a riskless unit of consumption. K -producers use these IOUs
to buy consumption goods from c-producers and invest these resources to produce
capital.
   Bankers have access to an exogenous endowment of consumption goods. Every
period, bankers can transfer wealth, as an equity injection, into legal institutions
called banks. Once in a bank, bankers' net worth nt is liable to intermediation losses,
but personal endowments are protected by limited liability. He can also transfer a
fraction of his net worth dt  [0, 1] as dividends to his personal account. Access to
an exogenous endowment of consumption goods is key to show that financial crises
can occur even if banks have enough funds to recapitalize.
   We make two assumptions regarding equity injections and dividend payments.
First, when a banker is paid dividends, he must pay a tax  . This tax can be
interpreted as an exogenous wedge that emerges from agency frictions or government
policies that are not modeled. The role of this tax is to induce a wedge between the
marginal cost of equity and the marginal value of dividends. This wedge is essential
to obtain inaction regions in which bankers neither pay dividends nor inject equity.
If the tax rate is set to zero, inaction regions become inaction points.
   Second, when a banker makes equity injections et × nt where et  R+ , it comes

  10
     This unique cutoff resembles the solution to the lemons problem of Akerlof (1978), with the
distinction that there is adverse selection about risky assets as opposed to riskless assets.

                                              13
with a cost (et ) × nt such that

                                         (et )                2 (et )
                      (0) = 0,                 > 0,                   > 0.
                                         et                  (et )2

This cost can be interpreted as the liquidity premium of selling a large quantity
of illiquid assets to recapitalize banks in a short period of time. Importantly, this
assumption prohibits bankers from being indifferent between multiple optimal equity
injection policies and prevents the existence of sunspot equilibria, which are not the
focus of this paper.11
   The diversification of idiosyncratic risk by bankers follows from the implicit as-
sumption that only banks can buy large pools of capital. This gives banks an advan-
tage over c-producers, who would otherwise bear the risk of getting a low -unit of
capital when trading with a k -producer directly. This role emerges as an equilibrium
outcome in Boyd and Prescott (1986), in which banks are coalitions of agents that
join together to mitigate idiosyncratic risk.
   When bankers buy a pool of capital from k -producers, they cannot distinguish the
quality of -units of capital. Moreover, they hold on to the pool of capital until t
is realized. After the -units of capital in the pool depreciate, the pool is resold as
homogeneous capital to c-producers and bankers settle all of their IOUs.
   The depreciation shock t renders bankers' assets risky, while their liabilities are
riskless. Thus, in the event of a bad depreciation shock, bankers face equity losses
if their IOUs exceed the value of their purchased capital pool. In principle, they
could finance losses with their personal endowment, but limited liability protects
their personal wealth. Thus, the limited liability constraint caps the amount of
intermediation a bank can provide: The greater the volume of capital bought, the
greater the risk, and the greater the need for an equity cushion. While bankers can
inject equity to scale up their operations, they need incentives to do so.




  11
     Without convex costs in equity injections, multiple equilibrium equity injection policies can
arise in equilibrium, as bankers' decisions to inject equity are strategic complements.

                                               14
State Variables There are two aggregate quantities of interest: the aggregate
capital stock,
                                                1
                                    Kt =            kt (z )dz,
                                            0

and the equity of the entire financial system,
                                                1
                                    Nt =            nt (j )dj,
                                            0


where individual producers and bankers are identified by z  [0, 1] and j  [0, 1],
respectively.
  In Section 4, we show that producers' policy functions are linear in their capital
stock and bankers' policy functions are linear in their net worth. Thus, it is only
necessary to keep track of the relative net worth of bankers relative to the size of the
economy--the economy's financial risk capacity--which is defined as

                                       t  Nt /Kt .

The aggregate state of the economy is summarized by {t , t }.


3.2    Agents' Problems
Producers Using a recursive notation and dropping the time subscript, the value
function of producers before being assigned to produce consumption goods or capital
is given by
                      U (k,  ) = (1 - )U c (k,  ) + U k (k,  ),

where U c (k,  ) and U k (k,  ) are the value functions of c- and k -producers, respec-
tively.

C -Producers We can write the problem of a c-producer as

                   U c (k,  ) = E    max            log(c) + U (k ,  )   ,
                                    cc 0,ic 0



                                            15
subject to their budget constraint:

                                      cc + pd ic = ak,

and the law of motion for capital:
                                            1
                                k =k            (, )d + ic .
                                        0


C -producers use their stock of capital to produce consumption goods. They can
either consume cc or invest ic in new units of capital at price pd . Consumption and
investment decisions are made after the realization of the depreciation shock .

K -Producers The problem of a k -producer is given by

                U k (k,  ) = max E       max         log(ck ) + U (k ,  )
                                        ck 0,ik


subject to their budget constraint:

                                    ck + ik = ps k,

and the law of motion for capital:
                                            1
                                k =k            (, )d + ik .
                                        


Before realization of the depreciation shock , k -producers choose the threshold qual-
ity  under which they sell each -units of capital. Since bankers cannot differentiate
-units of capital, k -producers sell each unit of capital at the same price ps . If bankers
were able to differentiate between -units of capital, there would be no asymmetries
of information.
  After realization of the depreciation shock , they can either consume ck or produce
new units of capital ik at cost . Proposition 2 provides the parameter restriction
on  such that it is never optimal for k -producers to purchase intermediated capital

                                                16
from bankers. Note that we allow k -producers to transform capital into consump-
tion goods--ik can be negative--when selling capital is not sufficiently profitable to
sustain their desired consumption level.12
Proposition 2. If the following condition holds:

                                        a(1 - )
                                 <                    ,                                   (C1)
                                      + (1 -  )(1 - )

then in equilibrium, pd >  is always true and k -producers never purchase interme-
diated capital from bankers. See Appendix E for the proof.

Bankers The problem of a banker is given by

                 U b (n,  ) =      max         d - e n + E U b (n ,  )
                                q 0,e0,1d0


subject to the law of motion for wealth:

                      n = n 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d + q (, ),

and the limited liability constraint:

                                      n  q,           ,                                     (2)

where  is a small positive number.
  The intermediation profit  (, ) per unit of capital is the difference between the
resale value of capital left after the depreciation shock and the cost of purchasing
the pool of -units of capital:

                                   (, )  pd (, ) - ps ,

                     
                         (,)d
where (, )           0
                          
                                  is the average quality of -units of capital sold by k -
  12
     Restricting ik to be positive would not change our results but would introduce a new regime
that unnecessarily complicates characterization of the solution.

                                              17
producers.
   Bankers take all of their decisions before realization of the depreciation shock
. Bankers can either transfer wealth as an equity injection e into the bank, pay
dividends d, or remain inactive. When paying dividends, bankers have to pay a tax
 while injecting capital costs (e).
   Bankers then decide how much capital to intermediate q , subject to the limited
liability constraint from equation (2). If  were equal to 0, bankers would need just
enough wealth to be able to pay any potential intermediation losses. With  > 0,
we ensure that bankers' wealth is never completely wiped out. This limited liability
constraint is akin to a value-at-risk constraint that scales with the size of the balance
sheet q and is such that the volume of intermediation per unit of net worth, q/n, is
bounded above by 1/.

Recursive Competitive Equilibrium Market-clearing conditions require that
the demand for capital by bankers equals the amount of capital sold by k -producers
at price ps before the depreciation shock . After the depreciation shock , the
supply of capital by bankers must equal the demand for capital by c-producers at
price pd . The definition of a recursive competitive equilibrium is a set of allocations
that solve the agents' problems and prices ps and pd such that markets clear in both
stages. The definition of the equilibrium is presented as Definition 1.

Definition 1 (Recursive Competitive Equilibrium). A recursive competitive
equilibrium is (i) a set of price functions {ps ( ), pd (, )}, (ii) a set of policy func-
tions for c-producers {cc (k, , ), ic (k c , , )}, (iii) a set of policy functions for k -
producers {(k,  ), ck (k, , ), ik (k, , )}, (iv) a set of policy functions for bankers
{e(n,  ), d(n,  ), q (n,  )}, (v) a set of value functions {U c (k,  ), U k (k,  ), U b (n,  )},
and (vi) a law of motion for the aggregate state  (, ) such that:

   1. The agents' policy functions (ii), (iii), and (iv) are solutions to their respective
      problems given prices (i) and the law of motion for  (vi).

   2. Markets for intermediation of capital, depreciated capital, and consumption
      goods clear.

                                              18
  3. The law of motion for the state variable  (, ) is consistent with equilibrium
     functions and demographics.


3.3       Discussion of the Environment
Role of Banks We interpret banks as commercial banks. In the model, banks
invest in risky pools of capital sold by k -producers and finance the position with
risk-free IOUs. The IOUs are used by c- and k -producers to trade goods and capital.
In doing so, banks perform three roles stressed by the banking literature.13 First,
banks diversify idiosyncratic transaction risk by pooling assets. Second, they create
a means of payment. Third, they provide insurance against aggregate risk, because
they purchase capital prior to the realization of . We do not model the emergence of
banks nor do we provide a theoretical foundation for this institutional arrangement.
Nevertheless, the paper is motivated by the banking literature and the institutional
features we see in practice.
   The diversification of idiosyncratic risk follows from an implicit assumption on
bank size. The idea is that banks are large agents and therefore can buy capital
pools and, in turn, dilute idiosyncratic trade risk. By contrast, we envision that
producers are small agents and cannot exploit the law of large numbers. If a c-
producer were to contract privately with a k -producer, it would bear the risk of
ending with low-quality capital. A similar role emerges in equilibrium in ?, in which
banks are coalitions of small agents that join together to exploit economies of scale.
We use that insight to motivate bank intermediation.
   Second, banks provide liquidity services because they create risk-free liabilities.
This aspect is fundamental. If the bank were to purchase capital by issuing debt
contingent on the quality of the k -producer's capital, the bank would be transferring
the asymmetric information back to the c-producer. As a result, trade opportunities
would be lost. This is precisely the problem that banks are there to solve. Because
banks offer risk-free IOUs, they mitigate the asymmetric information problem. This
financial arrangement is consistent with the view in Gorton (2010) that the essential

  13
       See Freixas and Rochet (2008), Section 1.2.

                                                 19
function of banking is to create a special kind of debt that is immune to adverse
selection. Gorton and Ordonez (2014), Farhi and Tirole (2015), and Bigio and Weill
(2016) are examples of related models in which the issuance of risk-free liabilities
by banks emerge as an optimal security design problem tailored to improving trade
under private information.
   A third role for banks is to absorb the risk implied by . Liquidity provision
requires that deposits be independent of , but it does not require these to be
independent of . While we do not model this aspect explicitly, this role emerges if
banks cannot contract on the aggregate state.
   These insights motivate the building blocks of our model but we do not estab-
lish the optimal use of debt as means of payments nor the emergence of banks in
equilibrium. We rather focus on the mechanics of slow recoveries following financial
crises. Recent models that provide foundations for the emergence of banks and their
role as liquidity providers include Gu, Mattesini, Monnet, and Wright (2013) and
Donaldson, Piacentino, and Thakor (2018).

Asymmetry of Information and the Nature of Financial Activities While
in the model banks intermediate capital, in the real world they issue loans. Loans
are typically collateralized with residential or commercial mortgages, equipment, in-
tellectual property, or accounts receivable. However, buying and selling assets is not
all that different from lending with collateral. Furthermore, problems of asymmetric
information in a market in which assets are sold produce similar effects on liquidity as
in markets where the quality of collateral is private information. To see this connec-
tion, consider a loan collateralized with an asset whose quality is private information.
The loan agreement sets a loan size, which we can think of as the analogue of the
price by financial intermediaries, ps . A loan agreement also determines a principal
payment to be repaid by the borrower. There is default if the collateral quality is
lower than the principal. Upon default, the bank seizes the collateral and resells it
at its full information price, as in this paper. If there is no default, it is effectively
as if the bank resells the collateral to the borrower--with the distinction that it sells
it at a price determined by the face value of the debt.

                                           20
  A connection between intermediation under private information and collateraliza-
tion under private information is studied formally by Bigio and Shi (2019). That
paper presents a model in which deep-pocketed banks compete by offering collateral-
ized loans and asset purchase contracts. The motive for trade is similar to the motive
in this paper, although there is no aggregate risk or dynamics of bank equity. The
important connection with this paper is that although collateralized loans provide
more liquidity than outright sales, the environments are observationally equivalent.
In particular, asset sales contracts, given a low dispersion of quality, produce the
same amount of liquidity as collateralized loans given a greater dispersion of quality.
  Asymmetries of information have been documented as an important feature of loan
markets. In particular, Stroebel (2016) documents the importance of adverse selec-
tion on collateral quality in the residential mortgage market. Similarly, Sufi (2007)
emphasizes that information asymmetry between lenders and borrowers influences
the structure of syndicated loans. We envision that if we were to introduce collateral-
ized debt contracts in the paper, the main message would be unaltered. We therefore
keep the analysis simple by working with outright sales only, but our intermediation
of capital is meant to capture actual lending practices.

Interpretation of (, ) In modern economies, firms operate in complex pro-
duction and financial networks. They produce in multiple interrelated product lines
and hold risky claims on others. This amalgamation of physical and financial assets
is represented by the collection of -units of capital held by producers. The quality
 is an ordered index that maps the different attributes of assets into a comparable
number, the efficiency units (, ). The aggregate shock  generates intermediation
risk and captures distributional changes in asset values at business cycle frequencies.
Bloom (2009) provides evidence of such increases in return dispersion in recessions.
Through , , and  the model parsimoniously captures these complex forces. In
Section 4, we characterize the relationship between the shape of (, ) and the
strength of asymmetries of information.




                                          21
Private Rationing In the model, banks take market prices and capital quality
as given. When the net worth of banks is low, the clearing mechanism lowers the
price at the same time as quality falls. A natural question is whether banks with low
net worth could improve the equilibrium by rationing sellers while offering a higher
price to attract assets of better quality. A potential concern is that banks could offer
a constant pooling price and ration k -producers when they have low risk-bearing
capacity. This would reduce quantities but keep the average quality constant, and
thus the profitability per unit of intermediation. However, this mechanism does not
take competition into account. In a related environment that allows for quantity and
price competition under competitive search, Guerrieri, Shimer, and Wright (2010)
find that this form of competition actually leads to separating equilibria, which
is typically worse than the pooling of assets that occurs here. Interestingly, the
comparative statics for asset dispersion are similar to our case. We keep the analysis
simple by focusing on pure asset sales and avoid study asset rationing. Bigio and Shi
(2019) also compare lemons equilibrium with Guerrieri, Shimer, and Wright (2010).

Lack of Screening and Flight to Quality In our model, intermediaries cannot
observe any attribute of . This assumption reduces the model's dimensionality
at the expense of realism. In actuality, assets have observable and unobservable
characteristics. Asset prices should condition on observable variables and there is
evidence of flight to quality during downturns (see Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist,
1994). At first, flight-to-quality behavior may seem to conflict with the idea that
adverse selection worsens during crises. However, adverse selection and flight-to-
quality can occur simultaneously: Adverse selection can worsen within assets of
common observed characteristics, while banks recompose portfolios between assets
of different observed characteristics (see Malherbe, 2014).
  Similarly, the model abstracts from any screening because banks cannot invest to
improve the information about the quality of the assets they invest in. However, in
practice, banks employ resources to improve screening. Nonetheless, the important
question is whether introducing a screening technology would offset the decline in
profitability when banks scale down their operations. With fixed screening costs,

                                          22
profitability would also decline as banks shrink their scale.


4     Characterization
This section characterizes the key elements of the mechanism illustrated in Figures
1 and 2. First, we describe the problems of producers and bankers and show that all
policy functions for producers are linear in their capital stock, and those for bankers
are linear in their net worth. Thus,  is the only endogenous state. From the policy
functions of k -producers, we deduce the supply schedule S (Q). Then, we derive the
regions in which banks inject equity, pay dividends, or remain inactive. Next, we
derive the expected intermediation revenues for bankers to pin down the demand
schedule D(Q). Finally, we show that intermediation profits (Q) are nonmonotone
in the presence of information asymmetries. We relegate all derivations and proofs
to the appendices.


4.1    Policy Functions
As a result of the homogeneity of production technologies and preferences, producers'
policy functions are linear in their wealth. The wealth of c- and k -producers are
functions of their stock of capital, and take a different form as their valuation of
capital changes with their investment options. Lemma 1 provides the policy functions
of c- and k -producers as a function of prices and their stock of capital.

Lemma 1. C - and k -producers' consumption policies are given by
                                                         1
            cc = (1 -  )wc ,      where    wc = qk           (, )d + ak,
                                                     0
                                                         1
             k            k                    k
            c = (1 -  )w ,        where    w = k             (, )d + ps k.
                                                     


From the problem of k -producers, it follows directly that the threshold policy is such




                                          23
that
                                                    1
                     s
                 (p ) = arg max E log                   (, )d + ps    .
                                                    


Moreover, (ps ) is unique, strictly increasing in ps , (0) = 0, and (E [(1, )]) =
1.

  Thus, the threshold policy  does not depend on the holding of capital and the
corresponding distribution of capital across k -producers. Deriving the aggregate
quantity of capital supplied by k -producers is then straightforward: Q = (ps )K .
                                                                               Q
The supply schedule from Figure 1 is the inverse of that function: S (Q) = -1  K
                                                                                 .

Lemma 2. Because (ps ) is strictly increasing in ps , S (Q) is also strictly increasing
in Q. Furthermore, S (0) = 0 and S (K ) =  E [(1, )].

  Equivalently, Proposition 3 demonstrates that e( ) and d( ) do not depend on
n, and q is a linear function of wealth: q (n,  ) = q( )n. Thus, we do not need to
keep track of the corresponding distribution of net worth across bankers, and the
aggregate quantity of capital intermediated by bankers from Figure 2b is given by
Q(N ) = q(N/K )N .

Proposition 3. The bankers' value function is linear in the net worth of bankers.
That is, U b (n,  ) = ub ( )n and ub ( ) satisfies


ub ( ) =     max         d - e +  E ub ( ) 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d + q (, )           ,
           q0,e0,1d0


subject to the limited liability constraint:

                                   1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d
                              q                           ,
                                         | (, ) - |

where  is defined as the worst realization of the depreciation shock such that  (, ) 
 (, )    . Furthermore,  (, ) is always negative in equilibrium.



                                               24
     To characterize the bankers' policy functions, we define the value of inside equity
as

                                                                 (, )
               ( )   E ub ( ) + max  E ub ( )                           ,0 .
                                                             | (, ) - |

The formula for ( ) is intuitive. The first term is the marginal value of equity in
the next stage. The second term is the shadow value of relaxing the limited liability
constraint by holding an additional unit of net worth. This shadow value is equal
to 0 when expected profits are negative and bankers do not intermediate capital.
Using this definition for the value of inside equity, we can rewrite the bankers' value
function as

               ub ( ) =    max      d - e + ( ) 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d             .           (3)
                          e0,1d0


   From Proposition 4, we get that q( ) follows a linear program: the limited lia-
bility binds when the marginal intermediation profits are positive, E  (, ) > 0.
Otherwise q( ) is zero when expected profits are negative.
   Likewise, the decisions to inject equity and pay dividends are also characterized
by a linear program. When ( ) < 1/(1 +  ), the banker pays dividends as the
marginal value of inside equity is below the after-tax benefit of dividends. Conversely,
if ( ) > 1, the banker injects equity because the value of inside equity exceeds
the cost of forgone consumption. When ( )  (1/(1 +  ), 1], there is financial
inaction. Finally, if ( ) is equal to 1/(1 +  ), bankers are indifferent about the
scale of dividends. In equilibrium, the aggregation of dividends has to be consistent
with the law of motion for  . Without loss of generality, we study the case with
symmetrical dividend policies.14




     14
     Since bankers' policy functions do not depend on their quantity of net worth and are linear in
their net worth, the cross-sectional distribution of net worth has no impact on the equilibrium.

                                                25
Proposition 4. The bankers' intermediation policy is given by

                       1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d
              q( ) =                               if E  (, ) > 0.
                             | (, ) - |

The intermediation policy is indeterminate at the individual level if E  (, ) = 0
and equal to 0 if E  (, ) < 0. Similarly, the dividend policy is given by

                          d( ) = 1     if ( ) < 1/(1 +  ).

The dividend policy is indeterminate at the individual level if ( ) = 1/(1 +  ) and
equal to 0 if ( ) > 1/(1 +  ). Finally, the equity injection policy satisfies:

                       ( ) - 1                                           (e)
       e( ) = -
              e
                1
                                      if ( )  1         where e (e) =        .
                        ( )                                              e

The equity injection policy is equal to 0 if ( ) < 1.


4.2    Expected Intermediation Profits
Using the market-clearing condition for consumption goods, we derive the price for
intermediated capital pd :

                                       a(1 - )
                       pd (, ) =                        .
                                   (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )

The price pd (, ) is decreasing in both  and . Both outcomes are natural, because
capital is a normal good. In essence, pd falls when the supply increases and captures
a substitution effect with consumption.
  Risk-neutral bankers are willing to intermediate capital as long as the expected
intermediation revenue, D(Q), is higher than the cost of capital purchased from k -
producers, S (Q). Given the depreciation shock , the intermediation revenue per
unit of capital, d(, ), is the product of the price of intermediated capital sold to




                                         26
c-producers and the average quality of -units of capital sold by k -producers:

                            d(, ) = pd ,           ,  .                           (4)

                                      substitution composition
                                         effect       effect


Following 2, the average quality increases with . Thus, the composition effect--the
novelty of this paper--responds opposite to the substitution effect.
  We have already defined the aggregate quantity of capital intermediated as a func-
tion of the threshold quality : Q = K. Thus, we can construct the demand
schedule of capital from Figure 1b:

                                                                 Q
                   D(Q) = E d (Q),              where (Q) =        .
                                                                 K

  In Appendix E, we show that the composition effect always dominates the sub-
stitution effect with respect to the depreciation shock . In contrast, the effect of
 (and therefore Q) can be nonmonotone. Proposition 5 provides the necessary
and sufficient condition for the composition effect to dominate. This condition is
analogous to requiring that the depreciation function (, ) be sufficiently steep in
.

Proposition 5. Given , the intermediation revenues are increasing in ,

                                    d(, )
                                          > 0,
                                     

if and only if the following condition holds:

                        (, ) - (, )     [(, )]2 
                                    >               .                            (C2)
                                      (1 -  )(1 - )

   The steepness of (, ) is what the literature refers to as "information sensitiv-
ity." The further the marginal quality (, ) is from the average quality of the
pool (, ), the stronger are the information asymmetries. Thus, (C2) is akin to


                                          27
imposing that information asymmetries weaken sufficiently fast as more capital is
intermediated. Without information asymmetries, the price of each -unit of capital
would be scaled by its quality (, ) in equation (4) instead of (, ), and the
substitution effect would always dominate.

Lemma 3. Intermediation revenues are such that d(0, ) = 0     and, thus,
D(0) = 0.

  The expected intermediation profits from Figure 2a can be written

                     (Q) = E  (Q),               = D(Q) - S (Q).

Because both the demand and the supply meet at the origin, (0) = 0 as well.
Proposition 6 establishes that these profits increase when the volume of intermedia-
tion is low. That is, when Q is low, an increase in intermediation volume alleviates
information asymmetries more than it satiates the need of c-producers for investment
in capital. (C3) ensures that intermediation of capital is profitable in expectation,
even when the volume of intermediation is low and information asymmetries are the
strongest.

Proposition 6. If the following sufficient condition holds,

                                          1 a
                                   <                ,                             (C3)
                                          2 (1 -  )

then expected intermediation profits increase as  tends to 0. That is,

                                     (Q)
                                    lim  > 0.
                                   Q0 Q


  Proposition 7 provides the last component to prove the nonmonotonicity of ex-
pected intermediation profits. This condition ensures that the bankers never in-
termediate all of the stock of capital of k -producers. This could happen if capital
production were so efficient that k -producers could sell their entire stock of capital
and produce enough capital to replenish their stock. In that situation, there would

                                            28
be no information asymmetries or intermediation risk for bankers. Importantly, (C4)
also implies that (K ) < 0.

Proposition 7. If the following condition holds,

                                 1         a(1 - )
                         >                               ,                           (C4)
                              E [(1, )]  + (1 -  )(1 - )

then in equilibrium, k -producers never sell their entire stock of capital ( < 1).

  Therefore, we have characterized the shape of expected intermediation profits from
Figure 2a. The function (Q) is equal to 0 for Q = 0, then increases and becomes
positive, and reaches negative territory as it gets closer to Q = K .


4.3    Quantity of Intermediated Capital
The last object to characterize is the quantity of intermediated capital as a function
of bankers' total net worth, Q(N ), from Figure 2b. This mapping arises from the
market-clearing condition for capital intermediation:

                                 (ps ) = q (, ps ) .

The left-hand side is the aggregate supply of capital by k -producers and the right-
hand side is the aggregate quantity of capital that bankers can intermediate while
satisfying the limited liability constraint. The bankers' policy function q is a function
of the price ps because it is constrained by the worst realization of intermediation
profits (see Proposition 4),

                             (, ) = pd (, ) (, ) - ps .

In general, there may be multiple solutions to that equation, as  (, ) might be
nonmonotone and the aggregate net worth of bankers  could support losses associ-
ated with two different volumes of intermediation. This price multiplicity is not the
focus of this paper. We can exclude the occurrence of multiple equilibria by ensuring

                                           29
that the worst realization of intermediation profits is monotone and decreasing in
the quantity of intermediated capital. We provide explicit sufficient conditions such
that  q (, ps ) /ps < 0 is satisfied and ps is unique in Appendix G. Given that this
condition is satisfied, Q(N ) is an increasing function in bankers' total net worth N .


5        Dynamics
In this section, we describe the nonlinear dynamics of the model, and demonstrate
that it features rocking-boat dynamics. To ensure that bankers never decide to
completely deplete the net worth in their banks, we restrict dividend payments when
banks' leverage ratio is above 10, in line with Basel capital requirements.15 Without
this restriction, when the net worth of the banking sector is sufficiently low, the
value of inside equity might be so low that bankers withdraw all their net worth
from the banks and the economy collapses in an absorbing steady state with no
financial sector.

Calibration We solve numerically for the solution of the model with the following
parameter values:

          {, , , a, , , , } = {0.97, 0.95, 0.10, 0.05, 0.15, 0.20, 0.08, 0.10}.

Importantly, we use the (1 , 2 )-Beta cumulative distribution function for (, )
and two possible shocks for  = (1 , 2 )  {(8, 4), (8, 1)} with probabilities (0.5, 0.5).
Finally, the functional form for the cost of equity injection is given by:

                                                      2
                                          (e) =        e.
                                                     2

  We set  so that the annualized risk-free rate is 3% at the stochastic steady state.
The depreciation rate  is consistent with an average annual depreciation of the
total capital stock of 5%. The fraction  is set to 0.10, as in Bigio (2015). The
    15
    We measure the leverage of the bank as the value of capital at the midpoint between the selling
and demand price over the net worth of the bank: q/n × (ps + pd )/2.

                                                30
productivity of capital a is set such that the return on producing consumption goods
fluctuates between 2% and 5%. With a capital production cost  of 0.15, the return
on equity of the bank is at most 10% and (C1) is satisfied. The equity injection cost
parameter  is set sufficiently high to eliminate multiple equilibrium equity injection
policies. The cost of dividend payments  is set to 8% to be consistent with the
estimates in Hennessy and Whited (2005). The limited liability parameter  is equal
to 10% to approximate Basel capital requirements.16
   To construct the model moments, we simulate the economy one million times after
a negative shock to bankers' net worth and plot the average response in Figure 6.
The size of the shock is defined as the initial deviation of the equity of bankers from
the stochastic steady state of the economy.

Recovery Time Figure 6a shows the average time it takes for the economy to
recover after a negative shock to bankers' net worth, for two shocks of different sizes.
The recovery time is measured as the expected time it takes for net worth to reach
its stochastic steady-state level. The highly nonlinear response is noteworthy: The
response to large shocks is extremely persistent, although the shock itself has no
memory. For shocks that are above 60% of bankers' net worth, the recovery time
increases exponentially with the size of the shock. For smaller shocks below 50%,
the recovery time is quick and lasts only a few years.

Rocking-boat Dynamics Figures 6b to 6f show the responses of intermediation
volume Q; expected intermediation profits (Q) × Q/N ; average quality of interme-
diated capital E [(, )]; growth rate of the economy K /K ; and equity injections
e to a net worth shock of -50% and a net worth shock of -70%. These figures
demonstrate that in response to the smaller shock, the economy stays near a stable
equilibrium, while after a large shock, the economy loses this tendency to return to
equilibrium.
  These distinct dynamics with respect to shocks of different sizes are driven by
expected intermediation profits. Expected profits increase after the smaller shock,
  16
       With this parameter value, the leverage of the bank is at most 10 over the state space.

                                                  31
while following the larger shock, profits remain low for a long time. This difference
follows from the interaction between the substitution and composition effects. The
decline of financial risk capacity causes a simultaneous decline in intermediation
volume and quality of intermediated capital (see Figures 6b and 6c). For the large
shock, the composition effect is so dramatic that it overcomes the substitution effect
and marginal profits decline (see Figure 6d).
  In Figure 6e, we see large equity injections after the small shock, and these continue
for a while until bank equity recovers. For the large shock, recapitalization of the
banking sector does not occur until almost 8 years into the crisis. After the large
shock, persistently low intermediation profits lead to the inability of bankers to
coordinate equity injections.
  Importantly, as shown in Figure 6f, the collapse of financial intermediation trans-
lates into an investment decline and slowdown of the growth rate of the economy.
The long-lasting impact on growth after the large shock creates a large shift in the
trend of output, a concurrent theme during the last crisis.
  It is useful to contrast these results with those of He and Krishnamurthy (2013)
and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). In He and Krishnamurthy (2013), bankers
require a higher premium to manage risky investments when their net worth is low.
In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), the surge in the risk premium is dampened
by the participation of less productive households. Nevertheless, in both models,
intermediation margins increase during financial crises and speed up recoveries. If
there were free entry into the banking sector in either model, we would see banks
being recapitalized even faster. In this paper, recoveries are slow despite free entry,
because profitability is low.
  Thus, our framework characterizes the recovery from a deep banking crisis as
particularly slow and ties financial intermediation to economic growth and capital
reallocation. In line with our results, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) calculate that
countries where banking crises occurred took up to a decade to recover from banking
crises and Cerra and Saxena (2008) document that growths fall to -8% in a cross-
country average of financial crises, well beyond the typical recession. Foster, Grim,
and Haltiwanger (2016) show that capital reallocation fell dramatically during the

                                          32
      30                                                                  0.80

      25                                                                  0.70

      20                                                                  0.60

      15                                                                  0.50

      10                                                                  0.40

       5                                                                  0.30

       0                                                                  0.20
       0%           -20%       -40%    -60%       -80%       -100%                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



                     (a) Years to Recovery                                        (b) Intermediation Volume Q/(K )

     0.10                                                                 0.14

                                                                          0.12
     0.08
                                                                          0.10
     0.06                                                                 0.08

     0.04                                                                 0.06

                                                                          0.04
     0.02
                                                                          0.02

     0.00                                                                 0.00
            1   2     3    4      5    6      7   8      9    10                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



     (c) Average Quality of Capital E [(, )]                                (d) Intermediation Profits (Q) × Q/N

     0.35                                                                 0.04
                                                                          0.03
     0.30
                                                                          0.02
     0.25
                                                                          0.01
     0.20                                                                    0

     0.15                                                                 -0.01
                                                                          -0.02
     0.10
                                                                          -0.03
     0.05
                                                                          -0.04
     0.00                                                                 -0.05
            1   2     3    4      5    6      7   8      9    10                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



                    (e) Equity Injections e                                               (f ) Growth Rate K /K


                                      Figure 6: Dynamics of the Numerical Solution


Great Recession. All in all, the model produces the rocking-boat dynamics of Fisher
(1933) while fitting the narrative of Mishkin (1990) or Calomiris and Gorton (1991),
in which asymmetric information plays a critical role.




                                                                     33
6    Coordination Failures
A typical response during many crises is a public effort to recapitalize banks. This
response is commonly seen as a necessary yet costly bailout of the banking system.
An important historical episode suggests another story: a coordination failure. In
October 1907, J.P. Morgan summoned New York City's major financial institutions
and managed to coordinate a capital injection for several trust and brokerage compa-
nies, thus saving them from insolvency (Chernow, 2010). The motivation was not to
benefit society, but rather the recognition that a coordinated effort to inject equity
would benefit the industry.
  In this section, we provide the solution to the coordinated investment problem of
bankers to highlight how asymmetric information generates externalities in the deci-
sion to recapitalize banks. That is, we solve for the equilibrium in which bankers can
coordinate their equity and dividend policies. We write this coordinated investment
problem as

          uc ( ) =    max     d - e + c (, e, d) 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d      ,
                     e0,1d0


where

                                                            (c , )
          c (, e, d) =  E [uc ( )] + max  E uc ( )                   ,0 .
                                                        | (c , ) - |

Compared to the definition of u( ) in equation (3), the value of inside equity, c ,
is explicitly a function of e and d. Thus, bankers take into account the impact of
their decisions on the accumulation of aggregate bankers' wealth, through the law of
motion of the state variable  . We label the solution to the coordinated investment
problem with a superscript c--e.g., ec , and dc for the bankers' decision policies.
   In Proposition 8, we formalize an intuitive result: If the marginal utility of wealth
is increasing in  , then the coordinated investment problem yields a higher equity
injection than the solution of the noncoordinated investment problem. As the value
of inside equity inherits the nonmonotonous property of the profit function, the


                                          34
numerical solution of the coordinated investment problem shown in Figure 7 displays
a faster recovery due to higher equity injections.
Proposition 8. If the value of inside equity ( ) is increasing in the bankers' share
of wealth  ,
                                    ( )
                                           > 0,
                                     
then
                                   ec ( ; ) > e( ; ).
   Figure 7 compares the response functions between the equilibrim with and without
coordination of bankers' equity injections for a shock that destroys 75% of bankers'
net worth. The salient feature is that with coordination, the recovery is much faster.
Figure 7a shows the differences in the number of years to recovery. Recall that
without coordination, for shocks greater than those that destroy 50% of bank equity,
recovery times increase exponentially. With coordination, that slow recovery is no
longer present.
   Figures 7b to 7f illustrate that feature. Whereas without coordination, injec-
tions are nil after the shock, with coordination, injections are very high (see Fig-
ure 7e). With coordination, bankers recognize the impact of their capital choice on
on marginal intermediation profits (see Figure 7d). The injection of equity restrains
the drop in quality: Intermediation volume and the average quality of intermediated
capital fall but not as much as without coordination. Note that adverse selection
is still triggering a drop in profitability, but bankers acknowledge that this is only
temporary: If they continue to inject equity, profitability will eventually increase (in
year 2 in this example). By contrast, profits take up to 7 years to recover without
coordination. Naturally, as shown in Figure 7f, the decline in growth only lasts for
3 years under the equilibrium with coordination and it takes up to 8 years without
coordination.
   What is striking about banking crises is that they are deep and long-lasting, al-
though human and physical resources remain intact. Fundamentally, when banks
lose net worth, the only change for society is the reallocation of property rights over
existing resources. That reallocation, however, disrupts economic activity. A typical

                                          35
      30                                                                 0.80

      25                                                                 0.70

      20                                                                 0.60

      15                                                                 0.50

      10                                                                 0.40

       5                                                                 0.30

       0                                                                 0.20
       0%           -20%       -40%   -60%       -80%       -100%                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



                     (a) Years to Recovery                                       (b) Intermediation Volume Q/(K )

     0.12                                                                0.15

     0.10                                                                0.13

     0.08                                                                0.10

     0.06                                                                0.08

     0.04                                                                0.05

     0.02                                                                0.03

     0.00                                                                0.00
            1   2     3    4      5   6      7   8      9    10                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



     (c) Average Quality of Capital E [(, )]                               (d) Intermediation Profits (Q) × Q/N

     0.40                                                                0.02

     0.35                                                                0.01

     0.30                                                                   0

     0.25                                                                -0.01

     0.20                                                                -0.02

     0.15                                                                -0.03

     0.10                                                                -0.04

     0.05                                                                -0.05

     0.00                                                                -0.06
            1   2     3    4      5   6      7   8      9    10                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10



                    (e) Equity Injections e                                              (f ) Growth Rate K /K


            Figure 7: Dynamics of the Numerical Solution with and without Coordination


view among economists is that during financial crises, the private recapitalization
of banks is impossible due to various market imperfections. Government bailouts
are one way around, but these come at a cost for society, either in terms of fiscal
resources or future incentives. The view here is more benign. The government can
promote equity injections to correct a coordination failure among private investors.
Of course, the policy challenge is to weight in moral hazard concerns.


                                                                    36
7    Conclusion
This paper provides a theory of risky financial intermediation under asymmetric
information. The central message is that financial markets in which asymmetric
information is a first-order friction are likely to be more unstable than otherwise. The
source of instability is the decrease in profitability generated by low intermediation
volume. This force deters incentives to recapitalize banks after large losses, even
when resources are available. The financial crises that emerge are deep and long-
lasting.




                                          37
References
Ajello, Andrea. Financial intermediation, investment dynamics, and business cycle
fluctuations. American Economic Review, 106(8):2256­2303, 2016.

Akerlof, George A. The market for "lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market
mechanism. In Uncertainty in economics, pages 235­251. Elsevier, 1978.

Bagehot, Walter. Lombard Street: A description of the money market. London: HS
King, 1873.

Begenau, Juliane. Capital requirements, risk choice, and liquidity provision in a
business-cycle model. Journal of Financial Economics, 2019.

Bernanke, Ben and Gertler, Mark. Agency costs, net worth and business fluctuations.
The American Economic Review, 79(1):14­31, March 1989.

Bernanke, Ben, Gertler, Mark, and Gilchrist, Simon. The financial accelerator and
the flight to quality. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1994.

Bigio, Saki. Endogenous liquidity and the business cycle. American Economic Re-
view, 105(6):1883­1927, 2015.

Bigio, Saki and Shi, Lyan. Repurchase options in the markets for lemons. Unpub-
lished Manuscript, 2019.

Bigio, Saki and Weill, Pierre-Olivier. A theory of bank balance sheets. Technical
report, Working Paper, 2016.

Bloom, Nicholas. The impact of uncertainty shocks. econometrica, 77(3):623­685,
2009.

Boyd, John H and Prescott, Edward C. Financial intermediary-coalitions. Journal
of Economic theory, 38(2):211­232, 1986.

Brunnermeier, Markus K and Pedersen, Lasse Heje. Market liquidity and funding
liquidity. The review of financial studies, 22(6):2201­2238, 2008.

                                        38
Brunnermeier, Markus K and Sannikov, Yuliy. A macroeconomic model with a
financial sector. American Economic Review, 104(2):379­421, 2014.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Gorton, Gary. The origins of banking panics: Models,
facts, and bank regulation. In Hubbard, R. Glenn, editor, Financial Markets and
Financial Crises. University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Cerra, Valerie and Saxena, Sweta Chaman. Growth dynamics: the myth of economic
recovery. American Economic Review, 98(1):439­57, 2008.

Chernow, Ron. The house of Morgan: An American banking dynasty and the rise of
modern finance. Grove/Atlantic, Inc., 2010.

Christiano, Lawrence J, Motto, Roberto, and Rostagno, Massimo. Risk shocks.
American Economic Review, 104(1):27­65, 2014.

Daley, Brendan and Green, Brett. Waiting for news in the market for lemons. Econo-
metrica, 80(4):1433­1504, 2012.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gorton, Gary, Holmstr¨
                                   om, Bengt, and Ordonez, Guillermo. Banks as
secret keepers. American Economic Review, 107(4):1005­29, 2017.

Diamond, Douglas W. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. The
review of economic studies, 51(3):393­414, 1984.

Diamond, Douglas W and Rajan, Raghuram G. Fear of fire sales, illiquidity seeking,
and credit freezes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2):557­591, 2011.

Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Piacentino, Giorgia, and Thakor, Anjan. Warehouse
banking. Journal of Financial Economics, 129(2):250­267, 2018.

Duffie, Darrell. Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital.
The Journal of finance, 65(4):1237­1267, 2010.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L. Endogenous liquidity in asset markets. The Journal of Finance,
59(1):1­30, 2004.

                                         39
Farhi, Emmanuel and Tirole, Jean. Liquid bundles. Journal of Economic Theory,
158:634­655, 2015.

Fisher, Irving. The debt-deflation theory of great depressions. Econometrica: Journal
of the Econometric Society, pages 337­357, 1933.

Foster, Lucia, Grim, Cheryl, and Haltiwanger, John. Reallocation in the great re-
cession: cleansing or not? Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1):S293­S331, 2016.

Freixas, Xavier and Rochet, Jean-Charles. Microeconomics of banking. MIT press,
2008.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W. A model of shadow
banking. The Journal of Finance, 68(4):1331­1363, 2013.

Gertler, Mark and Karadi, Peter. A model of unconventional monetary policy. Jour-
nal of monetary Economics, 58(1):17­34, 2011.

Gertler, Mark and Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro. Financial intermediation and credit policy
in business cycle analysis. In Handbook of monetary economics, volume 3, pages
547­599. Elsevier, 2010.

Gorton, Gary and Ordonez, Guillermo. Collateral crises. American Economic Re-
view, 104(2):343­78, 2014.

Gorton, Gary B. Slapped by the invisible hand: The panic of 2007. Oxford University
Press, 2010.

Gromb, Denis and Vayanos, Dimitri. Equilibrium and welfare in markets with fi-
nancially constrained arbitrageurs. Journal of financial Economics, 66(2-3):361­407,
2002.

Gu, Chao, Mattesini, Fabrizio, Monnet, Cyril, and Wright, Randall. Banking: A
new monetarist approach. Review of Economic Studies, 80(2):636­662, 2013.




                                         40
Guerrieri, Veronica and Shimer, Robert. Dynamic adverse selection: A theory of
illiquidity, fire sales, and flight to quality. American Economic Review, 104(7):1875­
1908, 2014.

Guerrieri, Veronica, Shimer, Robert, and Wright, Randall. Adverse selection in
competitive search equilibrium. Econometrica, 78(6):1823­1862, 2010.

Hart, Oliver and Moore, John. A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human
capital. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4):841­879, 1994.

He, Zhiguo and Krishnamurthy, Arvind. A model of capital and crises. The Review
of Economic Studies, 79(2):735­777, 2011.

He, Zhiguo and Krishnamurthy, Arvind. Intermediary asset pricing. American Eco-
nomic Review, 103(2):732­70, 2013.

Hendel, Igal and Lizzeri, Alessandro. Adverse selection in durable goods markets.
American Economic Review, 89(5):1097­1115, 1999.

Hennessy, Christopher A and Whited, Toni M. Debt dynamics. The Journal of
Finance, 60(3):1129­1165, 2005.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Tirole, Jean. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and
the real sector. the Quarterly Journal of economics, 112(3):663­691, 1997.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Moore, John. Liquidity, business cycles, and monetary
policy. Journal of Political Economy, 127(6):000­000, 2019.

Kurlat, Pablo. Lemons markets and the transmission of aggregate shocks. American
Economic Review, 103(4):1463­89, 2013.

Leland, Hayne E and Pyle, David H. Informational asymmetries, financial structure,
and financial intermediation. The journal of Finance, 32(2):371­387, 1977.

Maggiori, Matteo. Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve
currencies. American Economic Review, 107(10):3038­71, 2017.

                                         41
Malherbe, Fr´
            ed´eric. Self-fulfilling liquidity dry-ups. The Journal of Finance, 69(2):
947­970, 2014.

Martinez-Miera, David and Suarez, Javier. A macroeconomic model of endogenous
systemic risk taking. 2012.

Mishkin, Frederic S. Asymmetric information and financial crises: a historical per-
spective. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1990.

Myers, Stewart C. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of financial eco-
nomics, 5(2):147­175, 1977.

Myers, Stewart C and Majluf, Nicholas S. Corporate financing and investment de-
cisions when firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of financial
economics, 13(2):187­221, 1984.

Plantin, Guillaume. Learning by holding and liquidity. The Review of Economic
Studies, 76(1):395­412, 2009.

Reinhart, Carmen M and Rogoff, Kenneth S. This time is different: Eight centuries
of financial folly. princeton university press, 2009.

Shleifer, Andrei and Vishny, Robert W. Liquidation values and debt capacity: A
market equilibrium approach. The Journal of Finance, 47(4):1343­1366, 1992.

Stiglitz, Joseph, Stiglitz, Joseph Eugene Stiglitz, and Greenwald, Bruce. Towards a
new paradigm in monetary economics. Cambridge university press, 2003.

Stiglitz, Joseph E and Weiss, Andrew. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect
information. The American economic review, 71(3):393­410, 1981.

Stroebel, Johannes. Asymmetric information about collateral values. The Journal
of Finance, 71(3):1071­1112, 2016.

Sufi, Amir. Information asymmetry and financing arrangements: Evidence from
syndicated loans. The Journal of Finance, 62(2):629­668, 2007.

                                         42
Vayanos, Dimitri and Wang, Jiang. Liquidity and asset returns under asymmetric
information and imperfect competition. The Review of Financial Studies, 25(5):
1339­1365, 2011.




                                     43
Appendices
In these appendices, we prove explicitly every lemma and proposition. We solve the
policy functions of producers and bankers. As in the main text, we use a recursive
notation.


A     Proof of Proposition 1
We define 1() as the indicator function that is equal to 1 if the k -producer chooses
to sell that -unit of capital at price ps and 0 otherwise. Here, we show that an
optimal 1() must be monotone decreasing. Thus, choosing 1() is identical to
choosing a cutoff  under which all units of quality lower than this cutoff are sold.
   Suppose that 1() is not monotone decreasing. That is, the optimal plan is given
by some 1 () whose value cannot be attained by any monotone decreasing policy. It
is enough to show that the producer can find another candidate 1() that integrates
to the same number, that is monotone decreasing, and that makes his value weakly
greater.
   Thus, assume that 0 1()d = 0 1 ()d. Since 1() is monotone decreasing
                       1              1


and (, ) is monotone increasing in ,

                      1                             1
                          (1 - 1())(, )d                (1 - 1())(, )d,
                  0                             0


implying that any optimal policy can be attained by some 1 () monotone decreas-
ing.


B     Proof of Lemma 1
C -producers The problem of c-producers is given by

                  U c (k,  ) = E    max         log(c) + U (k ,  )
                                   cc 0,ic 0



                                           44
subject to their budget constraint:

                                      cc + pd ic = ak,

and the law of motion for capital:
                                            1
                             k =k               (, )d + ic .
                                        0


  First, we guess the functional form for the value function of c-producers as

                                                log(k )
                             U c (k,  ) =               +  c ( ).
                                                1-

  With this guess, we can substitute the budget constraint and the law of motion
for capital:

                                                    ak - c
        U c (k,  ) = E max   log(c) +       log k +                        +  c ( )      .
                        c
                      c 0                1-           pd

  Taking the first-order condition with respect to consumption, we get

                             1               1
                               c
                                 =
                             c     1 -  p k + ak - cc
                                         d


That is,

                              cc = (1 -  ) pd  + a k,
                                     ak
                              ic =  d - (1 -  )k.
                                     p

Thus,

                                                a
   c         log( ) + (1 -  ) log(1 -  ) log  + pd                      log (k )
 U (k,  ) =                             +                           +            +  E [ c ( )] ,
                       1-                   1-                           1-




                                                45
and we verified our guess as

                                                  a
         c     log( ) + (1 -  ) log(1 -  ) log  + pd
        ( ) =                             +                           +  E [ c ( )] .
                         1-                   1-

K -producers Similarly, the problem of k -producers is given by

                U k (k,  ) = max E         max       log(ck ) + U (k ,  )
                                        ck 0,ik


subject to their budget constraint:

                                     ck + ik = ps k,

and the law of motion for capital:
                                           1
                                k =k           (, )d + ik .
                                           


  We guess the functional form for the value function of k -producers as

                                               log(k )
                               U k (k,  ) =            +  k ( ).
                                               1-

  With this guess, we can substitute the budget constraint and the law of motion
for capital:
                                                             1
                                                                            ps k - c
U k (k,  ) = max E max          log(c) +      log k              (, )d +                +  k ( )
                      ck 0                 1-                                  

  Taking the first-order condition with respect to consumption, we get

                      1                                1
                        k
                          =                1                          .
                      c     1 -  k             (, )d + ps k - ck
                                           




                                                46
  That is,
                                                 1
                      ck = (1 -  )                   (, )d + ps  k,
                                             
                               s                         1
                               p
                      ik =       k - (1 -  )k                (, )d.
                                                        


  Thus,

                                                             1                  a
              log( ) + (1 -  ) log(1 -  ) log                
                                                                 (, )d +        pd       log (k )
U k (k,  ) =                             +                                           +            +  E  k ( ) ,
                        1-                                        1-                      1-

and we verified our guess as

                                                           1                a
           log( ) + (1 -  ) log(1 -  ) log                 
                                                               (, )d +      pd
  k ( ) =                             +                                              +  E  k ( ) .
                     1-                                          1-

  Taking the first-order condition with respect to the quality threshold , we get

                                      (, ) - ps
                           E          1                           = 0.
                                      
                                          (, )d + ps 

  Thus, if ps = 0, then  = 0, and if ps  E [(1, )], then  = 1. Let's define the
following function:

                                             -(, ) + ps
                     f (, ps ) = E           1                           = 0.
                                             
                                                 (, )d + ps 

  Taking the derivative with respect to , we get
                                                                                               
                                                                                           2
   f (, p )  s            - (,)
                                                                  -(, ) + p          s
            =E        1                              - E          1
                                                                                                < 0,
                          (, )d +         ps                          (, )d + ps 
                                                                  




                                                 47
        (,)
since   
              > 0   [0, 1]. Similarly,
                                                                               
        f (, ps )                1                        -(, ) + ps 
                  =E                            - E                          2,
                                                                               
                          1
          ps                  (, )d +    ps               1
                                              (, )d + ps 
                                                          
                                                 
                      1
                      
                        (, )d + ps  + (, ) - ps  
                  = E                     2      ,
                             1          s
                            (, )d + p 
                                        
                      1
                       (, )d + (, ) 
                 = E                  2  > 0.
                        1
                        (, )d + ps 

  Thus, using the implicit function theorem, we find that

          (ps )     f (, ps )        f (, ps )
                = -                            >0      ps  [0, E [(1, )]].          (5)
          ps          ps               


C       Proof of Lemma 2
A corollary of (5) is that

                              ps ()
                                    >0            [0, 1].
                              

  We can define the supply schedule for capital intermediation as the inverse of that
function:
                                              Q
                              S (Q) = -1             ,
                                             K
where we used the market-clearing condition for capital intermediation:

                                     Q = (ps )K.

Since (ps ) is strictly increasing in ps , S (Q) is also strictly increasing in Q. Since
ps (0) = 0 and ps (1) = E [(1, )], then S (0) = 0 and S (K ) =  E [(1, )].


                                           48
D      Proof of Proposition 3 and Proposition 4
Finally, the problem of a banker is given by:

               U b (n,  ) =      max        d - e n + E U b (n ,  )
                              q 0,e0,1d0


subject to the law of motion for wealth:

                     n = n 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d + q (, ),

and the limited liability constraint:

                                    n  q,           ,                                (6)

where  is a small positive number. The intermediation profit  (, ) per unit of
capital is the difference between the resale value of capital left after the depreciation
shock and the cost of purchasing the pool of -units of capital:

                                 (, )  pd (, ) - ps ,

                    
                       (,)d
where (, )  0                   is the average quality of -units of capital sold by k -
producers.
  We can rewrite (6) as


                 n 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d + q  (, ) -               0,

where  is defined as the worst realization of the depreciation shock such that
 (, )   (, )    . Since bankers are risk-neutral, if expected profits are
positive, they will leverage as much as possible. That is,

                         1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d
            q (n,  ) =                          n       if E  (, ) > 0.
                              - (, ) + 



                                            49
Given the solution for q (n,  ) if E  (, ) > 0, we can rewrite the value function
as

                                                                              (, )
ub ( ) =    max      d - e + E ub ( ) 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d         1+                    ,
           e0,1d0                                                         | (, ) - |

where U b (n,  ) = ub ( )n. Therefore the value function is linear in bankers' net worth
and the policy function for the quantity of intermediation is given by:

                        1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d
               q( ) =                               if E  (, ) > 0,
                              | (, ) - |

where q (n,  ) = q( )n. Note that in equilibrium, it must be the case that  (, ) - 
is negative when E  (, ) > 0; otherwise, bankers want to intermediate an infinite
quantity of capital.
   Furthermore, we can define the value of inside equity as

                                                           (, )
             ( )   E ub ( ) + max  E ub ( )                       ,0 ,
                                                       | (, ) - |

and rewrite (3) as


             ub ( ) =    max     d - e + ( ) 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d       .
                        e0,1d0


The first-order condition for dividend payouts is then given by

                                       1
                                         = ( ).
                                      1+

Thus, the dividend policy is given by

                           d( ) = 1     if ( ) < 1/(1 +  ).

The dividend policy is indeterminate at the individual level if ( ) = 1/(1 +  ) and
equal to 0 if ( ) > 1/(1 +  ).



                                          50
  The first-order condition for equity injections is given by

                                              ( ) - 1
                                  e (e) =             .
                                               ( )

Thus, the equity injection policy satisfies

                     ( ) - 1                                               (e)
       e( ) = -
              e
                1
                                      if ( )  1           where e (e) =        .
                      ( )                                                  e

Since e (0) = 0 and e (e) > 0, there is always a solution when ( )  1. The equity
injection policy is equal to 0 if ( ) < 1, since e (e) > 0 e  R+ .


E     Proof of Proposition 2 and Proposition 5
The market-clearing condition for consumption goods is given by

                         (, )q + cc + ck + ik = a(1 - )K,

where K is the aggregate supply of capital. The policy decisions for consumption
are given by

                          cc = (1 -  ) pd  + a (1 - )K,

while the budget constraint for k -producers is such that

                                  ck + ik = ps K.

Futhermore, the market-clearing condition for intermediated capital is given by

                                      q = K.




                                            51
Combining all of these equations results in

   (pd (, ) - ps )K + (1 -  ) pd  + a (1 - )K + ps K = a(1 - )K.

Simplifying, we obtain

                                    a(1 - )
                         pd =                        .
                                (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )

  Note that since (, )    , , if

                                     a(1 - )
                            <                      ,
                                   + (1 -  )(1 - )

then in equilibrium, pd >  is always true and k -producers never purchase interme-
diated capital from bankers.
  Given the depreciation shock , the intermediation revenue per unit of capital,
d(, ), is the product of the price of intermediated capital sold to c-producers and
the average quality of -units of capital sold by k -producers:

                                d(, ) = pd ,   , 

Thus, we have

                                   a(1 - )(, )
                     d(, ) =                          .
                                 (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )

The first-order derivative of d(, ) with respect to  is then given by

d(, )            a (1 - )              a(1 - )(, )                                 (, )
      =                           -                                           2
             (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )   , (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )                         
                  a(1 -  )(1 - )2                  (, )
         =                                    2         .
             (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )                  

Thus, the composition effect always dominates the substitution effect with respect

                                         52
to .
  The first order derivative of d(, ) with respect to  is given by

d(, )    a(1 -  )(1 - )2                           (, )    a (1 - )[(, )]2
      =                                         2       -                        2
        (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )                              (, ) + (1 -  )(1 - )

This derivative is positive if and only if the following holds:

                             (, )      [(, )]2 
                                  >               .
                                    (1 -  )(1 - )

Also, we can derive that
                                                 
                          (, )                  0
                                                    (, )d
                               =
                                                     
                                                     
                                     (, )     (, )d
                                   =      - 0
                                               2
                                     (, ) - (, )
                                   =             .
                                          

Thus, the previous condition becomes

                        (, ) - (, )      [(, )]2 
                                    >               .
                                      (1 -  )(1 - )

F     Proof of Proposition 5
The expected intermediation profits are given by

                            () = E d ,               - ps  .

  Profits are increasing in  if

                        ()     d(, )   ps ()
                           = E       -       > 0.
                                       


                                           53
  Using (5), we have that

                                              (,)                                  2
                                                                      -(,)+ps
                              E        1
                                           (,)d+ps 
                                                            + E       1
                                                                        (,)d+ps 
                    ps ()              
                          =                                                            .
                                                       1
                                                           (,)d+(,)
                                               E           1               2
                                                     (         (,)d+ps )


When  tends to 0, it becomes

                                 ps ()          (, )
                               lim     =  lim E      ,
                               0          0     

since (0, ) = 0 and ps (0) = 0. Furthermore,

                                d(, )      a         (, )
                              lim     =         lim       ,
                              0         (1 -  ) 0 

since

                                               lim (, ) = 0.
                                              0


Thus,

        ()      a          (, ) - (, )          (, )
        lim=         lim E             -  lim E      .
     0       (1 -  ) 0                    0     

Using l'H^
         opital's rule,

                 ()      a 1          (, )          (, )
              lim   =           lim E      -  lim E      .
              0       (1 -  ) 2 0             0     

Thus, if

                                                       a 1
                                               <              ,
                                                    (1 -  ) 2

then expected intermediation profits are always increasing as the intermediation


                                                       54
volume tends to 0.


G       Uniqueness of ps
A sufficient condition for uniqueness of ps is that

                             q (, ps )
                                       <0         ps  [0, ps ],
                               ps

where

                                   1 + e( ) - (e( ))) - (1 -  )d( )
                   q (, ps ) = -                                    .
                                         d((ps ), ) - ps - 

Thus,

          q (, ps )   1 + e( ) - (e( ))) - (1 -  )d( )       d((ps ), )
                    =                                                   -1 .
            ps              d((ps ), ) - ps -                  ps
               s
Thus, since p
            (p )
              s  > 0, a sufficient condition to guarantee the uniqueness of ps is to
have  such that

              (, ) - (, )     [(, )]2 
                          <                                   ps  [0, ps ].
                            (1 -  )(1 - )

Indeed, this implies that
                                       d(, )
                                             < 0.
                                        


H       Proof of Proposition 8
By substituting the definition for q, we can write the market-learing condition for
intermediated capital as

                                      1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d
                        (ps ) =                              .
                                            | (, ) - |


                                            55
Therefore, the state variable that matters for the equilibrium quality threshold 
and supply price ps is the quantity of wealth after equity injections and dividends:

                           = 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d .

Thus, given a functional form for the inside value of equity ( ) = c (, e, d), we can
rewrite (3) as


            uc ( ) =    max      d - e + ( ) 1 + e - (e) - (1 +  )d    ,
                       e0,1d0


The first order condition for the injection of equity in the coordinated equilibrium,
ec ( ), assuming dc ( ) = 0, is given by:

                                             ( ) 
                 0 = -1 + ( )(1 - e) +            1 + e - (e) .
                                              e

The first-order condition for the injection of equity in the noncoordinated equilib-
rium, e( ), assuming d( ) = 0, is given by

                                0 = -1 + ( )(1 - e (e)).

Therefore, if
                                       ( )
                                           > 0,
                                       
then
                                    ec ( ; ) > e( ; ).

Note that we are making a statement conditional on a functional form ( ). We
are not making a statement about the equilibrium value function arising from the
numerical solution of the coordinated investment problem.




                                           56
