                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES AND BANK VULNERABILITY DURING A CRISIS:
                EVIDENCE FROM AN EMERGING MARKET

                                       Viral V. Acharya
                                      Nirupama Kulkarni

                                      Working Paper 26564
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26564


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




We thank Ilisa Goenka, Kavya Ravindranath, Rahul Singh Chauhan, and Akshat Vikram Singh
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, CAFRAL, or the
Reserve Banks of India.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Viral V. Acharya and Nirupama Kulkarni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Guarantees and Bank Vulnerability during a Crisis: Evidence from an Emerging
Market
Viral V. Acharya and Nirupama Kulkarni
NBER Working Paper No. 26564
December 2019
JEL No. G01,G21,G28,H1

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the performance of Indian banks during 2007­09 relative to their vulnerability to a
crisis measured using pre-crisis data, in order to study the impact of government guarantees on
bank performance during a crisis. Using bank branch-level regulatory data, we exploit geographic
variation in the exposure to state-owned banks to show that vulnerable private sector bank
branches in districts with greater exposure to state-owned banks experienced deposit withdrawals
and shortening of deposit maturity. In contrast, nearby vulnerable state-owned bank branches
grew their deposit base and increased loan advances but with poorer ex-post performance of
loans. Our evidence suggests that access to stronger government guarantees during aggregate
crises allows even vulnerable state-owned banks to access and extend credit cheaply despite their
under-performance, and this renders private sector banks especially vulnerable to crises.


Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Nirupama Kulkarni
Research Director
CAFRAL, Research Department
Reserve Bank of India Main Building,
Mezzanine Floor,
Shahid Bhagat Singh Road,
Fort, Mumbai 400 001
nirupama.kulkarni@gmail.com
1   Introduction
While government guarantees can keep markets well-functioning during periods of stress, they can

also induce excessive ex-ante risk-taking by banks [Cordella and Yeyati (2003), Gorton and Huang

(2004) and Gropp et al. (2006)]. Prior literature has mainly studied the ex-ante impact of such guar-

antees on bank risk-taking, leverage and cost of capital [Acharya et al. (2016) and references therein].

In this paper, we study how government guarantees distort bank behavior and outcomes during cri-

sis periods. Specifically, we study whether government guarantees can have a destabilizing effect on

unguaranteed banks during crisis periods due to flight-to-safety of depositors from unguaranteed to

guaranteed banks.

    India, which has a mix of state-owned banks (also called public sector banks) and private sector

banks, provides an ideal setting to explore the impact of government guarantees during crises peri-

ods. While state-owned banks in India are explicitly and implicitly guaranteed by the government,

private sector banks are not (or arguably, are guaranteed to a much weaker extent). In this paper, we

highlight how the presence of implicit government guarantees for state-owned banks affected finan-

cial stability by destabilizing the private banking sector during the global financial crisis of 2007­09.

Specifically, we look at ex-ante heterogeneity in bank vulnerability to a market-wide shock for the pe-

riod preceding the crisis (January 2007 to December 2007). Then, separately for private sector banks

and state-owned banks, we analyze around the financial crisis in 2008­09 the relationship between

ex-ante bank vulnerability and (i) realized stock returns; (ii) deposit flows and corresponding deposit

rates; (iii) loan advances and corresponding loans rates; (iv) loan performance; and finally, (v) eco-

nomic activity.

    We present five main findings. First, we analyze stock market returns during the crisis period and

find that vulnerable private sector banks under-performed less vulnerable private sector banks. In

contrast, vulnerable state-owned banks outperformed less vulnerable state-owned banks. Second, this

preceding pattern is explained by deposit flows from vulnerable private sector banks to vulnerable

state-owned banks. Such deposit flows occur because (i) more vulnerable private sector banks are

not government guaranteed and hence see deposit outflows, and (ii) more vulnerable state-owned

banks increase their deposit rates and hence are able to attract a larger proportion of the deposit

outflows from private sector banks. Third, since banks heavily rely on deposits for their funding,

these deposit flows affect lending outcomes. Deposit outflows from vulnerable private sector banks



                                                   1
induce a contraction in their lending. However, vulnerable state-owned banks, which witness deposit

inflows, increase lending during the crisis. Fourth, vulnerable state-owned banks -- which increased

lending -- also saw a subsequent deterioration in loan performance. Fifth, these effects are persistent

and do not revert following the crisis. Economic activity, as measured by night-lights, also declines in

districts which witnessed deposit outflows from private sector banks.

    These results suggest that access to stronger government guarantees during an aggregate crisis al-

lows state-owned banks to access deposits and extend credit cheaply despite their underperformance.

This in turn induces negative spillovers on the private banking sector, thus increasing the financial

fragility of the banking sector as a whole.

    As a first step to determine the role played by government guarantees, we relate an ex-ante mea-

sures of bank vulnerability to the bank's ex-post stock performance during the crisis. Our bank vulner-

ability measure, Marginal Expected Shortfall ( MES) -- proposed by Acharya et al. (2017b) -- captures

the tail dependence of the stock return of a financial firm on the downside of the market as a whole. It

estimates the negative of the average stock return for a given financial firm in the worst 5 percent days

of the market index for a particular past period (one year preceding a crisis in our case). Intuitively,

the greater the MES, the more vulnerable is the firm to aggregate downturns or crises. We find that

a 1 percentage point (pp) higher MES is associated with a 7.05 pp increase in realized stock market

returns for state-owned banks whereas a 1 pp higher MES is associated with a 6.85 pp decline in stock

market return of private sector banks.

    As a second step, we explain the cross-sectional differences in stock market returns of banks by

relating deposit flows to bank vulnerability. We find that at the bank-level, deposits flew from more

vulnerable private sector banks to more vulnerable state-owned banks. Anecdotal evidence is consis-

tent with a flight-to-safety of depositors from private and foreign banks to state-owned banks during

this period. For example, Infosys (a large Indian multinational corporation) transferred nearly Rs.10

billion of deposits from ICICI to SBI just after the collapse of Lehman in September 2008 [Economic

Times (2009)]. Private sector banks attributed this flight of funds from private to state-owned banks

to the sovereign guarantees of the state-owned banks [Business Line (2009)]. The Bank Nationaliza-

tion Act of India explicitly places all liability for state-owned banks on the government. State-owned

banks enjoy implicit government guarantees, as well. For example, as the crisis of 2007­09 progressed,

the Indian government announced a number of wide-ranging stimulus plans to jump-start the bank-

ing system and state-owned banks were promised capital injections to help them maintain adequate


                                                   2
capital. Although deposits for all banks are insured upto a size threshold, government guarantees of

state-owned banks still matter since deposit insurance coverage is limited and only partially effective

[Iyer and Puri (2012)].

    The main identification challenge to using bank-level data to study deposit flows during the crisis

period is that deposit supply may be responding to contemporaneous changes in a bank's lending

opportunities and our results may thus be confounded. Hence, we use regulatory branch-level data

in a within-bank analysis and exploit geographic variation in "exposure" to state-owned bank branches

to address this identification issue. The identifying assumption for the within-bank estimation is that

banks can raise deposits at one branch and lend them at another branch so that local market (district)

deposit flows are not affected by differences in lending opportunities of banks. Our exposure measure

is the deposit share of state-owned banks in a district in the year prior to the crisis (2007). High branch-

exposure refers to branches with above median values of this exposure measure. Districts with few

state-owned bank branches serve as a control group because the crisis does not induce depositors

to run to state-owned banks in these districts. Since we are interested in the effects for vulnerable

state-owned versus vulnerable private sector banks, we set up a difference-in-difference-in-differences

(DDD) design with the interaction between branch-exposure, bank vulnerability (MES) and whether a

branch belongs to a state-owned bank. Using our preferred DDD specification, we show that branches

of more vulnerable private sector banks (1 pp higher MES) in districts with high branch-exposure, saw

a fall of 40.4 percent in deposit growth relative to other branches of the same private sector bank in

areas with low branch-exposure. In contrast, branches of more vulnerable public sector banks in high

branch-exposure districts witnessed a relative increase in deposits of 12.4 percent.

    Why do depositors flee to the more vulnerable state-owned banks and not to the less vulnera-

ble state-owned banks? We find that during this period, more vulnerable state-owned banks were

increasing their deposit rates which allowed them to attract the deposit outflows from private sector

banks. Plausibly, less vulnerable state-owned banks did not increase their deposit rates so as not to

signal distress to the market. This practice of vulnerable state-owned banks increasing their deposits

to chase deposit outflows from private sector banks became so rampant that the finance ministry had

to step in and stop state-owned banks from excessively increasing their deposit rates [Business Line

(2008)].

    The key threat to the DDD design is the possibility that time-varying, district-specific shocks are

correlated with our exposure measure. We address this concern in five ways: (1) presenting graphical


                                                     3
evidence of parallel trends prior to the crisis and showing clear differences in deposit growth after the

crisis period for state-owned and private sector banks; (2) conducting placebo tests to document the

lack of time-varying effects on deposit flows from private to state-owned banks in the years prior to

the crisis and showing that the effects are only present during and after the crisis period; (3) showing

that deposit growth of private and state-owned banks is not driven by differences in asset quality, size

and pre-crisis stock returns of banks; (4) showing robustness to alternate branch-exposure measures

using more granular local market definitions, to sub-samples of urban and rural areas, to varying

weighting schemes, to controlling explicitly for exposure to varying demographics, and to examining

effects in levels as opposed to differences; and (5) finally, showing that alternate explanations such as

pre-crisis leverage, liquidity, or too-big-to-fail guarantees do not explain our results.

    We also supplement the DDD estimates using an alternate regression discontinuity approach. We

build on the findings in Young (2017), who examines a 2005 banking reform in branch licensing in

India which encouraged opening of branches in under-banked districts. Young (2017) uses a pop-

ulation per branch cut-off, above which districts are assigned an "under-banked" status. Using a

regression discontinuity design, he finds that districts just above the cut-off (under-banked districts)

saw a significant increase in private sector branches compared to districts just below the cut-off. There

was no corresponding increase in the branches of state-owned banks, possibly because state-owned

banks are covered under other implicit government mandates and hence lend to under-banked dis-

tricts anyway. Building on this, we show that deposit share of state-owned banks -- corresponding to

our branch-exposure measure -- also saw a discontinuous jump at the cut-off. We confirm that these

districts do not differ along other demographic and economic dimensions at the cut-off. Consistent

with the DDD estimates, the regression discontinuity estimates document that the branches of vul-

nerable state-owned banks in districts with high exposure to state-owned banks' branches -- that is,

districts just below the cut-off -- saw a 5.7 percent increase in deposit growth whereas branches of

vulnerable private sector banks saw a 28.7 percent decrease in deposit growth.

    Having established that deposits flew from vulnerable private sector banks to vulnerable public

sector banks, we now turn to the impact on lending. We cannot use the same DDD identification

that we used for deposits to examine lending because banks can use their internal capital markets to

transfer resources from one branch to another. We average across all of a banks' branches, the share

of state-owned deposits in each district that the branch operates in. High bank-exposure refers to

above median values of this measure. We set up a DDD design with the interaction of bank-exposure,


                                                     4
bank vulnerability (MES) and whether a bank is state-owned. By looking at branches of different

banks within a district, we ensure that bank branches face similar lending opportunities. The lending

growth of high MES and high bank-exposure state-owned branches grew by 82 percent. In stark

contrast, lending fell nearly 8-fold for vulnerable private sector branches with high bank-exposure.

    One counterpoint could be that the increase in the deposit base of state-owned banks is not harm-

ful for the economy as a whole if these banks are more willing to advance loans to the real economy

resulting in much needed credit in times of a crisis, consistent with the socially maximizing view of

state-owned banks. Our results on lending rates and loan performance suggest otherwise. Lending

rates at the branches of more vulnerable high-exposure state-owned banks was higher by 6.9 bps rel-

ative to the less exposed branches, possibly reflecting a deterioration in the quality of borrowers. In

comparison, lending rates of more vulnerable high-exposure private sector banks was lower by 173

bps, potentially reflecting a cut back in lending to less creditworthy borrowers. Subsequent deterio-

ration in loan performance of more vulnerable state-owned bank branches supports this hypothesis.

Sub-standard assets of more vulnerable high-exposure state-owned banks increased by 29.6 percent

compared to a drastic fall of 365 percent at the branches of more vulnerable, high bank-exposure

private sector banks.

    Finally, we examine deposits, lending, and economic activity at the district level. Districts with

high branch-exposure see an overall decline in deposit growth, indicating that not all the deposit

outflows from private sector banks eventually make their way into state-owned banks. Additionally,

districts served by banks that raise deposits in high branch-exposure markets experience a decline in

lending, as well as lower subsequent economic activity as measured by night lights data.

    To summarize, this paper documents a flight-to-safety from more vulnerable private sector banks

to more vulnerable state-owned banks. While vulnerable private sector banks cut back on lending,

vulnerable state-owned banks increase lending but with poorer ex-post performance of loans. Our re-

sults suggest that stronger government guarantees of state-owned banks can increase overall financial

fragility by inducing negative spillovers on private sector banks during crises periods.

    Our paper is related to the law and finance literature on state-ownership. For banks in particular,

Gerschenkron (1962) and Stiglitz (1989) argue that state ownership is necessary and even socially

optimal since the lack of economic infrastructure makes it difficult for private banks to succeed. An

opposing strand of literature argues that the political influence of state-owned banks [Shleifer and

Vishny (1994)] and their misaligned incentives can result in corruption and lazy banking [ Banerjee


                                                   5
et al. (2005)], leading to a misallocation of resources [Qian and Yeung (2015)] and lower overall growth

[Dinç (2005)]. Our work highlights how the presence of state-owned banks can have negative spillover

effects on private sector banks. Our work also relates to the literature on deposit insurance [Demirgüç-

Kunt and Detragiache (2002), Demirgüç-Kunt et al. (2008), and Calomiris and Chen (2018)]. In a vein

similar to our findings, Calomiris and Jaremski (2016) find that the creation of the Federal Deposit

Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in the US in 1933 led to hitherto uninsured banks increasing their risk-

taking due to reduced market discipline post the introduction of deposit insurance.

      The next section provides the institutional details and the time-line of the crisis. Section 3 de-

scribes the data. Section 4 studies the impact of government guarantees of state-owned banks on

stock performance. Section 5 examines deposit flows. Section 6 examines lending. Section 7 provides

evidence for the implicit sovereign guarantee of state-owned banks and section 8 concludes.


2     The Indian Banking Sector and the Crisis of 2008
Historically, India has had a large presence of state-owned banks. After the most recent wave of

nationalization in the 1980s, nearly 90 percent of India's branches were nationalized. This changed

after economic liberalization in the 1990s and private sector and foreign banks were allowed to enter

the market. Despite this, given the historical legacy of state-ownership in the banking system, the

Indian financial system continues to have substantive state ownership and as of March 2009 state-

owned banks accounted for nearly 71.9 percent of aggregate assets.

2.1    The crisis of 2008 and the impact on India

The first signs of the global financial crisis of 2008­09 began in June 2007 when a subsidiary hedge

fund of the investment bank Bear Stearns, which had heavily invested in subprime mortgages had to

be rescued. Subsequently BNP Paribas announced a freeze on three of the bank's investment funds.

Bear Stearns continued to write-down its subprime portfolios and as investor losses mounted, the

Federal Reserve Bank of New York provided an emergency loan to try to avert a sudden collapse.

However, the bank could not be rescued and eventually was sold to JP Morgan Chase on 17th March

2008 at fire sale prices. Financial conditions further deteriorated with Lehman Brothers reporting a

loss of $3.9 billion in the third quarter of 2008 on September 10th . Finally, on September 15th 2008,

Lehman declared bankruptcy since it was unable to obtain short-term financing or a buyer.

      The global financial crisis hit India in 2008 with the Indian stock market losing more than 60

percent of its peak valuation. The stock market index, S&P CNX NIFTY index, declined sharply

                                                    6
starting January 2008. Index prices fell from a peak of 6,288 in January 2008 to 2,524 in October 2008,

representing a decline of nearly 60 percent. The BSE index, another market index, similarly fell nearly

59 percent from 20,873 in January 2008 to 8,510 in October 2008. Starting 2008, Foreign Institutional

Investors (FIIs) facing a liquidity squeeze from abroad, started pulling out capital from India. In

2008­09, FIIs withdrew nearly Rs.433 billion (approximately $7 billion). This eventually resulted in

a money market and credit squeeze which spilled over into the real economy [Subbarao (2009)].The

global slowdown also resulted in a slump in demand for exports. This impact was felt economy-wide

and Indian GDP fell from 9 percent in 2007 to nearly 6.1 percent in 2008. Eventually, the government

of India, fearing a rapid deterioration of the economy, announced wide-ranging stimulus packages

towards the end of 2008 that appeared to temporarily restore the economy back to its pre-2008 growth.

      Before 2008, private sector banks such as ICICI Bank, Karnataka Bank, Lakshmi Vilas Bank and

Kotak Mahindra topped the list of banks with the highest delinquent assets. This changed after the

crisis and post 2008, delinquent assets of state-owned banks grew nearly six times to Rs.3,416 billion

as of March 2016 with State Bank of India (SBI) and Indian Overseas Bank topping the list.

2.2    Government guarantees of state-owned banks

State-owned banks in India are both explicitly and implicity guaranteed by the government. The

Banking Regulations Act explicitly guarantees that all obligations of state-owned banks will be ful-

filled by the Indian government in case of failure. These guarantees can also be implicit. For exam-

ple, as the crisis of 2007­09 progressed the Indian government announced a number of wide-ranging

stimulus plans to jumpstart the banking system. PSBs were promised capital injections to help them

maintain a risk-adjusted capital ratio of 12 percent. The government also launched three fiscal stim-

ulus packages during December 2008­February 2009. Importantly, in the second stimulus package

the government recapitalized state-run banks and infused nearly Rs. 31 billion (approximately $0.5

billion) in 2008-09 as tier-I capital [World Bank (2009)]

      Although both public and private sector banks are insured by the Deposit Insurance and Credit

Guarantee Corporation (DICGC), government guarantees of state-owned banks still matter since de-

posit insurance coverage is limited and only partially effective. In 2007, only Rs.100,000 (approxi-

mately $2000) per depositor per bank was covered by the DICGC. Further, uncertainty and delay in

processing deposit insurance claims renders deposit insurance only partially effective. For example,

Iyer and Puri (2012) analyze a bank run at an Indian co-operative bank and find that deposit insur-



                                                    7
ance is only partially effective in preventing runs. Even depositors within the insurance limit but

with larger deposit balances are likely to run. In the absence of full deposit insurance, government

guarantees matter. In 2007­09, private sector banks too blamed the flight of funds from private to

state-owned banks on the sovereign guarantees of state-owned banks, and lobbied for an increase in

deposit insurance [Live Mint (2011)]. An RBI panel recommended raising the deposit insurance, but

as of November 2019, the deposit insurance still remains unchanged.

2.3   Branch licensing and the 2005 banking reform

In Section 5.6 we follow Young (2017) and use the bank branch licensing policy reform implemented

by the RBI on 8th of September, 2005 in one of our empirical strategies. This subsection provides some

details on this policy. Prior to the 2005 banking reform, branch licensing was heavily regulated by

the RBI and banks were required to seek permission on a case-by-case basis to open, close and shift

branches. The banking reform in 2005, substantially overhauled and streamlined this process. The

two important changes were, first, banks were required to submit on an annual basis the proposed

branch openings, closings and re-locations that it wanted to implement in a given year. The RBI

would then approve these proposals on a consolidated basis. Second, this policy specifically targeted

financial inclusion and encouraged banks to increase their number of branches in under-banked dis-

tricts. A district was designated as under-banked if the average population per branch of the district

was above the national average population per branch. We exploit this criteria used to classify dis-

tricts as under-banked in our empirical design in Section 5.6. Under-banked status remained constant

nearly throughout our main analysis period from 2005 to 2009. Under-banked status was introduced

in 2005, with minor revisions in 2006 and remained constant up until 2010.


3     Data
Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange (NSE) and the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE).

We use the Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES) to measure the ex-ante bank vulnerability of banks to an

aggregate crisis. The MES measure captures the tail dependence of the stock return of a financial firm

on the market as a whole. The strength of the measure lies in its ability to predict which firms are likely

to be worst affected when a financial crisis materializes, as demonstrated by Acharya et al. (2017b) in

their analysis of the systemic risk of large U.S. financial institutions around the financial crisis of 2007­

09. Specifically, MES estimates the expected losses for a stock conditional on a crisis. Since extreme

tail events such as a mild financial crisis happen once a decade and severe crisis such as the Great

                                                     8
Depression or the Great Recession only once in several decades, the practical implementation of MES

relies on normal tail events. We use the normal tail events as the worst 5 percent market outcomes at

daily frequency over the pre-crisis period. In our analysis, we take the 5 percent worst days for the

market returns as measured by the S&P CNX NIFTY index during the period of 1st January 2007 to

31st December 2007, and then compute the negative of the average stock return for any given bank

for these 5 percent worst days. Table A1 in the appendix shows the MES measures for public and

private sector banks using January 2007 to December 2007 as the measurement period. As such, MES

is a statistical measure but Acharya et al. (2017b) provide a theoretical justification for it in a model

where the financial sector's risk-taking has externalities on the economy whenever the sector as a

whole is under-capitalized Acharya et al. (2017b) show that the MES and leverage together determine

the contribution of each financial firm to systemic risk in the event of a crisis. Our baseline analysis

uses MES to measure bank vulnerability. Alternate MES measures include modified MES which uses

market return based on all banks excluding own bank return, and W-MES which uses exponentially

declining weights on past observations.

    The remaining branch and bank level data are from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). While bank-

level data is publicly available, branch-level data is only collected for regulatory purposes and is

proprietary. We only use publicly listed state-owned and private sector banks in India in our analysis

since our bank vulnerability measure is based on stock returns. Of the 50 public and private sector

banks, 38 banks (excluding Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI)) are publicly listed, of which

21 are state-owned and 17 are private sector banks. The main exposure variable used in the analysis

is the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district. Districts are economically integrated areas,

comparable to counties within the US. Since we are interested in the spillover effects of state-owned

banks on private sector banks, only districts where the deposit share of private sector banks is greater

than one percent are retained. Thus, 287 of 630 districts were retained in our analysis. The regulatory

branch-level data, also called Basic Statistical Returns (BSR) has previously been used by Das et al.

(2016) and Cole (2009). This data is collected as of March 31st of every year and covers a wide range

of variables, such as amounts of deposits by type (demand, savings and term), amount of credit by

sector, branch characteristics and personnel characteristics (skilled/unskilled). Our baseline analysis

focuses on the 33,972 branches. We also use deposit amounts by deposit rate brackets, though this

data is available only for 11,171 branches. Data on NPAs is also from the RBI, though is not collected

as part of BSR and hence only 77 percent of the branches have data on NPA.


                                                   9
    To measure economic activity, we use satellite data on human-generated nightlight activity. The

data is from VIIRS DNB data and collected by NOAA using the Suomi National Polar Partnership

satellite that was launched in 2011. We use the nightlight intensity which measures low-light imaging

data collected by the satellite. The data is filtered to measure the quantity of human-generated light

in an area, but some stray light remains which adds noise to the estimates. To remove this noise, we

remove cells for which the annual average of the data differ substantially from the annual composites

before aggregating to the district level. To assess differences at the branch and district level, we use

covariates from the 64th round of the NSS Employment and Unemployment survey conducted in

2007­08. Other variables in our analysis include beta, global beta, volatility, expected shortfall (ES)

measured for the pre-crisis period 1st January 2007 to 31st December 2007; and leverage, log assets

and liquidity measured as of March 31st , 2008. Beta is based on the S&P CNX NIFTY index as the

market return. Global beta is based on the MSCI World Index returns. Volatility is the annualized

daily volatility. Expected shortfall (ES) is the expected return of the bank when the bank's return is

below its 5th percentile in the pre-crisis period. Leverage ratio is the ratio of market equity to the

quasi­market value of assets measured as (book value of assets - book value of equity + market value

of equity). Log assets is the natural logarithm of the book value of total assets. Liquidity is the ratio

of the sum of cash in hand, balances with RBI, money at call and short notice, government securities

and deposits to total liabilities.

    For the regression discontinuity analysis, we exploit the branch licensing policy (see Section 2),

which came into effect in September 2005. The policy encouraged lending to under-banked districts.

A district was designated as under-banked if the average population per branch of the district was

above the national average population per branch. The population data to construct the running

variable is from the 2001 Census. The number of branches is from BSR as of March 2005. Using

this data, we are able to correctly match all except 12 districts to their official under-banked status.

Following Young (2017), we drop the unmatched districts from our analysis. Data for the covariates

(weekly wages, median age, percentage rural population, fraction female population, fraction with

high school education, and unemployment rate) are from the 61st round of the NSS Employment and

Umeployment survey, which was conducted from July 2004 to June 2005.


4   Stock performance and bank-level analysis
We start by analyzing stock market performance and then relate it to bank-level deposits and credit.


                                                   10
4.1    Stock-performance and event Study Analysis

Panels A and B of Figure 1 examine stock market returns of private sector (solid red line) and state-

owned (dashed blue line) banks from January 2008 to February 2009. Panel A examines aggregate

stock market returns and Panel B examines heterogeneity across bank vulnerability. Returns are value-

weighted by their market capitalization. The vertical solid line at 17th March 2008 marks the Bear

Stearns' fire sale to J. P. Morgan and the vertical dashed line at 15th September 2008 marks the Lehman

bankruptcy. Over the entire period, stocks of private sector banks fell by nearly 60 percent, compared

to a 45 percent drop for state-owned banks (panel A). Panel B plots the difference in stock index

performance between high and low MES banks. The top 7 banks with the highest MES within private

sector and state-owned banks are classified as high MES and low MES otherwise. Prior to the Bear

Stearns fire sale, the relative difference in returns between high and low MES banks of the private

sector were similar to the state-owned banks, but started to diverge after. The difference between

high and low MES state-owned banks (dashed blue line) increased, whereas the difference declined

drastically for private sector banks (solid red line). This pattern is similar following the Lehman

Brothers bankruptcy (panel d) and the relative difference between high and low MES state-owned

and private sector banks increased by 27.7 percent.

      More formal event study analysis in panels C and D of Figure 1 is consistent with this finding.

We calculate abnormal returns for the two event dates. Expected return is calculated as Ri,t = i +

 i R M ,t +   i ,t ,   where, Ri,t is the individual stock returns over the estimation window and R M,t is the

market return based on the S&P CNX NIFTY. We use an estimation window from 250 days prior to the

event window and ending 10 days before the event date. The daily abnormal return is then calculated

as the difference between the actual return and the expected return using i and  i . Cumulative

abnormal return (CAR) is calculated by cumulating the abnormal returns across time for the event

window. Panels C and D show the difference in CAR for high MES minus low MES banks. Consistent

with the raw data in panels A and B, the difference between high and low MES state-owned banks

increased post the Bear Stearns collapse. In comparison, this difference in abnormal returns for private

sector banks saw a relative decline of 10 percent compared to state-owned banks. Patterns are similar

following the Lehman bankruptcy with a spread of 7 percent between the relative (high MES minus

low MES) CAR of state-owned banks versus private sector banks (panel D).




                                                          11
4.2    Bank-level analysis

Our bank-level analysis relates bank vulnerability to stock market returns. We then relate this to

bank-level deposits and lending. The empirical specification is:


                       y j =  +   MES j +   Private j +   MES j  Private j +         j                   (1)


where y j is the relevant dependent variable: stock market return, deposit growth and lending growth.

Stock market return is from January 2008 to February 2009. Deposit growth is measured as the log of

change in total deposits (deposit flow) of bank j for the period starting from 31st March 2008 to 31st

March, 2009. Log of change in credit is analogously defined. MES j is the marginal expected shortfall

measure for a bank j and Private j is 1 for private sector banks and zero otherwise. All regressions are

weighted by the deposits in 2007.

      Figure 2 Panel A, graphically relates stock returns during the crisis to ex-ante bank vulnerability as

measured by MES. Private sector banks with higher vulnerability were worse hit during the market-

wide downturn and a 1 pp higher MES is associated with a 6.61 pp decline in stock returns during the

crisis. More vulnerable state-owned banks, however, had higher stock returns during the crisis and a

1 pp higher MES is associated with a 6.12 pp increase in stock returns.

      Results in columns 1­2 in Table 3 confirm the above results using formal regressions with stock

returns as the dependent variable in Equation 1. On average, the returns of private sector banks

were 10 percent lower than state-owned banks (column 1). But, this masks significant heterogeneity

within private and state-owned banks across bank vulnerability (column 2). Stock returns of safer

private sector banks were actually 49 percent higher than safer state-owned banks as indicated by the

coefficient on Pvt. State-owned banks with 1 pp higher MES, however, saw a 7.05 pp increase in stock

returns. Relative to the state-owned banks, the higher MES private sector banks saw a 13.9 pp relative

decline in stock returns. Adding up the coefficients, this is a 6.85 pp overall decline in stock returns

of the vulnerable private sector banks. Stock returns of more vulnerable state-owned banks increased

whereas stock returns of more vulnerable private sector banks declined.

      To explain the above results, we next relate bank vulnerability to deposit flows. Figure 2, panel

B relates deposit growth to ex-ante bank vulnerability. Consistent with the pattern observed in stock

returns, more vulnerable private sector banks had lower deposit growth, whereas more vulnerable

state-owned banks had higher deposit growth during the crisis. Table 3, analyzes this more formally.


                                                     12
On average, deposit flows were 7.86 percent (column 3) lower for private sector banks, possibly in-

dicating a flight to safety from private to state-owned banks. On adding the interaction with MES,

we see that the state-owned banks with higher vulnerability, saw an increase of 33 percent in deposit

flows. In contrast, private sector banks with 1 pp higher MES saw a relative outflow in deposits of

641 percent. Overall, vulnerable private sector banks saw a 6-fold decline in deposit flows. Column 5

links bank stock performance to deposit growth. Indeed, banks with higher stock returns had higher

deposit growth. The stock market returns observed in column 2 is explained by the deposit flows in

column 4.

    Columns 6­7 look at lending. Lending growth was, on average, not significantly lower for private

sector banks (column 6). On adding the interaction term with MES, we see that the state-owned banks

with 1 pp higher MES saw an increase in lending of 1.67 percent. In contrast, vulnerable private sector

banks see a 12.8 percent relative decline in lending. Overall, this translates to an 11.13 percent decline

in lending at vulnerable private sector banks.

    The regressions in columns 4 and 7 allow us to directly calculate the implied impact on lending for

each rupee value of deposit flow, that is the elasticity of new lending to deposit flows. For vulnerable

state-owned banks, a percentage increase in deposits led to a 0.05 percent increase in lending. This is

obtained by dividing the coefficient on MES in column 7 by the corresponding coefficient in column

4 (0.0167/0.330). For vulnerable private sector banks, a percentage increase in deposits led to a 0.0183

percent increase in lending. Summing up the coefficient on MES and MES*Pvt in columns 4 and 7

gives the total implied deposit and lending flows for private sector banks. Dividing these sums gives

the implied elasticity of lending to deposit flows [(-0.128+0.0167)/(-6.408+0.330)].

    To sum, the aggregate evidence in this section suggests that more vulnerable private sector banks

had lower stock returns. This is driven by the deposit outflows from less vulnerable private sector

banks which also impacts lending. The above estimates are merely correlational. We now turn to the

more challenging aspect of showing that the observed patterns are a direct causal effect of deposit

flows due to the exposure to state-owned banks and not merely driven by differences in lending

opportunities of banks.


5   Results on deposits
We now turn to causally estimating the impact of government guarantees on the deposit flows of

state-owned and private sector banks.


                                                   13
5.1    Identification Strategy

We use branch-level data to examine how the government guarantees of state-owned banks affect de-

posit flows of private sector banks during crisis periods. We exploit geographic variation in exposure

to state-owned banks across the branches of a bank. This also helps address several identification

issues that arise in the bank-level analysis, as explained below.

      The main identification challenge with an across-bank empirical strategy (as seen in Section 4.1) to

show the causal effect of government guarantees is the potential for omitted variables. For example, if

crisis periods result in a decline in lending opportunities of vulnerable private sector banks, then they

could contract deposit supply thus explaining our results. We address this identification challenge

by exploiting the geographic variation in the exposure to state-owned banks in local deposit mar-

kets, namely districts. However, we cannot simply compare deposits across banks because different

banks may have different lending opportunities. To control for bank-specific lending opportunities,

we compare deposits across branches of the same bank located in districts with different exposures to

state-owned banks. The identifying assumption for this within-bank estimation is that banks can raise

deposits at one branch and lend them at another. A large literature shows that banks use their internal

capital markets to move deposits raised in one area to another depending on loan demand (Gilje et al.

(2016) and Drechsler et al. (2017)). Later in Section 6, we empirically test this identifying assumption

and show that a bank's lending in a given district is unrelated to the presence of state-owned banks in

the local deposit-market within a district.

      The exposure measure in our analysis is the average share of deposits of state-owned branches in

a district, in a time period (2007) prior to the crisis. Figure 3, panel A shows the geographic variation of

the continuous exposure variable. Panel B restricts to districts with at least 1 percent deposit share of

private sector banks. As the map shows, there is a wide geographic variation in exposure which allays

concerns that results may be purely driven by geographic differences in exposure. Panel C shows the

binary exposure measure we use in our baseline analysis. This is called branch-exposure since it

captures the exposure to state-owned banks at the branch-level as opposed to exposure at the bank-

level which we will define in Section 6. Branch-exposure is 1 for districts with above median exposure

to state-owned banks. Our baseline analysis uses this binary measure for ease of interpretation. We

look at alternate measures in a number of robustness tests. Table 2 shows that around 40 percent of the

bank branches were in high exposure districts with 20 (10) percent of low (high) MES private sector

bank branches in the high exposure districts. In comparison, 40 percent of the state-owned banks were

                                                    14
in the high exposure districts.

      Table 4 explores the correlates of the branch-exposure variable. Districts with high branch-exposure

have lower average wages, are younger, are more rural, and have fewer people with high-school edu-

cation (panel A ). Bank branches in high-exposure districts have fewer skilled workers, are less likely

to serve the urban populations, have higher non-performing assets, have lower credit to deposit ratios

and are smaller (panel B). In other words, the branches in high branch-exposure areas are the worse

performing branches of a bank. High branch-exposure districts are serviced mostly by state-owned

banks due to the implicit and explicit government mandates on financial inclusion for state-owned

banks.1 Our empirical strategy compares the impact on state-owned banks relative to private sector

banks. What matters for identification is whether there are differences between state-owned and pri-

vate sector banks in districts with high branch-exposure. Panel C shows that the branches of private

sector banks in high branch-exposure districts banks were 15 percent more likely to cater to the urban

population, but were not significantly different from state-owned banks in the proportion of skilled

workers, in loan performance, in credit to deposit ratios and in size.

5.2    Within-bank estimation

The empirical specification uses branch-level data and exploits within-bank variation in exposure to

state-owned banks to control for differences in banks' lending opportunities. For a branch i located in

district d belonging to a bank j, we run the following specification:


       Yi, j,d(08-09) =  j + d +   Branch-Exposured  Private j +   MES j  Branch-Exposured +

                                                      MES j  Branch-Exposured  Private j +  Xi +                 i , j,d   (2)


where  j and d are the bank and district fixed effect respectively. The dependent variable is the log

of the change in deposits (deposit flows) for the period starting from 31st March 2008 to 31st March,

2009. Branch-Exposured is at the district level d and is 1 if the average share of deposits of state-owned

banks, as of 31st March 2007, within a district is above median. Private j is 1 for private sector banks

and 0 otherwise. All other lower order interaction terms are absorbed by the fixed effects. The key set

of controls are the bank fixed effects  j , which absorbs all differences between banks. Intuitively, we
    1 One such government mandate is the Lead Bank Scheme introduced in 1969 wherein a state-owned bank with adequate

presence in the district was assigned "Lead Bank" status. These banks used to oversee and coordinate branch expansion in
the districts and monitor credit disbursement. While branch licensing changed significantly post 2005, the historical legacy
of these banks implies that rural areas still have high presence of state-owned banks.



                                                            15
are comparing branches of the same bank and asking whether for a bank with higher vulnerability, as

measured by MES, the bank's branches in districts more exposed to state-owned branches experience

larger outflows, relative to branches with lower exposure to state-owned branches. By including

bank fixed effects we are controlling for any changes in the bank's lending opportunities under our

identifying assumption that banks are able to allocate funds internally. District fixed effects (d ) control

for district-specific factors such as local economic conditions. Xi are the remaining control variables.

As the previous subsection showed, private sector bank branches were more likely to cater to the

urban population. Hence we add a control for whether a branch serves the rural, semi-urban, urban

or metropolitan population. In addition we add the interaction of these indicators with MES to control

for geographic variation with MES. To control for other bank characteristics that can vary with the

exposure measure, we also interact the Branch-Exposure measure with bank leverage. Similarly, we

add Branch-Exposure measure interacted with total bank assets. Standard errors are clustered at the

district level since our exposure measure is also at the district level. Regressions are weighted by

deposits in 2007.

      The coefficients of interest are  and .  measures deposit flows of vulnerable state-owned banks

at branches in districts with more state-owned banks (high branch-exposure) relative to branches in

districts with fewer state-owned banks (low branch-exposure).  measures the deposits flows of vul-

nerable private sector banks at branches in districts with more state-owned banks relative to branches

with low exposure to state-owned banks and relative to similar state-owned banks.  +  measures

the deposits flows of the high branch-exposure branches of the more vulnerable private sector banks.

5.3    Growth in Deposits

Table 5 shows the results using the specification in Equation 2. We include bank-fixed effects in all

columns since we want to compare branches in high branch-exposure districts to the branches of the

same private sector bank in low branch-exposure districts. All specifications also control for bank

specific factors and geographic factors as described in the previous section. Regressions are weighted

by deposits in 2007 (except in column 7). We include district fixed effects in some specifications to

control for local economic conditions. We include only state fixed effects (and exclude district fixed

effects) in columns 1, 3, and 5 since we are interested in the coefficient on branch-exposure which is

collinear with district fixed effects .

      Before turning to the full sample, we first separately examine private and state-owned banks.



                                                    16
Columns 1-2 looks at the sub-sample of private sector bank branches. On average, deposit growth

of private sector bank branches did not vary significantly with branch-exposure (column 1). This,

however, masks heterogeneity within private sector banks. The branches of more vulnerable private

sector banks (those with 1 pp higher MES) saw a 38 percent decline in deposit growth (column 2)

in high branch-exposure districts relative to low branch-exposure districts. Columns 3-4 restrict to

state-owned bank branches. On average, the deposit growth of state-owned bank branches did not

vary with branch-exposure (column 3). More vulnerable state-owned bank branches in high branch-

exposure districts had a 10.2 percent higher deposit growth relative to less vulnerable banks and

relative to branches in low branch-exposure districts (Column 4).

    Using the full-sample of branches, Column 5 shows that branches of more vulnerable state-owned

banks in high branch-exposure districts saw an 11.4 percent increase in deposit growth. In compari-

son, branches of more vulnerable private sector branches in high-exposure districts saw a relative 52.5

percent decline in deposit growth. Effects are similar on adding district level fixed effects in column

6. Branches of more vulnerable state-owned bank branches in high-exposure areas saw a 12.4 percent

increase in deposit flows, whereas branches of more vulnerable private sector banks in high-exposure

areas saw a relative decline of 52.8 percent. Adding up the coefficients, private sector branches of more

vulnerable banks in high branch-exposure districts saw a 40.4 percent decline in deposit growth.

    Our results are robust to a number of alternate specifications. Results are similar when we do

not weight by deposits in 2007 (column 7). One concern is that private sector banks in high-exposure

districts cater to urban areas. We already address this, by including an extensive set of controls for

urban areas in all regressions. In addition, we show that results are similar in the sub-sample of urban

(column 8) and rural (column 9) areas. Column 10 shows that results are similar with the continuous

measure of branch-exposure. Results are also similar when we use the level of deposits as opposed to

growth (column 11). In our baseline analysis, the dependent variable is the log of deposit flows as it

allows us to trace deposit flows and more closely tied to our estimate of interest. Table A2 shows that

results are similar with the dependent variable deposit growth defined as change in log deposits.

    Why do depositors move to the more vulnerable state-owned banks and not to the safer state-

owned banks? To answer this question, Table 6 examines deposit growth in different deposit rate

buckets. Columns 1­3 repeats the specification in Equation 2 with the dependent variable as the

growth rate of deposits with deposit rates less than 9 percent and columns 4­6 with the dependent




                                                   17
variable as growth rate of deposits with deposit rates greater than or equal to 9 percent.2 The repo rate

during this period ranged from 5 to 9 percent, so we take 9 percent as the cut-off for the low deposit

rate category. Deposits are further split into retail and wholesale deposits. Columns 1-3 show that

there was no differential impact on deposit growth in the low deposit rate category for state-owned

banks. Private sector banks see a decline in wholesale deposits in this category, but not in retail

deposits. In stark contrast, columns 4­6 show that deposit growth of state-owned bank branches in

this high deposit rate bracket increased by 13.6 percent for more vulnerable state-owned branches in

high branch-exposure districts. Deposit growth was relatively 44.4 percent lower for private sector

bank branches of more vulnerable banks in high exposure districts. This effect seems to be driven

entirely by retail deposits with a 15 percent higher growth for vulnerable state-owned bank branches

and a relative 45.6 percent lower growth for vulnerable private sector banks in high branch-exposure

districts. The coefficients on MES  Branch-Exposure and Private  MES  Branch-Exposure for the

retail deposits in the high interest rate bracket are also statistically different from the coefficients for

retail deposits in the low interest rate bracket. These results suggest that state-owned banks were

increasing deposit rates to attract the deposits flowing out of the private sector banks and hence we

see an increase in retail deposit flows to the more vulnerable state-owned banks.

    Table A3 examines the heterogeneity by deposit type and by deposit maturity. An important dis-

tinction between the different deposit types in India -- namely, demand, savings, and term deposits --

is that while banks were able to set deposit rates for demand deposits and term deposits, rates of sav-

ings deposits were heavily regulated by the government during this period.3 Columns 1­3 show that

the deposit flows from vulnerable private sector banks to vulnerable state-owned banks were mostly

concentrated in the demand and term deposits. The impact on savings deposits is insignificant and

noisy (column 2). Plausibly, state-owned banks had the liberty of changing deposit rates of demand

and term deposits and were thus able to attract the deposit outflows from private sector banks. Com-

position of deposits also changed for the vulnerable private sector banks which witnessed a fall in the

longer maturity term deposits (columns 3­6). Maturity of term deposits also shrunk by 18 percent at

the branches of more vulnerable private sector banks in high branch-exposure areas. To sum, affected

private sector bank branches saw a maturity shortening, as well as a shift in the composition of their

deposits.
  2 Number    of observations in this Table 6 differ from Table 5 since deposit rate data is not available for all branches.
  3 Savings   deposit rates were deregulated post October 2011 [see RBI (2009)].




                                                                18
5.4    Pre-existing trends and long-term effects

To now examine pre-existing trends and long-term effects we look at a longer time period between

2005 to 2013. We run the following specification separately for state-owned and private sector banks

at the branch-level:


         Yi, j,d,t =  j + d + t +   MES j  Branch-exposured +    1  Branch-exposured
                                                                     

                           +    MES j  1 +    MES j  Branch-exposured  1 +                      i , j,d,t   (3)
                                                    


where  j is the bank fixed effect, d is the district fixed effect and t is the time fixed effect. The

dependent variable is the log of the change in deposits (deposit flows) for the period starting from

31st March in year t - 1 to 31st March in year t. Branch-Exposured is at the district level d and is 1 if the

share of deposits as of 31st March 2007 of state-owned bank banks within a district is above median.

1 is 1 for each year. We plot  which allows us to examine the pre-trend and longer term effects on
deposit flows separately for state-owned and private sector branches. The coefficients are normalized

relative to the year 2007 since the annual deposit flow between March 2007­08 captures the effect of

the Bear Stearns fire sale also.

      Figure 4, panel A plots the coefficients from the event study plot for private sector banks. The

dashed grey lines represent the confidence interval at the 5 percent level. Prior to 2008, branches of

more vulnerable private sector banks in high-exposure areas were similar to those in low-exposure

areas. However, post the crisis, there was a steep fall in the deposit growth of the branches of more

vulnerable private sector banks in high-exposure areas and the effect persisted even 5 years post the

crisis. Panel B repeats the same for state-owned banks, and shows that prior to the crisis deposit

growth at the branches of more vulnerable state-owned banks in high-exposure areas was not signifi-

cantly different from zero. However, post the crisis the deposit growth in high exposure areas of more

vulnerable state-owned banks was higher than those of less vulnerable banks and relative to branches

of the same bank in low branch-exposure areas. Further, this effect was persistent. These tests vali-

date our interpretation that our estimates of the flow of deposits is due to a flight to safety of deposits

rather than to pre-existing trends in districts that had a higher exposure to runs.

      Figure 4, panel C repeats the specification in Equation 2 for each year between 2005 to 2013 and

plots the coefficient on the triple interaction term, Private  Branch-Exposure* MES. Private and state-



                                                     19
owned banks were on similar time trends prior to the crisis and the parallel trends assumption cannot

be rejected. As before, effects are persistent and there is no reversal of deposit flows post the crisis.

5.5     Robustness tests

This section (i) shows robustness to alternate measures of branch-exposure, (ii) compares MES to

alternate risk measures, and (iii) shows robustness to alternate explanations.


5.5.1    Alternate exposure measures

In our baseline, branch-exposure is the average deposit share of state-owned branches in a local mar-

ket, namely a district, in 2007. Since we want to capture how exposed a branch is to state-owned

banks, defining the measure at the district level is reasonable because districts represent economi-

cally integrated units. Table A4, column 1 shows that results are robust to defining branch-exposure

as the deposit share of state-owned banks in more local markets, namely pincodes.4 Deposit flows

may also be affected by state-owned banks in nearby pincodes and not just those in the pincode a

branch is located in. In columns 2­5, we define an alternate distance-weighted measure of expo-
                             j                         -d
                             Branch-Exposure Pincode ×e ij
sure: Branch-Exposurei = i            j -dij
                                             j
                                                           , where Branch-Exposure Pincode
                                                                                   j       is the share of
                                                i e
state-owned banks in a pincode j. Pincodes farther away from a branch are given decreasing weights

and pincodes outside a district are given zero weight.  ranges from 0.01 to 0.2. Values outside this

range lead to implausible weights. For =0.01 (0.02), pincodes at 10 and 20 km receive weights of

0.91 (0.16) and 0.82 (0.02) relative to the weight at 1 km. Results are robust to using this alternate

distance-weighted measure.


5.5.2    Alternate risk measures

Table A5 compares MES to alternate measures of bank vulnerability. First, we focus on two measures

of firm level risk, namely the annualized standard deviation of returns based on daily stock returns

(volatility), and expected shortfall (ES) defined as the negative of the firm's average stock return in

its own 5 percent left tail. Second, we look at the standard measure of systemic risk, beta, which

is the covariance of a firm's stock returns with the market returns divided by the variance of market

returns. In contrast to MES, the baseline effects using firm-level risk measures are in the right direction

but noisy (columns 1 and 2). With the traditional systemic risk measure beta (column 3), we see our

familiar result with branches of vulnerable state-owned banks in high exposure districts witnessing
  4 Table   A4 has fewer observations since pincode data is available for only 44 percent of branches.


                                                              20
deposit inflows and branches of vulnerable private sector banks in these areas witnessing deposit

outflows. Acharya et al. (2017b) too find that the systemic risk measures perform better compared to

the firm measures, though MES better captures bank vulnerability. The difference between the MES

and beta is that the MES is based on tail dependence whereas beta is based on average covariance with

the market. MES captures the propensity of each bank to be under-capitalized when the financial

sector as a whole is under-capitalized, and is a better measure of the systemic risk externality arising

when the financial sector as a whole is under-capitalized.

    What is important for our analysis is whether a ranking of banks based on the normal-time MES

works well during crisis periods. Figure A1 plots MES rankings in January 2006-December 2006

against MES rankings from January 2007-December 2007. MES rankings in 2006 were reflective of

which banks would be systemically important in 2007 and MES values are stable over time.

    We now examine alternate definitions of MES. Modified MES is similar to MES except market re-

turn is calculated using all banks in the economy, excluding own bank return. Weighted MES (W-MES)

uses exponentially declining weights (=0.94) on past observations to estimate the average equity re-

turns on the 5 percent worst days of the market. Table A5, columns 4­5 show that results are robust

to alternate definitions of MES.


5.5.3   Robustness to alternate explanations

Our results are robust to several alternate explanations. Effects are not explained by higher exposure

of private sector banks to the global markets. Table A6, column 1 looks at deposit growth against

global beta (measured as the sensitivity to the MSCI World market index). The coefficients on the in-

teraction terms with beta go in the expected direction (though the triple interaction term is noisy and

insignificant) and the interaction terms with the global beta are negative and insignificant. These re-

sults assure us that exposure to the global markets are not driving our results. Pre-crisis leverage does

explain our results (column 2). The pattern of deposit flows cannot be explained by bank asset size

either (column 3), assuring us that it is the sovereign guarantees and not a too-big-to-fail guarantee

that is driving deposit flows.

    Columns 4­5 examines whether our results are simply capturing a reversal in pre-crisis effects.

Though column 4 seems to suggest that deposit flows could be driven by pre-crisis returns, on adding

the interaction with MES in column 5 we see our familiar result. Deposit flows in state-owned and

private sector banks are not related to pre-crisis stock returns, assuring us that we are not merely


                                                   21
capturing a reversal in deposit flows.

      Pre-crisis liquidity differences do not explain deposit flows either. Column 5 seems to suggest

that the branches of more illiquid private sector banks in exposed districts had lower deposit flows.

However, more illiquid state-owned banks saw deposit inflows contrary to a pure flight to safety of

depositors from illiquid private sector banks to liquid state-owned banks. On adding the interaction

with MES in column 6, we see our familiar result. Deposit flows across bank vulnerability persist even

after controlling for bank liquidity.

5.6     Regression discontinuity using the 2005 banking reform

To supplement our earlier findings on the effect of exposure to government guaranteed state-owned

banks on desposit flows, we provide evidence from a regression discontinuity (RD) design. This

approach allows us to more precisely estimate the impact of higher exposure to state-owned banks on

deposit flows of private and state-owned banks. To implement the RD, we use branch-level data and

exploit a 2005 banking reform that differentially affected exposure of districts to state-owned banks.


5.6.1    Empirical strategy

The 2005 banking reform substantially revised branch licensing in India and explicitly encouraged

opening of branches in under-banked districts. A district is designated as under-banked if the district

average population per branch is above the national average population per branch. Young (2017)

compares districts just above the threshold for under-banked status to districts just below the thresh-

old in an RD design and shows that the number of private sector branches in under-banked districts

increased significantly. However, there was no corresponding increase in the branches of state-owned

banks. Young (2017) postulates that the reform had minimal effect on state-owned banks because they

are not driven by market incentives. Alternatively, state-owned banks are implicitly encouraged to

operate in under-banked districts under alternate financial inclusion schemes (such as the Lead Bank

Scheme discussed above) and hence, on the margin, are not affected by the reform.

      We build on the above result from Young (2017) and first estimate whether the deposit share of

state-owned banks -- which also corresponds to our branch-exposure measure -- changed discon-

tinuously at the RD threshold. We estimate the following regression model within a narrow window




                                                  22
around the under-banked threshold:


 Exposured = s +   Bankedd +   Bankedd  f (rund ) +   (1 - Bankedd )  f (rund ) +  Xd + d (4)


where, Exposured is the deposit share of state-owned banks for each district d in 2006­08. rund is

the running variable, calculated by subtracting the national average population per branch from the

district's average population per branch. Bankedd takes a value 1 for all districts with negative values

of rund . That is, Bankedd is one for all banked districts and 0 for the under-banked districts. s is the

state fixed-effect. Xd are the controls variables: number of persons and number of persons squared

in a district. Following Gelman and Imbens (2014), we use second degree polynomials. We use a

triangular kernel for the baseline which uses decaying weights for observations with higher distances

from the threshold. Regressions are weighted by population in 2001. We use a bandwidth of 4.5

thousand persons per branch around the threshold so as to compare districts that are fairly close to

the cut-off point. This is within the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011) bandwidth. In robustness tests,

we use alternate specifications with the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011) and Calonico et al. (2014)

bandwidths and the bandwidth used in and is the same bandwidth used in Young (2017).

     is the RD coefficient of interest and estimates the discontinuous jump in exposure to state-

owned banks at the threshold. The RD design provides the causal estimate of the impact of the reform

on branch openings (and consequently on deposit share of state-owned banks) because districts just

above the threshold are good counterfactuals for districts just below the threshold. Under-banked dis-

tricts where the population per branch ratio is very small (far away from the RD threshold) are likely

to be different from districts with a very high population per branch. However, when we narrow our

focus to the set of districts close to the threshold, it becomes more plausible that districts just above

the threshold are reasonable counterfactuals for districts just below the threshold. Equation 4 allows

us to estimate the causal impact of the reform on deposit share of state-owned banks.

    Next, using branch-level data we examine the heterogeneity in the impact on deposit growth of

public and private sector bank branches across the RD threshold. The specification is:


           Yi, j,d(08-09) =  j + d +   Bankedd  f (rund ) +   (1 - Bankedd )  f (rund ) +  Xi

        +   Bankedd  MES j +   Bankedd  Private j +   Bankedd  MES j  Private j + i, j,d              (5)


where as before, Yi, j,d is log of the change in deposits (deposit flow) in 2008­09 for a branch i be-

                                                   23
longing to bank j in district d. rund is the running variable described in Equation 5. Bankedd takes

a value 1 for all districts with negative values of rund . d is the district fixed-effect. Xd includes the

controls number of persons and number of persons squared in a district. Standard errors are clus-

tered at the district level. As before, we use second degree polynomials with triangular kernels and

a bandwidth of 4.5 thousand persons per branch. Regressions are weighted by population in 2001.

The coefficients of interest are  and .  measures the impact on deposit flows of the branches of

vulnerable state-owned banks in districts just below the threshold (banked) to those just above the

threshold (under-banked). + measures the analogous effect for the branches of vulnerable private

sector banks.

    The intuition for the RD is as follows. First, Equation 4 establishes whether the banking reform of

2005 caused a discontinuous change in deposit share of state-owned banks (analogous to our branch-

exposure measure) in 2006­08 at the RD threshold. This is the period prior to our analysis. Equation 5

then compares the effect on the branches of state-owned banks relative to private sector banks across

bank vulnerability in 2008­09, analogous to the DDD specification in Equation 2. While the RD esti-

mate is a local average treatment effect and measures the heterogeneity in the discontinuous jump in

deposit growth at the RD threshold, the DDD estimates measures average treatment effect. The RD

specification helps address the concern in the previous section that districts with very high branch-

exposure are also more rural districts since government mandates require state-owned banks to op-

erate in these areas. The RD specification restricts to districts within a narrow band around the RD

threshold and thus plausibly subsets to districts which are similar along all other dimensions besides

exposure to state-owned banks. We test the plausbility of this assumption below.

    Identification for the RD specification requires that all relevant factors besides treatment vary

smoothly at the threshold between banked and under-banked districts. Formally, letting y1 and y0 de-

note potential outcomes under banked and under-banked districts, identification requires thatE[y1 |run]

and E[y0 |run] are continuous at the RD threshold. This assumption is needed for districts which fall

just under the RD threshold (and were thus designated as banked districts) to be appropriate counter-

factuals for districts that are just above the RD threshold (and were thus designated as under-banked

districts). To assess the plausibility of the identifying assumptions, Table 7 Panel A examines at the

district- level whether weekly wages(column 1), median age (column 2), percentage of rural house-

holds (column 3), percentage of females (column 4), percentage of those who have finished high school

(column 5) and unemployment rate (column 6) are balanced across the RD threshold. Results suggest


                                                   24
that these demographic and economic covariates vary smoothly across the RD threshold. This is in

contrast to Table 4, panel A where high and low exposure districts differed along every dimension.

The RD design allows us to subset to districts that are similar along almost every dimension besides

exposure to state-owned banks. Column 7 also shows that the deposit share of state-owned banks be-

tween 2001­2003, prior to the banking reform, did not change discontinuously across the RD thresh-

old. We exclude 2004 and 2005 since the reform was anticipated and may have had spillover effects

before the implementation date in September 2005.

    Figure 5 analyzes this covariate balance graphically. Covariates are plotted against the running

variable. Points to the right of the cut-off represent districts that had a higher average population per

branch than the national average population per branch, and are thus designated as under-banked.

Each point represents the average of the relevant covariate value in 0.2 percentage points of the run

bins. We use second degree polynomials to plot covariates against the running variable on either side

of the RD threshold which is shown by the solid line. Dashed lines show the 95 percent intervals. State

fixed effects are partialed out here, and other controls are excluded in order to transparently display

raw data. Consistent with the results in Table 7 panel A, covariates did not change discontinuously at

the RD threshold.

    Identification also requires the absence of selective sorting around the RD threshold. Figure A3

shows the McCrary plot and tests for selective sorting. Panel A includes the full sample and Panel B

removes the outliers, that is, observations greater than 50. Given that the assignment to under-banked

status was based on the 2001 population census which was four years prior to banking reform in 2005,

it would have been difficult for banks to manipulate around the threshold. It is, however, possible that

banks manipulate the number of branches in a district prior to the reform to game the classification

into under-banked status. This seems unlikely given the difficulties of such coordinated manipulation.

Indeed, Figure A3 shows that there is no discontinuity in the density of observations around the RD

threshold.


5.6.2   Results

First, we graphically examine the deposit share of public sector banks around the RD threshold in

Figure 6. Panel A shows that the reform led to a discontinuous increase in the number of private

sector bank branches at the RD threshold in under-banked districts. Panel B shows, however, that

the reform had no impact on state-owned branches. This could either be due to the lack of market


                                                   25
incentives for state-owned banks ([Young (2017)] or because state-owned banks have other financial

inclusion mandates and thus the reform does not bind for them. The above findings are consistent

with Young (2017).

    Panel C shows that the deposit share of state-owned banks in 2006­08 was discontinuously lower

at the RD threshold in under-banked districts. That is, districts just above the RD threshold (corre-

sponding to banked districts) had a discontinuously higher share of state-owned banks compared to

the districts just above the RD threshold (corresponding to under-banked districts). Panel D shows

that there was no discontinuity in deposit share of state-owned banks in 2001­03, prior to the reform.

    Table 7, panel B shows these results more formally. All columns use state fixed effects and also

control for number of persons and number of persons squared. Number of private sector bank

branches was discontinuously lower (higher) by 25 branches in the banked (under-banked) districts

(column 1). There was no discontinuous impact on the number of state-owned banks (column 2). Frac-

tion of state-owned banks was discontinuously higher in banked districts at the RD threshold (column

3). Deposit share of state-owned banks, was 9.22 percent higher in districts just below the RD cut-off

(banked districts) compared to districts just above the RD cut-off (under-banked districts) as shown

in column 4. This is our main estimate of interest and corresponds to branch-exposure measure previ-

ously defined. These results confirm that the banking reform led to discontinuously higher exposure

to state-owned banks in districts just below the RD threshold (banked districts). Table A7 shows that

our results are robust to alternate bandwidths: Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011) (column 1), Calonico

et al. (2014) (column 2), bandwidth of 4 (column 3), and bandwidth of 4.5 (column 4). Results are also

robust to using the Young (2017) bandwidth and to using local linear polynomials (column 5). Fig-

ure A2 shows the RD plots with a bandwidth of 3.5 and a local linear regression. Results are similar

to the baseline plots in Figure 6.

    Having established that the banking reform led to a discontinuously higher exposure to state-

owned banks in banked districts just below the RD threshold, we now examine deposit flows at vul-

nerable private sector and state-owned banks in these otherwise similar districts. Table 8, panel A

examines deposit flows at the branch-level in 2008­09. Consistent with Table 5, we use a within-bank

estimation strategy and include bank fixed effects. Columns 1, 2, and 4 also include district fixed

effects to control for local economic conditions. For robustness column 3 only includes state fixed

effect. Control variables included are population and population squared. Regressions are weighted

by population in 2001. Column 1 restricts to private sector banks. Branches of vulnerable private


                                                 26
sector banks in districts just below the RD threshold (banked districts) saw a discontinuous decline in

deposit flows of 34 percent. In other words, branches of private sector banks in districts with a dis-

continuously higher share of state-owned bank branches also had a discontinuous decline in deposit

growth compared to branches in less-exposed districts (those districts above the RD threshold and

were thus designated as under-banked) and relative to less vulnerable private sector banks. When we

restrict to public sector bank branches, we see that the branches of more vulnerable state-owned banks

in exposed districts (those below the RD threshold, that is, banked districts) saw a discontinuous in-

crease in deposit growth. Columns 3 and 4 with the full sample of public and private sector banks

shows similar results. Column 4, also includes district fixed effects and the coefficient on Banked*MES

in column 4 indicates that branches of more vulnerable public sector banks just below the RD cut-off

saw a 4.6 percent increase in deposit growth compared to those in districts just above the RD cut-

off. In contrast, branches of vulnerable private sector banks saw a relative discontinuous decline of

36.2 percent in districts just below the RD threshold. As a robustness test, column 3 only includes

state-fixed effects instead of the district fixed effects to be consistent with the specifications in Table 7.

Results are similar.

      Table 8, Panel B, examines deposit flows in the pre-crisis years, 2004­05 (column 1), 2005­06 (col-

umn 2), 2006­07 (column 3) and 2007­08 (column 4). There was no discontinuous change in deposit

flows at the RD threshold, assuring us that private and public sector bank branches in districts just

above and below the RD threshold were on similar trends prior to the crisis.


6     Impact on bank lending
This section examines the impact on lending. Since deposits account for nearly 79 percent of banks'

liabilities and are the main source of banks' funding, we would expect to see an impact on credit. This

section concludes by looking at district-level impact on credit availability and the resulting impact on

real economic activity.

6.1    Identification strategy

Since banks can use their internal capital markets to allocate deposits across branches, the impact on

lending may not be affected by local exposure to state-owned banks and hence, we cannot use the

same empirical strategy as in Section 5. Instead, we calculate a bank-level measure by averaging at

the bank level, the exposure of the bank's branches to state-owned banks. To control for differences in

lending opportunities we compare the lending of different banks in the same district. This empirical

                                                     27
strategy to examine lending is consistent with the identification strategy used to examine deposits in

Section 5. Previously, our identification strategy relied on the assumption that banks are able to allo-

cate funds across branches and thus local deposit flows are not driven by local lending opportunities.

We will also explicitly test this assumption in our empirical analysis below.

6.2    Within-district estimation

We now implement our bank-level estimation strategy by first calculating a bank level exposure to

state-owned branches. Bank exposure is calculated as the weighted average of all branches of a bank

in a district, Exposure j = i j Wi, j,d Branch-shared , for a bank j with branches i in district d. Branch-

shared is the district level measure of the share of deposits of state-owned banks. The weight, Wi, j,d =

Depositsi,d / i j Deposits, where weight of each branch i, of a bank j, in a district d is the deposit of

a branch i in district d divided by the sum of deposits of all branches of that bank. We use Bank-

Exposure j in our analysis, which is 1 for above median value of Exposure j .

      The empirical specification to examine lending is:


      Yi, j,d(08-09) = d +  MES +  Private j +   MES j  Bank-Exposure j +   MES j  Private j +

                       Private j  Bank-Exposure j +   MES j  Bank-Exposure j  Private j +        i , j,d   (6)


where d is the district fixed effect. The dependent variable is the log of the change in loans (flow of

credit) for the period starting from 31st March 2008 to 31st March, 2009. All other lower order interac-

tion terms are absorbed by fixed effects. Intuitively, we are comparing branches of banks which had

high exposure to state-owned banks to branches of banks in the same district which had low expo-

sure to state-owned banks. The previous section showed that private sector bank branches were more

likely to cater to urban borrowers, we thus add a control for whether a branch serves a rural popula-

tion, a semi-urban population, an urban population or a metropolitan population. In addition we add

the interaction of these indicators with MES. To control for other bank-level factors that can vary with

the exposure measure, we also interact the branch-exposure measure with bank leverage and bank

assets. The above equation is our baseline regression to examine lending and lending performance.

Standard errors are clustered at the district level and the regression is weighted by deposits in 2007.

      In supplemental regression we repeat the specification in Equation 2 with lending growth as the

dependent variable to test the identifying assumption that lending is not affected by local deposit

flows. If capital markets work well, we should see no impact or minimal impact on lending for


                                                    28
branches with high exposure to state-owned banks.

6.3    Lending

Table 9 shows the lending results. Column 1 restricts to private sector banks. Lending growth at

branches of more vulnerable, high exposure private sector banks saw a decline in lending growth,

relative to branches of less vulnerable, low exposure banks, in the same district. On the other hand,

lending growth of vulnerable state-owned banks with high bank-exposure increased (column 2). Our

preferred specification in column 3 shows that lending increased by 82 percent at more vulnerable

state-owned banks with high bank-exposure. Lending at more vulnerable private sector branches

with high bank-exposure was nearly 9 times lower as shown by the coefficient for MES  Bank-

Exposure j  Private. By comparing branches within a district, we are controlling for differences in

lending opportunities. These large magnitudes for the impact on lending of vulnerable private sector

banks possibly indicate that though deposit outflows were spread across districts, the lending effects

were actually concentrated in a few districts. Unweighted regressions in column 4 yields similar re-

sults. Column 5 tests our identifying assumption using the specification in Equation 2. Lending at the

branch-level does not depend on branch exposure to state-owned banks, supporting our identifying

assumption that branch deposit flows are not affected by local lending opportunities since banks use

their internal capital markets to reallocate deposits across branches.

      Results are also robust to using the continuous measure of bank-exposure (column 6). Columns 7­

9 examine sector-wise lending, where we split loans into (i) services, (ii) agriculture, and (iii) industry.

Branches of more vulnerable, private sector banks with high bank-exposure saw a decline in deposit

growth across all sectors. Also, the increase in credit growth of more vulnerable state-owned banks

was concentrated in the industry sector. Industry lending tends to be long term in nature and thus

relies on relationship lending. Lending flows by state-owned banks to predominantly to the industry

sector could point to a "lazy banking" theory which postulates that managers of state-owned banks

are more prone to lending to existing customers since they are heavily penalized for making bad loans,

but do not face harsh consequences for passing on good opportunities [Banerjee et al. (2005)]. Agricul-

tural lending by state-owned banks does not increase, even though it is considered to be a politically

important sector [Cole (2009) and Kumar (2019)]. Column 9 confirms that the bank-exposure measure

also captures effects on deposit growth. Branches of vulnerable private sector banks more exposed to

state-owned banks saw a decline in deposit growth, whereas branches of state-owned banks saw an



                                                    29
increase in deposit growth, thus tying the result on deposit flows as documented in Section 5 with the

lending patterns documented above.

      Table A8 examines loan rates. Lending rates at the branches of more vulnerable private sector

banks with high bank-exposure was significantly lower compared to the branches of more vulnerable

state-owned banks in these areas (column 1). These effects are driven by the industry and services

sector (columns 3­5).

      These differences in lending rates plausibly reflect a deterioration in credit-worthiness of bor-

rowers of vulnerable state-owned banks relative to private sector banks. Plausibly, more vulnerable

private sector banks reduce lending to the least profitable borrowers, and thus have lower lending

rates. To test this hypothesis, we examine loan performance in the next section.

6.4    Loan Performance

There could be several explanations as to why state-owned banks do not cut back on lending dur-

ing crises. One argument is that vulnerable state-owned banks are socially maximizing and there-

fore increase lending during crises and are thus helpful in maintaining credit flow in the economy

when it is most needed. In contrast, a political economy view suggests that this increased lending by

state-owned banks may be due to political pressures, and could thus lead to inefficient investments

[Sapienza (2004) and Dinç (2005)]. Both the social and the political motive result in greater lending

and greater investment. However, in the former, state-owned banks invest in projects which are wel-

fare maximizing whereas in the latter, they investments may be inefficient. To see which of the above

motives dominate, this section examines loan performance between March 2008 to March 2013.

      We focus on a longer time period, since it takes some time for the loans to become delinquent.

A loans is classified as an a non-performing asset (NPA) if a borrower misses payments for 90 days

(or 180 days in some cases). Banks are further required to further classify NPAs into three categories,

each with different provisioning requirements: (i) sub-standard assets for assets that have remained

NPAs for less than or equal to 18 months and with a provisioning requirement of 10 percent; (ii)

doubtful assets for NPAs exceeding 18 months an with a provisioning requirement of 20-50 percent;

and finally, (iii) loss assets if the assets are considered uncollectible, and thus have to be written off.

Given these differences in provisioning requirements, banks are not inclined to recognize loss assets

on their balance sheets. Because banks have an incentive to delay the classification of delinquent loans,

we also look at sub-standard and doubtful assets.



                                                    30
      Using the specification in Equation 6, column 1 in Table 10 suggests that NPAs of private sec-

tor banks declined, whereas the NPAs of state-owned banks increased. Effects, however, are noisy

and not statistically significant. On further splitting into the components of NPAs, we see that there

was a 30 percent increase in sub-standard assets of vulnerable state-owned banks with high bank-

exposure. Relative to the state-owned bank branches, private sector branches of vulnerable banks

with high bank-exposure saw a sharp decline in sub-standard assets. There was no impact on doubt-

ful assets which require higher provisioning. Strikingly, loss assets declined for state-owned banks

but increased for private sector banks. We interpret these as reflecting state-owned banks' reluctance

to write down even delinquent loans. However, the (true) deterioration in asset quality is reflected in

sub-standard assets (column 2) is also has much lower provisioning requirements.

6.5    District-level lending and economic activity

We now aggregate to the district level and examine how the deposit flows affect lending and subse-

quent economic activity (as measured by night lights). To examine the district-level impact, we first

construct a district-level exposure measure. District-exposure is defined as the weighted average of

bank-exposure across all banks lending in a given district, using deposit shares in 2007 as weights.

This measure captures the extent to which a district is served by banks that raise deposits in districts

with high exposure to state-owned banks (high branch-exposure).

      The specification to examine lending and economic activity is:


                               Yd = s +   District-Exposured +  Xd +      d                           (7)


where s is the state fixed effect. To look at the impact on lending, the dependent variable is the log

of the change in loans (flow of credit) for the relevant period. To look at the impact on economic

activity, we take the logarithm of night light intensity. We look at short term growth from 31st March

2008 to 31st March, 2009. To measure long term impact we also look at the years 2009­13. The control

variables included are unemployment rate and percentage rural population in 2007­08. Standard

errors are clustered at the state level and the regression is weighted by total deposits in 2007.

      Table 11 presents the results of the district-level analysis. As a first step, we first examine the

district-level impact on deposits using branch-exposure (columns 1­2). Districts with high share of

state-owned banks (high branch-exposure) saw a 93 percent decline in deposit flows in 2008­09 and

a decline of 90 percent over the five year period. The overall negative growth at the district-level in


                                                    31
exposed districts, suggests that not all the deposits that flew out of private sector banks made their

way to state-owned banks. Since banks can use their internal capital markets, these deposit flows

may not directly impact the districts which witnessed deposit flows and hence we use the district-

exposure defined above to examine the impact on lending and real economic activity. Districts whose

banks raise deposits in markets more exposed to state-owned banks saw a decline in lending (column

3) and this effect persisted up until 2013 (column 4). A one standard deviation increase in district-

exposure (0.22) was associated with a 1.6 times relative decline in lending in 2008­09. Columns 6­7

examine the impact on real economic activity. A one standard deviation increase in district-exposure

was associated with a 33 percent decline in economic activity, as measured using night light intensity.


7   Evidence of implicit government guarantee of state-owned banks
This section examines the extent of capital support provided by the Indian government to the state-

owned banks in the aftermath of the crisis. The sample of banks that received capital injections is

small and hence we only provide a descriptive analysis. Beginning December 2008, the government

announced a number of capital injections for state-owned banks. Importantly, weaker state-owned

banks received greater capital injections. In February 2009, the government announced capital injec-

tions in 3 state-owned banks: UCO Bank, Central Bank of India and Vijaya Bank. Further, as part of the

2010-2011 budget, the government announced additional capital infusion in five state-owned banks:

IDBI Bank, Central Bank, Bank of Maharashtra, UCO Bank and Union Bank. The amount of capital

injections was determined based on funding requirements of state-owned banks and their need for a

capital buffer. Effectively, the state-owned banks which performed the worst during the crisis, that is,

those that had higher capital depletion received greater support from the government. As of March

2009, all the banks mentioned above (except Union Bank) had less than 8 percent of Tier 1 capital.

Based on the MES measure, these were also among the more vulnerable banks in our analysis. For

example, Union Bank had an MES of 5.74 percent and Vijaya Bank had an MES of 5.27 percent. UCO

Bank had a relatively lower MES of 4.80 percent. More vulnerable state-owned banks, thus, received

greater ex-post government support. Such direct capital support was not provided to more vulnera-

ble private sector banks, consistent with our starting assumption that state-owned banks have greater

government support as compared to the private sector banks.




                                                  32
8     Conclusion
In this paper, we examine the relatively strong performance of state-owned banks in India compared

to their private-sector counterparts during the global financial crisis of 2007­09. While more vulnera-

ble private sector banks performed worse than less vulnerable private sector banks, vulnerable state-

owned banks performed better. We attribute this to the presence of government guarantees which

enabled more vulnerable state-owned banks to grow their deposit base by increasing their deposit

rates. They also increased loan advances. However, ex-post, these loans have been associated with

greater non-performance and restructuring of assets. Our results suggest that the presence of state-

owned banks can decrease financial fragility during crisis periods by destabilizing the private banking

sector. Such distorted lending by under-performing state-owned banks may further sow the seeds of

an eventual slowdown in economic investments [as documented by Acharya et al. (2017a) in India].

     Our findings are, in fact, consistent with the experience worldwide: financial institutions with

greater access to government guarantees have survived the crisis or even expanded post-crisis while

the ones without such access have failed or shrunk. A striking case in point has been the growth of

the government-sponsored enterprises (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) and commercial banks in the

United States - both sets of institutions with explicit government support and ready access to central

bank emergency lending. These institutions expanded their holdings of mortgage-backed securities

while investment banks and hedge funds deleveraged and sold these securities [He et al. (2010)].

Eventually, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac effectively failed and were put under the United States

government conservatorship in September 2008. In contrast, private-label mortgage securitizers lost

a significant market share during the crisis and have not recovered since then. Thus, even though

access to government guarantees might be considered a source of financial stability during a crisis,

our results suggest that greater presence of government institutions in the financial sector (or greater

extent of government intervention in a crisis) is likely to be associated with the misfortune of crowding

out the private financial sector in the long run.

References
Acharya, V., Anginer, D., Warburton, A., May 2016. The End of Market Discipline? Investor Expecta-
    tions of Implicit State Guarantees. NYU Stern School of Business Working Paper.
Acharya, V., Mishra, P., Prabhala, N., 2017a. The Anatomy of a Business Cycle. CAFRAL Working
    paper.
Acharya, V. V., Pedersen, L. H., Philippon, T., Richardson, M. P., 2017b. Measuring Systemic Risk.


                                                    33
  Review of Financial Studies 30 (1), 2­47.
Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E., 2005. Bank Financing in India. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London.
Business Line, 2008. India and the global financial crisis.
Business Line, 2009. Private banks want deposit insurance cap hiked.
Calomiris, C. W., Chen, S., 2018. The spread of Deposit Insurance and the Global Rise in Bank Asset
  Risk since the 1970s. NBER Working Paper (24936).
Calomiris, C. W., Jaremski, M., 2016. Deposit Insurance: Theories and Facts. NBER Working paper
  8 (1), 97­120.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Titiunik, R., 2014. Robust Nonparametric Confidence Intervals for
  Regression-Discontinuity Designs. Econometrica 91 (82), 2295­2326.
Cole, S., 2009. Fixing Market Failures or Fixing Elections? Elections, Banks, and Agricultural Lending
  in India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Cordella, T., Yeyati, E., 2003. Bank Bailouts: Moral Hazard vs. Value Effect. Journal of Financial Inter-
  mediation 12, 300­330.
Das, A., Mishra, P., Prabhala, N. R., 2016. The Transmission of Monetary Policy Within Banks: Evi-
  dence from India. CAFRAL Working Paper.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Detragiache, E., 2002. Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking System Stability?
  An Empirical Investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 1373­1406.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Kane, E. J., Laeven, L., 2008. Determinants of Deposit-Insurance Adoption and
  Design. Journal of Financial Intermediation 17.3, 407­438.
Dinç, S., 2005. Politicians and Banks: Political Influence on Government Owned Banks in Emerging
  Markets. Journal of Financial Economics 77, 453­479.
Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2017. The Deposits Channel Of Monetary Policy. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1819­1876.
Economic Times, 2009. Deposits with SBI zoom past Lehman collapse. https://economictimes.
  indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/deposits-with-sbi-zoom-post-lehman-
  collapse/articleshow/4367690.cms?from=mdr.
Gelman, A., Imbens, G., 2014. Why High-Order Polynomials Should Not be Used in Regression Dis-
  continuity Designs. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37 (3), 447­456.
Gerschenkron, A., 1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. Cambridge, MA, Harvard
  University Press.
Gilje, E., Loutskina, E., Strahan, P. E., 2016. Exporting Liquidity: Branch Banking and Financial Inte-
  gration. The Journal of Finance 71 (3), 1159­1184.
Gorton, G., Huang, L., 2004. Liquidity, Efficiency and Bank Bailouts. American Economic Review 94,
  455­83.
Gropp, R., Vesala, J., Vulpes, G., 2006. Equity and Bond Market Signals as Leading Indicators of Bank
  Fragility. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38 (2), 399­428.
He, Z., Khang, I. G., Krishnamurthy, A., 2010. Balance Sheet Adjustments in the 2008 Crisis. IMF
  Economic Review 58, 118­156.
Imbens, G., Kalyanaraman, K., 2011. Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discontinuity
  Estimator. Review of Economic Studies 91 (79), 933­959.


                                                    34
Iyer, R., Puri, M., 2012. Understanding Bank Runs : The Importance of Depositor-bank Relationships
  and Networks. American Economic Review 102 (4), 1414­1445.
Kumar, N., 2019. Political Interference and Crowding Out in Bank Lending. Journal of Financial Inter-
  mediation, 100815.
Live Mint, 2011. Rbi panel for raising deposit insurance cover to rs 500000. https://www.livemint.
  com/Politics/N7f0UFvTrLmHCJ2KJ2YGkO/RBI-panel-for-raising-deposit-insurance-cover-to-
  Rs500000.html.
Qian, M., Yeung, B., 2015. Bank Financing and Corporate Governance. Journal of Corporate Finance
  32, 258­270.
RBI, 2009. Deregulation of Savings Bank Deposit Interest Rate - Guidelines. https://www.rbi.org.in/
  scripts/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=6779&Mode=0.
Sapienza, P., 2004. The Effects of Government Ownership on Bank Lending. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 72, 357­384.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1994. Politicians and Firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 995­1025.
Stiglitz, J., 1989. Markets, Market Failures and Development. American Economic Review 79, 197­203.
Subbarao, D., 2009. Speech delivered at the Symposium on 'The Global Economic Crisis and Chal-
  lenges for the Asian Economy in a Changing World' organized by the Institute for International
  Monetary Affairs, Tokyo.
World Bank, 2009. India - first banking sector support loan project (english). http://documents.
  worldbank.org/curated/en/356561468041681870/India-First-Banking-Sector-Support-Loan-
  Project.
Young, N., 2017. Banking and Growth: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity analysis. EBRD
  Working Paper.




                                                  35
                                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics: Bank level data

      Variables                                   All                         Public Sector Banks                           Private Sector Banks
                                                                        Low MES                  High MES             Low MES                 High MES
                                         Mean            SD       Mean          SD          Mean           SD      Mean       SD           Mean        SD
                                                                                               Risk Measures
      MES (in%)                          4.00           1.23       3.47         1.32          5.47         0.32      3.23        0.44         4.69       0.67
      Volatility (in%)                   20.02          7.48       18.08        7.54         23.07         4.43     16.37        5.18        26.04       8.82
      Expected Shortfall (in%)           5.54           0.80        5.40        0.52          6.23         0.43      4.91        0.80         5.94       0.76
      Beta                               0.86           0.29       0.77         0.30          1.14         0.13      0.68        0.20         0.99       0.23
      Global Beta                        0.70           0.32       0.63         0.38          0.92         0.07      0.50        0.16         0.91       0.30
      Modified MES (in%)                 4.22           1.04       4.20         0.59          5.27         0.59      3.13        0.57         4.76       1.07
      W-MES (in%)                        4.57           0.95       4.43         0.50          5.71         0.52      3.55        0.54         5.09       0.63
                                                                                               Other Variables
      Log Assets (in%)                   10.82           1.16      11.35        0.77         11.67         0.57     10.33        1.28          9.59       0.72
      Leverage (in%)                     17.97           9.63     21.48        10.13         17.99         8.51     14.55        9.85         15.79       8.85
      Liquidity (in%)                    37.70           5.19     37.59         3.17         36.02         2.69     36.77        3.52         40.95      10.06
36




      Pre-crisis Stock Returns (in%)     9.05           6.45       7.43        4.32          6.08          3.96     8.22        3.31         16.43       10.14
      Stock Returns (in%)                -65.52         12.38     -66.81       11.89        -55.11        12.41    -61.95        8.55        -78.46       5.28
      Deposit Growth (in%)               18.40          11.52      20.44        5.06         22.12         4.95     23.96        6.71          2.67      17.47
      Credit Growth (in%)                19.20          11.60      21.15        4.62         22.45         5.16     22.91       13.37          6.72      16.21
      Bank-Exposure                      0.50            0.51       0.79        0.43          0.86         0.38      0.10        0.32          0.14       0.38
      Obs. (Banks)                                38                                   21                                               17


     This table shows the summary statistics for all bank-level variables used in our analysis. This data is for 38 banks for the period March 31st 2008 to March
     31st 2009. Ex-ante bank vulnerability, measured by MES is the marginal expected shortfall of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile
     during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. High MES refers to the top 7 banks within the state-owned or private sector banks. Remaining
     are classified as Low MES banks. For the definitions of volatility, expected shortfall, beta, global beta, modified MES, W - MES, log asset, leverage and
     liquidity refer to Table A5 and Table A6 in the appendix. Pre-crisis stock returns (stock returns) is based on the S&P CNX NIFTY for the pre-crisis period
     from 1st January, 2007 (1st January, 2008) to 31st December, 2007 (24th February, 2009). Deposit and credit growth is for the period March 31st 2008 to March
     31st 2009. Only districts where private sector bank deposit share is greater than one percent are retained. Bank-exposure is calculated for every bank in
     our sample. It is the weighted average of the district-level share of deposits of state-owned banks, where the weight of each branch of that bank is the
     total deposits of that branch in a district, divided by the sum of deposits of all branches of the bank. It is 1 for banks which have above median exposure.
     Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.
                                                        Table 2: Summary Statistics: Branch level data
      Variables                                               All                      Public Sector Banks                         Private Sector Banks
                                                                                  Low MES                 High MES            Low MES                 High MES
                                                     Mean             SD     Mean        SD          Mean         SD     Mean         SD         Mean         SD
      Branch-Exposure                                0.40             0.50     0.40      0.50          0.40       0.50     0.20       0.40         0.10       0.40
                                                                                                     Deposit Variables
      Deposit growth (in %)                          29.00           23.70    29.30     23.50         26.40      22.50    35.20      26.60        29.50      25.50
      I) Demand deposit growth                       53.80          133.40    61.40    140.30         42.60     123.70    35.60     100.10        63.00     152.10
      II) Savings deposit growth                     21.90           26.20    22.80     25.40         20.20      26.20    22.50      28.50        20.40      30.90
      III) Term deposit growth                       36.90           39.00    36.10     38.10         34.10      36.80    51.90      47.30        37.00      41.70
       a)Deposit Growth: Rate < 9%                   -24.60          47.80   -25.30     47.90        -25.90      44.50   -17.00     50.70        -27.50      59.30
         i) Retail Deposit Growth: Rate < 9%         -19.90          62.70   -19.70     65.70        -23.50      51.90   -13.90      58.40       -26.70      64.60
         ii) Wholesale Deposit Growth: Rate < 9%     23.50          255.50   29.30     275.70         3.90      213.20    16.90     185.50        34.30     223.20
       b)Deposit Growth: Rate  9%                    50.40          131.40    52.60    139.30        37.10      118.80    61.70     93.20         20.70     102.70
        i) Retail Deposit Growth: Rate  9%           66.00          171.60    71.40    187.10        43.80      134.30    73.10     113.80        18.10      98.90
        ii) Wholesale Deposit Growth: Rate  9%       134.00         515.70   166.00    576.50        53.80      405.40    89.40     295.50       128.30     425.70
                                                                                                    Lending Variables
      Credit growth (in %)                           18.30           32.70    18.40     29.80         16.10      31.70    24.30      44.50        21.00      46.60
      I) Services credit growth                      12.70           36.90    14.60     34.80         6.700      36.10    21.10      48.90        8.900      34.50
      II) Agriculture credit growth                  44.40          191.00    35.70    172.50         56.40     208.00    52.20     213.90        74.70     263.10
37




      III) Industry credit growth                    93.80          379.90    74.90    336.10       117.00      422.30   154.20     485.30        71.00     383.00
      Lending Rate                                   11.90            1.10    11.60      0.90         11.70       0.90    13.40       1.00        14.20       1.10
      I) Lending Rate: Services                      11.70            1.60    11.50      1.50         11.50       1.40    12.70       1.70        14.00       1.90
      II) Lending Rate: Agriculture                  12.60            1.50    12.30      1.40         12.30       1.50    14.10       1.50        14.60       1.50
      III) Lending Rate: Industry                    11.60            1.60    11.20      1.30         11.50       1.40    13.20       1.60        14.30       1.80
                                                                                         Non-performing Assets (NPA) Variables
      NPA growth (in %)                              6.20             1.70     6.00      1.70          6.20       1.60     7.00       1.90         7.00       2.10
      I) Sub-standard assets                         6.10             1.60     6.00      1.50          6.00       1.50     6.90       1.80         6.80       1.80
      II) Doubtful assets                            5.70             1.60     5.70      1.50          5.70       1.60     6.20       1.60         6.40       1.70
      III) Loss assets                               5.20             1.60     5.20      1.60          5.00       1.60     5.30       1.70         5.60       2.10
      Obs. (Branches)                                        33,972                           29,861                                       4,111

     Summary statistics at the branch level are shown above. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of a stock given that the
     market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value
     1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Deposits are classified into demand, savings
     and term. Term deposits are further broken into deposits with rates less than 9 percent and those with rates greater than or equal to 9 percent. Credit and
     lending rates are classified into credit to the services, agriculture, and lending sector. A loan is an NPA if a borrower misses payments for 90 days (or 180
     days in some cases). Sub-standard assets are assets that have remained NPAs for less than 18 months. Doubtful assets are assets that have remained NPAs
     for a period exceeding 18 months. Loss assets are uncollectible NPAs. All growth rates are from March 31st 2008 to March 31st 2009. Branch-level data
     is from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as part of the Basic Statistical Returns data. Data on NPA and deposit rates is also collected by the RBI but only
     available for a subset of the branches. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.
                                      Table 3: Bank-level regressions



                          (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                          Stock market returns                Ln( Deposits)                  Ln( Lending)
 Pvt                    -0.102        0.496        -7.860        18.43        24.30       -0.109     0.421
                        (0.0409)       (0.153)      (3.666)      (9.409)      (9.205)    (0.0749)    (0.248)

 MES                                 0.0705                      0.330                                0.0167
                                      (0.0143)                   (0.126)                              (0.00327)

 MES*Pvt                             -0.139                      -6.408                                -0.128
                                      (0.0333)                    (2.581)                              (0.0605)

 Crisis Returns                                                               5.260
                                                                               (1.649)

 Crisis Returns*Pvt                                                           46.58
                                                                               (16.30)
 No. of Obs.              38            38           38            38             38         38           38
 R squared               0.145         0.580        0.477         0.725         0.693      0.254        0.513
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



This table estimates the effect of government guarantees on bank-level outcomes. The dependent variable in
columns 1­2 is the bank's stock market returns from January 2008 to February 2009. The dependent variable in
columns 3­5 is the log of the change in deposits (deposit flow) and the dependent variable in columns 6­7 is log
of the change in lending for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009. Private is 1 if the bank is a private
sector bank and 0 otherwise. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of a stock
given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December,
2007. All observations are weighted by deposits in 2007. Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis.
Bank data is publicly available and from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National
Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                        38
                                          Table 4: Correlates of exposure

                                             Panel A: Characteristics of districts
                                 (1)                (2)               (3)             (4)                     (5)              (6)
                                                                  Fraction
                                                                                   Fraction          Fraction
                                                                     rural                                               Unemp.
                             Ln (Wages)             Age                             female            high-
                                                                 population                                             rate (in %)
                                                                                     (in %)        school (in %)
                                                                    (in %)
 High Branch-Exposure          -0.127             -2.076          0.0942            -0.00412            -0.0172           0.00914
                               (0.0591)            (0.367)         (0.0215)        (0.00291)             (0.00409)       (0.00937)
 No. of Obs.                      285                285              285              285                  285             285
 R squared                      0.0160              0.102           0.0649          0.00709               0.0597          0.00338


                                             Panel B: Characteristics of branches
                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                   (5)
                             Skilled                                      NPA
                             workers                                      ratio                 Credit
                                                    Urban                                       Deposit               Large
                              (in %)                                     (in %)

 Branch-Exposure             -1.154                -0.189               0.489                   -27.01               -0.162
                              (0.192)              (0.00506)             (0.105)                 (13.44)             (0.00511)
 No. of Obs.                   39876                 39876                39863                   39876                39876
 R squared                   0.000878                0.0335             0.000550               0.0000594              0.0245



                     Panel C: Heterogeneity across state-owned and private sector bank branches
                                           (1)                 (2)              (3)                     (4)              (5)
                                        Skilled                                NPA
                                        workers                                ratio               Credit
                                                             Urban                                 Deposit             Large
                                         (in %)                               (in %)

 Private * Branch-Exposure               0.255               0.145             -0.368              30.38               -0.0171
                                        (1.319)              (0.0237)         (0.733)             (19.94)             (0.0250)
 No. of Obs.                             39876                39876            39863               39876                39876
 R squared                               0.625                 0.385           0.119              0.00427               0.163
 Bank-FE                                   Y                     Y                Y                  Y                    Y
 District-FE                               Y                     Y                Y                  Y                    Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



This table examines district and branch level characteristics. Panel A examines district-level characteristics. The
dependent variables in panel A are district-level weekly wages (column 1), median age (column 2), percentage
of rural population (column 3), percentage of female population (column 4), percentage of population with
high school (column 5), and unemployment rate (column 6). Panel B examines branch-level characteristics.
The dependent variables are percentage of skilled workers (column 1), whether a branch caters to an urban
population (classified as urban or metropolitan in the data) (column 2), ratio of non-performing assets (NPA) to
total deposits plus credit (column 3), credit to deposit ratio column (4), and whether a branch is large, defined
as branches with total loans above the median in 2007 (column 5). Panel C examines the heterogeneity across
branches of private and state-owned banks. Branch-exposure takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-
owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Private is 1 if the bank is a private
sector bank and 0 if it is a state owned bank. All columns include bank and district fixed effects and are weighted
using deposits in 2007. Only districts where deposit share of private sector banks is greater than 1 percent are
retained. All observations are weighted by deposits in 2007. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
All variables have been winsorized at the 2 percent level. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India.
District-level data is from the 61 st NSS Employment and Unemployment Survey for 2004­05.


                                                                 39
                                                                          Table 5: Deposit Growth


                                                 (1)             (2)     (3)            (4)      (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)
                                                                                              Within     Within                                        Cont.
                                                       Private                 Public                               Unwtd.       Urban      Rural                 Levels
                                                                                              State      district                                     measure

      Branch-Exposure                          -1.119                  -0.846                  -1.075
                                               (0.913)                 (0.670)                 (0.654)

      Branch-Exposure * MES                               -0.384                  0.102       0.114      0.124      0.0701      0.137      0.0730                0.0642
                                                           (0.143)                (0.0327)    (0.0366)   (0.0325)    (0.0140)   (0.0436)   (0.0353)               (0.0237)

      Private * Branch-Exposure * MES                                                         -0.525     -0.528      -0.135     -0.450     -0.490                -0.116
                                                                                               (0.142)    (0.132)   (0.0797)     (0.143)    (0.181)              (0.0581)

      Branch-Exposure (cont.) * MES                                                                                                                   0.440
                                                                                                                                                      (0.0921)

      Private * Branch-Exposure (cont.)* MES                                                                                                          -0.793
                                                                                                                                                       (0.382)
      No. of Obs.                              4111         4111       29861        29861      33972      33972      33972       15487      18485       33972     33972
40




      R squared                                0.533        0.609      0.416        0.481      0.437      0.497      0.450       0.381      0.366       0.497     0.583
      Bank-FE                                    Y            Y          Y            Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y
      State-FE                                   Y            Y          Y            Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y
      District-FE                                N            Y          N            Y          N          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y
      Controls                                   Y            Y          Y            Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y
      Standard errors in parentheses
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



     This table examines deposit growth against an ex-ante measure of bank vulnerability using branch-level data. Columns 1­2 restrict to private sector banks.
     Columns 3­4 restrict to state-owned banks. Columns 5, 6, 7, 10, and 11 include the full sample. Column 8 restricts to branches that cater to the urban
     and metropolitan population and column 9 restricts to branches that cater to the rural and semi-urban population. Private is 1 if the bank is a private
     sector bank and 0 otherwise. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of a stock given that the market return is below its
     5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks
     in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Column 10 uses the continuous measure of branch-exposure, namely the deposit share of
     state-owned banks in a district. The dependent variable is the log of the change in deposits (deposit flow) for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March,
     2009 in columns 1­10 and the log of the level of deposits as of 31st March, 2009 in column 11. All columns include bank and state fixed effects. All columns
     except columns 1, 3, and 5 also include district fixed effects. All specifications include an indicator for the population a branch caters to (rural, semi-urban,
     urban or metropolitan), and their interaction with MES. All specifications also include bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage, and with
     bank assets. All columns except column 7 are weighted by deposits in 2007. Only districts where deposit share of private sector banks is greater than 1
     percent are retained. Standard errors are clustered at the district level. Variables have been winsorized at the 2 percent level. Branch-level data is from the
     Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.
                                                                 Table 6: Deposit Rates and MES


                                                   (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                                                               Deposit rates < 9%                                         Deposit rates  9%
                                                   All              Retail              Other                 All                Retail             Other

      Branch-Exposure * MES                      -0.0352            -0.0200             0.144              0.136               0.150               -0.00701
                                                 (0.115)           (0.0950)            (0.0960)            (0.0324)            (0.0361)            (0.0479)

      Private * Branch-Exposure * MES             0.313              0.198             -0.902              -0.444              -0.456               -0.274
                                                 (0.253)            (0.172)             (0.198)             (0.116)             (0.123)             (0.167)
      No. of Obs.                                 11711              11711               11711               11711               11711               11711
      R squared                                   0.470              0.531               0.451               0.474               0.436               0.511
      Bank-FE                                       Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
      State-FE                                      Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
41




      District-FE                                   Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
      Controls                                      Y                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
      Standard errors in parentheses
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


     This table examines deposit growth across deposit rate buckets for retail and wholesale deposits. Columns 1­3 restricts to deposits with deposit rates lower
     than 9 percent. Columns 4­6, restricts to deposits with deposit rates greater than 9 percent. Columns 2 and 5 restrict to retail deposits, columns 3 and 6
     restrict to wholesale deposits. The dependent variable is the log of the change in deposits (deposit flow) for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009.
     Private is 1 if the bank is a private sector bank and 0 if it is a state owned bank. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of
     a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at the district
     level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. All columns include
     bank, state and district fixed effects. All specifications control for the kind of population a branch serves (rural, semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), their
     interaction with MES, and bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage and with bank assets. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
     All observations are weighted using deposits in 2007. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock
     Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.
Table 7: Regression discontinuity: Under-banked status and state-owned banks' deposit
share

                                           Panel A: Covariate balance
                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                (7)
                                          Fraction                                                     Deposit share of
                                                       Fraction      Fraction
                                            rural                                       Unemp.          public sector
               Ln (Wages)      Age                      female        high-
                                         population                                    rate (in %)        branches
                                                         (in %)    school (in %)
                                           (in %)                                                        in 2001­03
 Banked          0.0915        0.0481      -5.335      0.00834           0.0242          0.0531             0.0844
                 (0.174)      (0.0509)     (8.009)     (0.0106)         (0.0159)        (0.0327)           (0.0505)
 State-FE           Y             Y           Y            Y                Y               Y                  Y
 No. of Obs.       247           247         247          247              247             247                247
 R squared        0.580        0.705        0.551        0.264            0.466           0.214              0.579




                              Panel B: Deposit share of state-owned banks in 2006­08

                           (1)                    (2)                      (3)                           (4)
                      Number of               Number of               Fraction of                Deposit share of
                     private sector          state-owned             state-owned                   state-owned
                     bank branches          bank branches           bank branches                 bank branches
 Banked                 -25.52                   17.43                   0.110                       0.0922
                         (11.34)                (14.05)                 (0.0620)                      (0.0446)
 State-FE                   Y                      Y                        Y                             Y
 No. of Obs.               255                    255                     255                           255
 R squared                0.622                  0.926                   0.455                         0.546


This table examines the impact of the 2005 banking reform on public and private sector bank branches and
deposits using district-level data. Panel A examines covariate balance with a standard RD specification. The
dependent variables in panel A are district-level weekly wages (column 1), median age (column 2), percentage
of rural population (column 3), percentage of female population (column 4), percentage of population with high
school (column 5), unemployment rate (column 6) and deposit share of state-owned banks in 2001­03 (column
5). Panel B presents the RD estimates with the dependent variable number of private sector branches in a district
(column 1), number of state-owned branches in a district (column 2), fraction of state-owned bank branches in a
district (column 3), and deposit share of state-owned banks in a district in 2006­08. The running variable is the
the national average population per branch subtracted from the district level average population per branch.
Banked takes a value 1 if the running variable is negative. All regressions use second degree polynomials
and triangular kernel with a bandwidth of 4.5 around the cut-off. All regressions include state fixed effects
and are weighted by population in 2001. Controls included are population and population squared. Standard
errors are clustered at the district level. Data for covariates is from the 61st round of the NSS Employment and
Unemployment Survey conducted in 2004­05. Bank data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Population data to
construct the running variable is from Census 2001.




                                                       42
Table 8: Regression discontinuity: Under-banked status and impact on deposit growth dur-
ing the crisis

                                              Panel A: Deposit growth

                                      (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                   Private               Public                        All
 Banked * MES                      -0.345               0.0446             0.0491              0.0464
                                    (0.152)             (0.0229)           (0.0238)            (0.0229)

 Banked * MES * Private                                                    -0.287              -0.362
                                                                           (0.154)              (0.156)
 State-FE                             Y                    Y                  Y                    Y
 District-FE                          Y                    Y                  N                    Y
 Bank-FE                              Y                    Y                  Y                    Y
 No. of Obs.                        2074                 18383              20457                20457
 Adj. R2                            0.565                0.483              0.455                0.488




                                               Panel B: Placebo Years
                                      (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                   2004­05              2005­06            2006­07             2007­08
 Banked * MES                       0.0104              -0.0227             0.0264             -0.00456
                                   (0.0329)             (0.0274)           (0.0345)            (0.0327)

 Banked * MES * Private              -0.166              0.0765              0.272              0.0470
                                    (0.184)              (0.178)            (0.192)            (0.0807)
 District-FE                           Y                    Y                  Y                   Y
 Bank-FE                                Y                   Y                  Y                   Y
 No. of Obs.                         16834                18311              19096              18871
 Adj. R2                             0.399                0.410              0.372               0.355


This table presents the regression discontinuity (RD) estimates for deposit growth using branch-level data. The
dependent variable in both panels is log of the change in deposits (deposit flow) from the previous fiscal year to
the current fiscal year (as of March 31st ). Panel A shows the RD estimates for the year 2008­09. Panel B shows
the RD estimates for the year 2004­05 (column 1), 2005­06 (column 2), 2006­07 (column 3), and 2007­08 (column
4). Column 1 in panel A restricts to private sector banks and column 2 in panel A restricts to state-owned banks.
Remaining columns include the full sample. The running variable for the RD design is the the national average
population per branch subtracted from the district level average population per branch. Banked takes a value
1 if the running variable is negative. Private is 1 if the bank is a private sector bank and 0 otherwise. MES
(marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of a stock given that the market return
is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at
the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district is greater than
the median, as measured in 2007. All regressions use second degree polynomials and triangular kernel with
a bandwidth of 4.5 around the cut-off. All regressions include bank and state fixed effect and are weighted
by population in 2001. All columns (except column 3 in panel A) also include district fixed effect. Controls
included are population and population squared. Standard errors are clustered at the district level. Branch data
is from the Reserve Bank of India. Population data to construct the running variable is from Census 2001. Stock
market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                        43
                                                                  Table 9: Lending during the Crisis


                                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                                                      All Lending
                                                                                              Branch-                 Services     Agri.      Industry    Deposit
                                              Private     Public        Wtd.     Un-Wtd.                   Cont.
                                                                                             exposure                 Lending     Lending     Lending     growth

      Bank-Exposure * MES                     -15.89      0.934       0.815      0.369                                  0.410      -0.227     1.139       0.0628
                                               (3.839)     (0.161)     (0.180)   (0.0905)                              (0.340)     (0.258)     (0.116)    (0.0377)

      Private * Bank-Exposure * MES                                   -8.756     -7.380                               -9.767      -5.849      -4.510      -2.086
                                                                       (1.658)    (0.943)                              (1.605)     (1.103)     (1.497)     (0.404)

      Branch-Exposure * MES                                                                    0.0715
                                                                                              (0.0736)

      Private * Branch-Exposure * MES                                                          0.103
                                                                                              (0.288)

      Bank-Exposure (cont.)* MES                                                                          6.123
                                                                                                           (2.342)
44




      Private * Bank-Exposure (cont.) * MES                                                              -34.76
                                                                                                          (7.598)
      No. of Obs.                              4111       29861        33972      36176       36176        33972       33972       33972       33972       33972
      R squared                                0.275      0.0639       0.0754     0.0693      0.0966      0.0768       0.0867      0.123       0.0831      0.444
      District-FE                                Y           Y            Y          Y           Y           Y            Y          Y            Y          Y
      Controls                                   Y           Y            Y          Y           Y           Y            Y          Y            Y          Y



     This table examines lending growth against an ex-ante measure of bank vulnerability using branch-level data. Column 1 restricts to private sector banks.
     Column 2 restricts to public sector lending. Remaining columns include both private and public sector banks. Columns 7­9 examines lending to the
     following sectors: services (column 7), agriculture (column 8), and industry (column 9). The dependent variable in columns 1­9 is the log of the change in
     lending for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009 and the dependent variable in column 10 is the log of the change in deposits for the same period.
     Private is 1 if the bank is a private sector bank and 0 if it is a state owned bank. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns
     of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at the
     district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Bank-exposure
     (continuous) is the bank-level weighted average of the continuous measure of branch-exposure across a bank's branches using deposit shares in 2007 as
     weights. Bank-exposure takes a value 1 if the exposure is greater than the median. All columns include district fixed effects.All specifications control for the
     kind of population a branch serves (rural, semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), their interaction with MES, and bank-exposure separately interacted with
     bank leverage and with bank assets. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and all observations are weighted by deposits in 2007. Branch-level
     data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.
                     Table 10: Non-performing Assets and Restructured Loans

                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                              Sub-
                                           NPA             standard            Doubtful             Loss
                                                             assets
 Bank-Exposure * MES                       0.113           0.296                0.0612            -0.460
                                          (0.120)           (0.0820)           (0.0791)            (0.146)

 Private * Bank-Exposure * MES             -1.453             -3.952             1.755             1.884
                                          (1.248)              (1.605)          (1.798)            (0.947)
 No. of Obs.                              130651               130651           130651             130651
 R squared                                0.0466               0.0262           0.0310             0.0840
 District-FE                                  Y                   Y                Y                  Y
 Controls                                     Y                   Y                Y                  Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


This table examines non-performing assets (NPA) growth against ex-ante bank vulnerability using branch-level
data. A loans is an NPA if a borrower misses payments for 90 days (or 180 days in some cases). Sub-standard
assets are assets that have remained NPAs for less than 18 months. Doubtful assets are assets that have remained
NPAs for a period exceeding 18 months. Loss assets are uncollectible NPAs. The dependent variable is the log
of the change in NPA (column 1), sub-standard assets (column 2), doubtful assets (column 3), and loss assets
(column 4) respectively for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2013. Private is 1 if the bank is a private
sector bank and 0 if it is a state owned bank. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average
returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007
to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of
state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Bank-exposure (continuous) is
the bank-level weighted average of the continuous measure of branch-exposure across a bank's branches using
deposit shares in 2007 as weights. Bank-exposure takes a value 1 if the exposure is greater than the median. All
columns include district fixed effects. All specifications control for the kind of population a branch serves (rural,
semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), their interaction with MES, and bank-exposure separately interacted with
bank leverage and with bank assets. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and all observations are
weighted by deposits in 2007. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from
the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                         45
            Table 11: District-level effects on deposits, lending and economic activity

                           (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)
                             Ln( Deposits)                  Ln( Lending)                  Ln(Night lights)
                                         2008­                         2008­                          2008­
                         2008­09                       2008­09                        2008­09
                                         2013                           2013                           2013
 Branch-exposure        -0.927         -0.896
                         (0.125)        (0.134)

 District-exposure                                     -7.139         -4.528         -1.490          -1.449
                                                        (2.426)        (1.445)        (0.497)         (0.465)
 No. of Obs.               279           1368             279           1368            279            1368
 R squared                0.495          0.481           0.487          0.210          0.568           0.556
 State-FE                   Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
 Controls                   Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


This table examines the district-level effect on deposits, lending and economic activity. In columns 1­2, the
dependent variable is log of the change in deposits (deposit flow) from the previous fiscal year to the current
fiscal year (as of March 31st ). In columns 3­4, the dependent variable is log of the change in lending from
the previous fiscal year to the current fiscal year (as of March 31st ). In columns 5­6, the dependent variable is
log of night lights intensity. Columns 1, 3, and 5 are for the annual period 2008­09. Columns 2, 4, and 6 are
for the period 2008­13. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of
state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Bank-exposure (continuous) is
the bank-level weighted average of the continuous measure of branch-exposure across a bank's branches using
deposit shares in 2007 as weights. District-exposure is the district-level weighted average of bank-exposure
(continuous) across the branches in a district using deposit share in 2007 as the weights. All columns include
state and year fixed effects. Controls included are unemployment rate and share rural population. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level and all observations are weighted by deposits in 2007. Branch-level data is
from the Reserve Bank of India. Night lights data is provided by the World Bank. Data for controls is from the
64th round of the NSS Employment and Unemployment Survey conducted in 2007-08.




                                                        46
                     (A) Stock Index                            (B) Stock Index of High MES vs. Low MES




            (C) 17th March 2008 ­ Bear Stearns                       (D) 15th September 2008 ­ Lehman




              Figure 1: Stock Index Performance of Private and State-Owned banks

Panel A shows the indexed value weighted returns for all private and state-owned banks used in our analysis.
It is weighted by their market capitalization for the period starting January 2008 to February 2009. The solid line
is the indexed value weighted returns for private sector banks, and the dashed line is the same for state-owned
banks. Returns are indexed to 31st December, 2007. In Panel B, the solid line depicts the difference between high
and low MES private sector banks, and the dashed line represents the same for state-owned banks. In all panels,
the solid vertical line depicts the date of the Bear Stearns collapse (17th March 2008) and the solid dashed line
depicts the date of the Lehman bankruptcy (15th September 2008). MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the
negative of the average returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the
period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. High MES refers to the top 7 banks within state-owned and
private sector banks. Remaining banks are classified as low MES banks. Panels C and D show the Cumulative
Average Returns (CAR) of private and state-owned banks against ex-ante bank vulnerability. The market model
is used to estimate the expected return wherein for each bank, its stock returns are regressed on market returns
separately over the estimation window starting 250 days prior to the event window and ending 10 days before
the event date. CAR is computed as the cumulated abnormal returns across time over the event window. The
event window is five days before and ten days after the event date. Market return is based on the S&P CNX
NIFTY. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                        47
                                                             (A) Panel A: Stock Returns vs. MES

                                 Private Sector Banks                                                 Public Sector Banks




                                                                                    -.4
                                                     DBL                                                                                   BOI
                  -.5


                                             HDFC                                                                                        UNION

                                            KARUR                                                                                    PNB

                                                                                                                                       CANARA
                                                                                                                             INDIAN
                                                                                                                                  SBI
                  -.6




                                       FED                b=-6.61 s.e=2.63                                                  BOB    SYNDICATE
                                          ING V                                                                           ANDHRA




                                                                                    -.6
                                                  AXIS                                      b=6.12 s.e=1.52
 Crisis returns




                                                                                                                      CORP              OBC
                                      LVB                                                                                           UCO
                                                                                                                                ALLHBD DENA

                                                                                                SBT
                  -.7




                                                                                                                SBM
                                                    CUN
                                J&K                                                                                                      VIJAYA
                                            KRNTKA               ICICI                                         BOMAHRSHTRA
                                                                                                  CBI                  IOB
                                            SOUTHIND                         IDB
                                                           BOR




                                                                                    -.8
                  -.8




                                                           YBL
                                                                 KMB




                                                                   DCB                            SBJ
                  -.9




                                                                                    -1
                        .02           .03           .04           .05        .06          .01           .02   .03         .04      .05      .06
                                                    MES                                                             MES

                                                                               MES

                                                            (B) Panel B: Deposit Growth vs. MES

                                 Private Sector Banks                                                 Public Sector Banks
                                                                                    .35
                  .4




                                             HDFC
                                                   DBL                                                                             SBI
                                                  AXIS
                                      LVB
                                                    CUN                                     b=1.44 s.e=0.72
                                                                                    .3




                                          FED                                                                                               UNION
                                                                                                                      CORP
                  .2




                                        ING V              YBL
                                KARUR
                                                                             IDB
                                    KRNTKA                SOUTHIND
                                J&K
 Deposit Growth




                                                           BOR
                                                                                    .25




                                                                                                                                  PNBOBC
                                                                                                                                BOB      BOIDENA
                                                                                                               BOMAHRSHTRA          UCO
                  0




                                                                 KMB
                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                    SYNDICATE
                                                                 ICICI                                                                 CANARA
                                                                                                                SBM    ANDHRA
                                                                                                  CBI
                                                                                                SBT               INDIAN  IOB
                                                                                                                       ALLHBD
                  -.2




                              b=-9.07 s.e=3.90
                                                                                    .15




                                                                   DCB                            SBJ
                                                                                                                                         VIJAYA
                  -.4




                                                                                    .1




                        .02           .03           .04           .05        .06          .01           .02   .03         .04      .05      .06
                                                    MES                                                             MES

                                                                               MES


                                Figure 2: Stock Performance and Deposit Growth Versus MES
Panel A plots stock market returns during the crisis period against MES for private and state-owned banks.
Panel B plots deposit growth against MES for private and state-owned banks. Stock return is calculated from
January 2008 to February 2009, that is the period of the crisis. Deposit growth is from March 2008 to March
2009. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of a stock given that the market
return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Stock market data
is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange. Deposit data is from the Reserve Bank
of India.



                                                                               48
               (A) District-wise Branch-Exposure: Full                   (B) District-wise Branch-Exposure        (C) District-wise Branch-Exposure (dichotomous)




          (.962465,.992048]                                    (.9271972,.9779137]
          (.9198631,.962465]                                   (.8850294,.9271972]
                                                                                                                   Low Branch-Exposure
          (.8438342,.9198631]                                  (.8117019,.8850294]
          [0,.8438342]                                         [.0861936,.8117019]                                 High Branch-Exposure
          No data                                              No data                                             no values
49




                                           Figure 3: Geographic variation of deposit share of state-owned Banks
     These figures show the geographic variation of the district-level average share of deposits of state-owned banks in 2007, or the continuous value of the
     Branch-Exposure variable. Panel A shows the variation using all districts for which data is available. Panel B shows the variation for the districts specifically
     used in our analysis (districts with private sector bank deposit shares greater than 1 percent). Districts with darker shades are those with higher values
     of Branch-Exposure. Panel C shows the variation using the dichotomous exposure variable for these specific districts. The dichotomous Branch-Exposure
     variable is coded at the district level, and is 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks within a district is above the median in 2007. Districts where
     Branch-Exposure takes a value of 1 are shown in red, and are high exposure districts. All branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India.
                                                (A) Private Sector Banks                                                                                                     (B) State-Owned Banks




                                                                                                                              -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06
           .2       .1
 Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                                                      Coefficient Estimate
  -.2 -.1  -.3 0
                         2005

                                2006

                                                          2007

                                                                      2008

                                                                             2009

                                                                                     2010

                                                                                             2011

                                                                                                    2012

                                                                                                                  2013




                                                                                                                                                             2005

                                                                                                                                                                      2006

                                                                                                                                                                              2007

                                                                                                                                                                                            2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                           2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013
                                                                             Year                                                                                                                  Year


                                                                                                            (C) All banks
                                              .4          .2
                                     Coefficient Estimate
                                 -.6  -.4     -.2
                                              -.8    0
                                                               2005



                                                                              2006



                                                                                            2007



                                                                                                           2008



                                                                                                                              2009



                                                                                                                                                                    2010



                                                                                                                                                                                     2011



                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013




                                                                                                                          Year




                                                                               Figure 4: Event study plots and pre-trends

This figure plots the event study plots for the impact on deposit flows. The dependent variable in all panels
is log of change in deposits (deposit flow) from March 31st of the previous year to March 31st of the current
year. Panels A and B plot the coefficient  from equation (3). Panel C plots the coefficient  from equation (2).
The red dashed vertical line at 2008 represents the year of the financial crisis. Coefficients are normalized with
respect to 2007. Panel A is restricts to private sector banks. Panel B restricts to state-owned. Panel C is the full
sample. The dashed grey lines represent the 5 percent confidence interval in all graphs. Branch-level data is
from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock
Exchange.




                                                                                                                         50
                                                                 (A) Weekly Wages                                                                                                   (B) Median Age
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                     Average age of household head in 2004-05
 Log (weekly wages in 2004-05)




                                                                                                                                                     1
                          .2




                                                                                                                                         0
               0




                                                                                                                              -1
   -.2




                                                                                                                    -2
                       -.4




                                                 -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5                                                 -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
                                                                   District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                       District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                               Centered at Cutoff                                                                                               Centered at Cutoff



                                                           (C) Rural Population (in %)                                                                                       (D) Fraction female (in %)




                                                                                                                                         .52
                       20     10
  % Rural population in 2004-05




                                                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                                                       % Female in 2004-05
                     0




                                                                                                                              .48
          -10




                                                                                                                    .46
 -20                   -30




                                                                                                                                         .44




                                                 -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5                                                 -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
                                                                   District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                       District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                               Centered at Cutoff                                                                                               Centered at Cutoff



                                  (E) Fraction with high school education (in %)                                                                                              (F) Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                                                         .15
                                            .1
    % with high-school eductaion in 2004-05




                                                                                                                    Unemployment rate in 2004-05
                                                                                                                                             .1
                                  .08




                                                                                                                                 .05
                       .06




                                                                                                                        0
            .04




                                                                                                                                         -.05
 .02




                                                 -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5                                                 -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
                                                                   District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                       District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                               Centered at Cutoff                                                                                               Centered at Cutoff




                                                                            Figure 5: Regression discontinuity: Covariate balance
The figure above shows the regression discontinuity (RD) plots for the covariates weekly wages (panel A), me-
dian age (panel B), percentage rural population (panel C), percentage female population (panel D), percentage
of population with high school education (panel E), and unemployment rate (panel F) at the district level. The
running variable is the national average population per branch subtracted from the district average population
per branch and is centered at zero and scaled by thousand. Points to the right (left) of 0 are under-banked
(banked) districts. Each point represents the average value of the outcome in 0.2 percentage point run variable
bins. The solid line plots predicted values, with separate quadratic trends with triangular kernels estimated on
either of 0. Bandwidth of (-4.5,+4.5) is used. State fixed effects have been partialed out. The dashed lines show
95 percent confidence intervals. Covariates are from the 61st NSS Employment and Unemployment Survey for
2004­05. Branch-level and population data to construct the running variable are from the Reserve Bank of India
and the 2001 Census respectively.                        51
                                                  (A) Private sector bank branches in 2006­08                                                                                   (B) State-owned bank branches in 2006­08




                                                                                                                                                   150
                          40
         Number of private sector bank branches




                                                                                                                          Number of state-owned bank branches
                                                                                                                                                      100
                              0         20




                                                                                                                                            50
                 -20




                                                                                                                                 0
       -40




                                                                                                                                                   -50
                                                  -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5                                                              -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
                                                                    District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                                    District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                                Centered at Cutoff                                                                                                            Centered at Cutoff




       (C) Deposit share of state-owned banks in 2006­08                                                                  (D) Deposit share of state-owned banks in 2001­03
                          .1




                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                            Share of public sector banks (Exposure) in 2004
       Share of public sector banks (Exposure)
                                        .05




                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                    -.05




                                                                                                                                      -.1
          -.1             -.15




                                                                                                                          -.2




                                                  -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5                                                              -4.5 -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
                                                                    District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                                    District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                                Centered at Cutoff                                                                                                            Centered at Cutoff




                                                     Figure 6: Regression discontinuity: Share of state-owned bank branches

The figure plots the regression discontinuity plots number of private sector bank branches in 2006­08 (panel
A), number of state-owned bank branches in 2006­08 (panel B), deposit share of state-owned banks in 2006­
08 (panel C), and deposit share of state-owned banks in 2001­03 (panel D) at the district-level. The running
variable on the horizontal axis is the national average population per branch subtracted from the district average
population per branch. It is centered at zero and scaled to thousands of persons per district. Points to the right
(left) of 0 are under-banked (banked) districts. Each point represents the average value of the outcome in 0.2
percentage point run variable bins. The solid line plots predicted values, with separate quadratic trends with
triangular kernels estimated on either of 0. Bandwidth of (-4.5,4.5) is used. State fixed effects have been partialed
out. The dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India.
Population data used to construct the running variable is from the 2001 Census.




                                                                                                                     52
                            Table A1: Banks and MES during 2007­2009

                    State-owned banks                                         Private sector banks
     Bank Name                                     MES             Bank Name                              MES
     Allahabad Bank                                0.04            Axis Bank                              0.04
     Andhra Bank                                   0.04            Bank of Rajasthan                      0.04
     Bank of Baroda                                0.04            City Union Bank                        0.04
     Bank of India                                 0.06            Development Credit Bank                0.05
     Bank of Maharashtra                           0.03            Dhanalakshmi Bank                      0.04
     Canara Bank                                   0.05            Federal Bank                           0.03
     Central Bank of India                         0.01            HDFC Bank                              0.03
     Corporation Bank                              0.04            ICICI Bank                             0.05
     Dena Bank                                     0.06            IndusInd Bank                          0.06
     Indian Bank                                   0.04            ING Vysya Bank                         0.03
     Indian Overseas Bank                          0.04            Jammu & Kashmir Bank                   0.02
     Oriental Bank of Commerce                     0.05            Karnataka Bank                         0.03
     Punjab National Bank                          0.05            Karur Vysya Bank                       0.03
     State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur              0.01            Kotak Mahindra Bank                    0.05
     State Bank of India                           0.05            Lakshmi Vilas Bank                     0.03
     State Bank of Mysore                          0.03            South Indian Bank                      0.04
     State Bank of Travancore                      0.01            Yes Bank                               0.04
     Syndicate Bank                                0.05
     UCO Bank                                      0.05
     Union Bank of India                           0.06
     Vijaya Bank                                   0.05




This table shows the bank vulnerability measure used for all 21 state-owned banks and 17 private
sector banks used in our analysis. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average
returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January,
2007 to 31st December, 2007. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay
Stock Exchange.




                                                    53
                                         Table A2: Deposit Growth


                                          (1)                (2)         (3)                 (4)        (5)
                                                                     Ln (Deposits)
                                                  Private                         Public                All
 Branch-Exposure                         0.591                         1.755
                                        (0.722)                         (0.524)

 Branch-Exposure * MES                                  -0.497                             0.0557     0.0575
                                                         (0.182)                           (0.0272)   (0.0305)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * MES                                                                      -0.296
                                                                                                       (0.146)
 No. of Obs.                             4981               4981       33131                33131       38112
 R squared                               0.453              0.505      0.0819               0.0978      0.224
 Bank-FE                                   Y                  Y           Y                    Y          Y
 State-FE                                  Y                  Y           Y                    Y          Y
 District-FE                               N                  Y          N                     Y          Y
 Controls                                  Y                  Y           Y                    Y          Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



This table examines deposit growth against an ex-ante measure of bank vulnerability. Columns 1­2 restrict to
private sector banks. Columns 3­4 restrict to state-owned banks. Column 5 includes the full sample. Private is
1 if the bank is a private sector bank and 0 otherwise. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the
average returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January,
2007 to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits
of state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. The dependent variable is
the change in the log of deposits for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009. All columns include bank
and state fixed effects. All columns except columns 1 and 3 also include district fixed effects. All specifications
include an indicator for the population a branch caters to (rural, semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), and their
interaction with MES. All specifications also include bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage,
and with bank assets. All columns are weighted by deposits in 2007. All variables have been winsorized at the
2 percent level. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National
Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                            54
                                                     Table A3: Heterogeneity by deposit type and maturity


                                               (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)                 (7)
                                                          Ln( deposits)                                Share of deposits
                                            Demand           Savings        Term           Demand           Savings          Term          Ln(Wtd. Maturity)
      Branch-Exposure * MES                 0.408              0.115       0.124           -0.000693       0.000874        -0.000181            0.0353
                                             (0.161)          (0.110)      (0.0600)        (0.00169)       (0.00473)       (0.00521)           (0.0303)

      Private * Branch-Exposure * MES       -1.891           -1.246        -0.574           0.0193          0.0187         -0.0380               -0.178
                                             (0.659)          (0.568)       (0.196)        (0.0148)        (0.0165)         (0.0157)            (0.0967)
      No. of Obs.                             31940            31940         31940          31940           31940            31940                31940
      R squared                               0.198            0.170         0.576           0.241           0.460            0.423              0.0803
      Bank-FE                                   Y                Y             Y               Y               Y                Y                   Y
      State-FE                                  Y                Y             Y               Y               Y                Y                   Y
      District-FE                               Y                Y             Y               Y               Y                Y                   Y
55




      Controls                                  Y                Y             Y               Y               Y                Y                   Y
      Standard errors in parentheses
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


     This table examines deposit growth by deposit type and maturity. The dependent variable in columns 1­3 is the change in the log of deposits for the
     period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009 for demand deposits (column 1), savings (column 2), and term deposits (column 3). The dependent variable
     in columns 4­6 is the share of demand deposits (column 4), savings (column 5), and term deposits (column 6). The dependent variable in column 7 is
     the deposit weighetd maturity of all deposits. Private is 1 if the bank is a private sector bank and 0 otherwise. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the
     negative of the average returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December,
     2007. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as
     measured in 2007. All columns include bank and state fixed effects. All columns except columns 1 and 3 also include district fixed effects. All specifications
     include an indicator for the population a branch caters to (rural, semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), and their interaction with MES. All specifications also
     include bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage, and with bank assets. All columns are weighted by deposits in 2007. All variables have
     been winsorized at the 2 percent level. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the
     Bombay Stock Exchange.
                          Table A4: Alternate measures of branch exposure


                                          (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)
                                                                  Distance-weighted exposure measure
                                        Pincode         =0.01            =0.05          =0.1            =0.2
 Branch-Exposure * MES                  0.133          0.0678          0.0783           0.0374         0.0368
                                        (0.0525)       (0.0366)         (0.0236)       (0.0247)        (0.0193)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * MES       -0.528          -0.497          -0.601         -0.624           -0.622
                                        (0.152)         (0.150)         (0.131)        (0.128)          (0.127)
 No. of Obs.                             15028           15028           15028          15028            15028
 R squared                               0.490           0.489           0.490          0.490            0.490
 Bank-FE                                   Y               Y               Y              Y                Y
 State-FE                                  Y               Y               Y              Y                Y
 District-FE                               Y               Y               Y              Y                Y
 Controls                                  Y               Y               Y              Y                Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



This table shows robustness to alternate measures of branch-exposure. The dependent variable is the log of the
change in deposits for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009. In column 1, branch-exposure takes a
value 1 if the deposit share of state-owned banks within a pincode is above the median in 2007. In columns
2­5, the branch-exposure of a branch is an exponentially weighted average of the deposit share of all pincodes
in a district that a branch belongs to. Pincodes farther away from the branch receive exponentially declining
weights of  ranging from 0.01 to 0.2 in columns 2­5. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the
average returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January,
2007 to 31st December, 2007. All columns include bank and district fixed effects. All specifications include an
indicator for the population a branch caters to (rural, semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), and their interaction
with MES. All specifications also include bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage, and with
bank assets. All columns are weighted by deposits in 2007. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India.
Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                        56
                                    Table A5: Alternate measures of risk

                                                 (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)           (5)

 Branch-Exposure * Volatility                   0.714
                                               (0.565)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Volatility        -0.313
                                               (1.082)

 Branch-Exposure * ES                                          2.787
                                                              (2.235)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * ES                               -16.07
                                                              (8.913)

 Branch-Exposure * Beta                                                  0.434
                                                                          (0.161)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Beta                                       -1.105
                                                                         (0.392)

 Branch-Exposure * Modified MES                                                         0.0368
                                                                                       (0.0251)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Modified MES                                              -0.240
                                                                                        (0.0859)

 Branch-Exposure * W-MES                                                                              0.0414
                                                                                                      (0.0243)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * W-MES                                                                   -0.325
                                                                                                      (0.112)
 No. of Obs.                                    33972         33972       33972         33972          33972
 R squared                                      0.495         0.497       0.497         0.497          0.497
 Bank-FE                                          Y             Y           Y             Y              Y
 District-FE                                      Y             Y           Y             Y              Y
 Controls                                         Y             Y           Y             Y              Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

This table shows the results of deposit flows against alternative measures of risk. The dependent variable is
log of the change in deposits for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009. Volatility of returns based
on the S&P CNX NIFTY index is for the period January 2007 to December 2007. Expected shortfall (ES) is the
expected return of the bank when the bank's return is below its 5th percentile, during the period 1st January
2007 to 31st December 2007. Beta is based on the S&P CNX NIFTY index. Branch-exposure is at the district
level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median,
as measured in 2007. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average returns of a stock given
that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007.
Modified MES is similar to MES except market return is calculated using all banks in the economy excluding
the bank for which MES is being calculated. W-MES is a weighted MES which uses exponentially declining
weights (=0.94) on past observations to estimate the average equity returns on the 5 percent worst days of the
market. Private is 1 if the bank is a private sector bank and 0 if it is not. All columns include bank and district
fixed effects. All specifications include an indicator for the population a branch caters to (rural, semi-urban,
urban or metropolitan), and their interaction with the respective risk measure. All specifications also include
bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage, and with bank assets. All columns are weighted by
deposits in 2007. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National
Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                         57
                                         Table A6: Alternate explanations

                                                       (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)

 Branch-Exposure * Beta                             0.550
                                                    (0.274)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Beta                    -0.140
                                                     (0.831)

 Branch-Exposure * Global Beta                       -0.137
                                                     (0.277)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Global Beta             -0.867
                                                     (0.662)

 Branch-Exposure * Lvg.                                        -0.00669
                                                               (0.00417)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Lvg.                              0.000889
                                                               (0.00688)

 Branch-Exposure * Log Assets                                               0.0879
                                                                            (0.0420)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Log Assets                                      0.0169
                                                                            (0.0600)

 Branch-Exposure * Pre-crisis returns                                                    0.394     0.0903
                                                                                        (0.938)    (1.139)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Pre-crisis returns                                         -0.0831     2.365
                                                                                        (1.345)    (1.889)

 Branch-Exposure*MES                                                                               0.0558                  0.0562
                                                                                                   (0.0289)                (0.0296)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * MES                                                                  -0.662                  -0.521
                                                                                                   (0.168)                 (0.126)

 Branch-Exposure * Liquidity                                                                                   -2.394        -1.519
                                                                                                               (1.442)      (1.681)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * Liquidity                                                                         12.15         6.710
                                                                                                                (4.010)     (4.240)
 No. of Obs.                                         33972       33972       33972      33972       33972        33972       33972
 R squared                                           0.497       0.495       0.497      0.496       0.497        0.497       0.498
 Bank-FE                                               Y           Y           Y          Y           Y            Y           Y
 District-FE                                           Y           Y           Y          Y           Y            Y           Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

This table explores alternate hypotheses. The dependent variable if log of the change in deposits for the period from 31st
March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of
state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the
negative of the average returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st
January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Beta and Global Beta is based on the S&P CNX NIFTY index and MSCI World Index
returns respectively. Private is one if the bank is private sector bank and 0 if it is not. Lvg is the ratio of the quasi-market
value of assets(book value of assets - book value of equity + market value of equity) to the market equity. Log Assets is
the logged value of total assets. Pre-Crisis stock return is based on the S&P CNX NIFTY for the pre-crisis period from 1st
January, 2007 to 31st December, 2007. Liquidity is the sum of cash in hand, balances with the RBI, money at call and short
notice, government securities and deposits to the total liabilities as on 31st March, 2008. All columns include bank and
district fixed effects. All specifications include an indicator for the population a branch caters to (rural, semi-urban, urban or
metropolitan), and their interaction with the respective bank-level measure in each column. All specifications also include
bank-exposure separately interacted with bank leverage, and with bank assets. All columns are weighted by deposits in
2007. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from the National Stock Exchange and the
Bombay Stock Exchange.                                            58
Table A7: Regression discontinuity: Under-banked status and state-owned banks' deposit
share


                       (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                      Calonico,
                    Imbens-
                                      Cattaneo,                                            Bandwidth=3.5,
                 Kalyanaraman                         Bandwidth=4       Bandwidth=5
                                    and Titiunik                                          Linear polynomial
                  bandwidth
                                     bandwidth
 Banked              0.101              0.100           0.104              0.0782              0.0726
                    (0.0574)           (0.0497)         (0.0491)           (0.0434)            (0.0300)
 State-FE               Y                  Y                Y                  Y                   Y
 No. of Obs.           220                247              229                285                 207
 R squared            0.556              0.556            0.559              0.484               0.538
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


This table examines robustness of the regression discontinuity (RD) estimates examining the impact of the 2005
banking reform deposits share of state-owned banks in 2006­08. The dependent variable is deposit share of
state-owned banks in 2006­08 at the district-level. Column 1 uses the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011) band-
width. Column 2 uses the Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidth. Columns 3 and 4 use a bandwidth of (-4,+4) and
(-5, +5) around the cut-off. Column 5 uses a bandwidth of (-3.5, +3.5). The running variable is the the national
average population per branch subtracted from the district level average population per branch Banked takes
a value 1 if the running variable is negative. All regressions (except column 5) use second degree polynomials
and triangular kernel with a bandwidth of 4.5 around the cut-off. Column 5 uses a local linear polynomial. All
regressions include state fixed effects and are weighted by population in 2001. Controls included are population
and population squared. Standard errors are clustered at the district level. Bank data is from the Reserve Bank
of India. Population data to construct the running variable is from Census 2001.




                                                      59
                                 Table A8: Lending rates during the crisis


                                          (1)                (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                   All                Services         Agri.         Industry
                                                 Lending              Lending        Lending         Lending
 Bank-Exposure * MES                   0.0692                         0.0537         -0.0758         0.0599
                                        (0.0207)                       (0.0201)       (0.0323)        (0.0197)

 Private * Bank-Exposure * MES         -1.727                         -0.506          -3.179         -3.018
                                        (0.186)                        (0.192)         (0.364)        (0.252)

 Branch-Exposure * MES                                     -0.0225
                                                           (0.0160)

 Private * Branch-Exposure * MES                            0.0879
                                                           (0.0548)
 No. of Obs.                            190557              190557     162887          68953          108636
 R squared                               0.250               0.356      0.345          0.201           0.265
 District-FE                               Y                   Y          Y              Y               Y
 Controls                                  Y                   Y          Y              Y               Y
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
This table examines lending rates against a measure of ex-ante bank vulnerability. Columns 1­2 examines lend-
ing across all sectors. Columns 3­5 examines lending to the following sectors: services (column 3), agriculture
(column 4), and industry (column 5). The dependent variable in all columns is the weighted lending rate at
the branch-level for the period 31st March, 2008 to 31st March, 2009. Private is 1 if the bank is a private sec-
tor bank and 0 if it is a state owned bank. MES (marginal expected shortfall ) is the negative of the average
returns of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th - percentile during the period 1st January, 2007
to 31st December, 2007. Branch-exposure is at the district level and takes a value 1 if the share of deposits of
state-owned banks in a district is greater than the median, as measured in 2007. Bank-exposure (continuous) is
the bank-level weighted average of the continuous measure of branch-exposure across a bank's branches using
deposit shares in 2007 as weights. Bank-exposure takes a value 1 if the exposure is greater than the median. All
columns include district fixed effects.All specifications control for the kind of population a branch serves (rural,
semi-urban, urban or metropolitan), their interaction with MES, and bank-exposure separately interacted with
bank leverage and with bank assets. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and all observations are
weighted by deposits in 2007. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Stock market data is from
the National Stock Exchange and the Bombay Stock Exchange.




                                                            60
        40




                                                                                        SBT
                                                                                                         CBI
                                                                SBJ
                                                                    J&K
                      b=0.45 s.e=0.15                      BOMAHRSHTRA
                                                                                                LVB
                                                                                                      KARUR
                                                   SBM
                                                                                ING V
        30




                                        KRNTKA
                                                                                                  HDFC
                                          FED
                                       CORP
                                                                       AXIS
  MES Rank 2007




                                                                                           CUN
                                                       ANDHRA
                                                                                            DBL
                                                                                              SOUTHIND
                                 IOB
       20




                                                                                                            INDIAN
                                             BOR
                                                                                  YBL
                                                                                    ALLHBD
                                                               BOB
                                                    KMB
                                                                              ICICI
                                                                            SBI
                                                                      UCO
                                  SYNDICATE
        10




                                                                                                       DCB
                                                                 PNB
                                              VIJAYA
                                                OBC
                              CANARA
                                BOI
                             UNION
                                                         DENA
                       IDB
        0




                  0                     10               20                           30                   40
                                                    MES Rank 2006


             Figure A1: MES Rank for Jan '07­Dec '07 versus MES Rank for Jan '06­Dec '06
The graph above shows the scatter plot of the MES Rank computed during the period 1st January, 2007 to 31st
December, 2007 versus the MES Rank computed during the period from 1st January, 2006 to 31st December,
2006. MES for a period is the marginal expected shortfall of a stock given that the market return is below its 5th
- percentile during the same period. Market return is based on the S&P CNX NIFTY. MES Rank ranks banks in
descending order of MES values (assigns rank 1 to the bank with the largest MES). The 38 banks for which data
was available for both periods were used in the analysis. Data is from the Reserve Bank of India.




                                                          61
                                                           (A) Private sector bank branches in 2006­08                                                                                      (B) State-owned bank branches in 2006­08
                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                      150
      Number of private sector bank branches




                                                                                                                                                  Number of state-owned bank branches
                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                20




                                                                                                                                                                  50
                 0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                              -20




                                                                                                                                                                     -50
                                                           -3.5   -3   -2.5   -2 -1.5 -1 -.5         0    .5   1 1.5 2       2.5   3   3.5                                                  -3.5   -3   -2.5   -2 -1.5 -1 -.5         0    .5   1 1.5 2       2.5   3   3.5
                                                                                District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                                       District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                                            Centered at Cutoff                                                                                                               Centered at Cutoff




     (C) Deposit share of state-owned banks in 2006­08
     (Exposure)                                                                                                                                                                       (D) Fraction of state-owned banks in 2006­08
                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                     .2
        Deposit share of public sector banks (Exposure)




                                                                                                                                                  Fraction of public sector banks
                                           .05




                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                0




                                                                                                                                                          0
                  -.05




                                                                                                                                                                     -.1
      -.1




                                                           -3.5   -3   -2.5   -2 -1.5 -1 -.5         0    .5   1 1.5 2       2.5   3   3.5                                                  -3.5   -3   -2.5   -2 -1.5 -1 -.5         0    .5   1 1.5 2       2.5   3   3.5
                                                                                District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)                                                                                       District Population Per Branch in (1,000s)
                                                                                            Centered at Cutoff                                                                                                               Centered at Cutoff




   Figure A2: Regression discontinuity: Share of state-owned bank branches (Robustness)

The figure plots the regression discontinuity plots number of private sector bank branches in 2006­08 (panel
A), number of state-owned bank branches in 2006­08 (panel B), deposit share of state-owned banks in 2006­
08 (panel C), and deposit share of state-owned banks in 2001­03 (panel D) at the district-level. The running
variable on the horizontal axis is the national average population per branch subtracted from the district average
population per branch. It is centered at zero and scaled to thousands of persons per district. Points to the right
(left) of 0 are under-banked (banked) districts. Each point represents the average value of the outcome in 0.2
percentage point run variable bins. The solid line plots predicted values, with separate local linear trends with
triangular kernels estimated on either side of 0. Bandwidth of (-3.5,3.5) is used. State fixed effects have been
partialed out. The dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Branch-level data is from the Reserve
Bank of India. Population data used to construct the running variable is from the 2001 Census.




                                                                                                                                             62
                                          (A) Full sample                                                       (B) Without outliers
                .08




                                                                                       .08
                .06




                                                                                       .06
                .04




                                                                                       .04
                .02
63




                                                                                       .02
                0




                                                                                       0
                      -50       0           50          100         150         200          -20            0               20           40             60



                                                     Figure A3: Regression discontinuity: McCrary test

     This figure plots the McCrary graphs. It graphs the density of the running variable. The running variable on the horizontal axis is the national average
     population per branch subtracted from the district average population per branch. It is centered at zero and scaled to thousands of persons per district. It is
     centered at zero and scaled to thousands of persons per district. Points to the right (left) of 0 are under-banked (banked) districts. Panel A is the full sample
     and Panel B removes outliers above 60. Branch-level data is from the Reserve Bank of India. Population data used to construct the running variable is from
     the 2001 Census.
