                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               SKEWED BUSINESS CYCLES

                                        Sergio Salgado
                                        Fatih Guvenen
                                        Nicholas Bloom

                                      Working Paper 26565
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26565


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank seminar participants at Wharton, the Federal
Reserve Board, the 11th World Congress of the Econometric Society, the CESifo Conference,
SED, SITE, Queen's University, and University of Montreal. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the US
Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This research was performed at a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number 1694. All results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The replication packet for
the empirical results of the paper is available from: https://sergiosalgado.net/home/research/

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sergio Salgado, Fatih Guvenen, and Nicholas Bloom. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skewed Business Cycles
Sergio Salgado, Fatih Guvenen, and Nicholas Bloom
NBER Working Paper No. 26565
December 2019
JEL No. E3

                                           ABSTRACT

Using firm-level panel data from the US Census Bureau and almost fifty other countries, we
show that the skewness of the growth rates of employment, sales, and productivity is procyclical.
In particular, during recessions, they display a large left tail of negative growth rates (and during
booms, a large right tail of positive growth rates). We find similar results at the industry level:
industries with falling growth rates see more left-skewed growth rates of firm sales, employment,
and productivity. We then build a heterogeneous-agent model in which entrepreneurs face shocks
with time-varying skewness that matches the firm-level distributions we document for the United
States. Our quantitative results show that a negative shock to the skewness of firms' productivity
growth (keeping the mean and variance constant) generates a persistent drop in output,
investment, hiring, and consumption. This suggests the rising risk of large negative firm-level
shocks could be an important factor driving recessions.

Sergio Salgado                                    Nicholas Bloom
The Wharton School                                Stanford University
University of Pennsylvania                        Department of Economics
2325 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall               579 Serra Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367                       Stanford, CA 94305-6072
ssalgado@wharton.upenn.edu                        and NBER
                                                  nbloom@stanford.edu
Fatih Guvenen
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER
fatihguvenen@gmail.com
1        Introduction
    This paper studies the cyclicality of the distribution of the growth rate of firm-level outcomes.
In the previous literature, recessions have been characterized as a combination of a negative
first-moment (mean) shock and a positive second-moment (uncertainty) shock (Bloom, 2014). In
this paper, we argue that recessions are also accompanied by negative third-moment (skewness)
shocks implying that, during economic downturns, a subset of firms does extremely badly,
leading to a left tail of large negative outcomes. This is often accompanied by a deceleration of
growth for a subset of firms at the top end, leading to a compression of the right tail of positive
outcomes. The opposite patterns happen during expansions, with the left tail shrinking and
the right tail expanding. Consequently, the skewness of the growth rates is procyclical.

    Using firm-level panel data from the US Census and Compustat and panel data on firms
from thirty-nine other countries, we show that the cross-sectional skewness of the distribution
of several firm-level outcomes, such as sales growth, employment growth, productivity growth,
and stock returns, is strongly procyclical. As an illustration of our main empirical result, the
top panel of Figure 1 displays the distribution of firms' employment growth from the US Census
Bureau's Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The solid line shows the empirical density of
employment growth pooling observations from the most recent two recession years, 2001­02
and 2008­09. The dashed line instead shows the density for the subsequent expansion years, in
this case, years 2003 to 2006 and 2010 to 2014. One can clearly see that, relative to expansion
periods, the distribution of employment growth during recessions has a thicker left tail, whereas
the right tail exhibits little change, indicating an increase in dispersion that is mostly due to a
widening left tail.

    This asymmetric change in the distribution of employment growth from expansion to reces-
sion years can be quantified using the Kelley skewness (Kelley, 1947), a measure that is robust
to the presence of outliers. This measure is defined as the difference between the 90th-to-50th
log percentiles differential (a measure of dispersion in the right tail) and the 50th-to-10th log
percentiles differential (a measure of dispersion in the left tail) divided by the 90th-to-10th log
percentiles differential (a measure of the total dispersion of the distribution). For a distribution
with a compressed upper half and a dispersed lower half (i.e., a left skew), the Kelley skew-
ness is negative. In the case of the top panel of Figure 1, we find a decline in the dispersion
of employment growth above the median from 0.22 to 0.20 from expansion to recession years,
whereas the dispersion below the median increases from 0.17 to 0.25. This asymmetric change
in the tails generates a decline in the Kelley skewness from 0.10 during expansions to ­0.12
during recessions.1 Similarly, the bottom panel of Figure 1 displays the distribution of sales
    1
        Put differently, a Kelley skewness of 0.10 indicates that during expansion, 45% of all the dispersion is


                                                        1
growth for Compustat firms for recessions years (2001-02 and 2008-09) and for expansion years
(2003 to 2006, and 2010 to 2014). As in the case of employment growth, here we also find
that recessions are characterized by a widening left tail, which gives rise to both an increase in
dispersion and a decline in the skewness of the sales growth distribution. Furthermore, using
firm and establishment-level panel data, we show that the skewness of stock returns, and firms'
productivity shocks, are also left skewed during recession. This suggests that the underlying
demand and productivity shocks experienced by firms has a cyclical skew.
    We find the same empirical pattern at the two-digit NAICS industry level: the within-
industry skewness of firm-level employment growth, sales growth, stock returns, and productiv-
ity growth is positively correlated with the industry growth rate. Moreover, the same pattern is
also seen globally. Using firm-level data for over thirty-nine countries that are both geograph-
ically and economically diverse, we show that the skewness of the same firm-level variables
within each country is robustly procyclical with respect to that country's business cycle.
    Given these empirical patterns, we then evaluate to what extent these cyclical fluctuations
in the skewness of firm-level shocks can account for business cycle variations in investment,
hiring, and output. To investigate this we study a set of vector regression (VAR) estimations
which show that skewness shocks to the distribution of firms' stock returns predict large drops in
aggregate economic activity. In particular, a drop in firm-level skewness precedes large declines
in industrial production, investment and employment. Of course VAR estimates do not identify
causal impacts, but they do highlight that increasing left-tailed skewness of firm-level shocks
forecasts significantly lower growth rates.
    In the second part of the paper we take a different modeling approach to evaluate the
potential macro impact of fluctuations in micro-skewness. We build a heterogeneous-agents
model where the key feature is the presence of a large number of entrepreneurs that face shocks
with time-varying variance and time-varying skewness. To capture the potentially non-linear
response of firms to shocks, we assume that entrepreneurs are risk-averse, face a combination
of convex and non-convex adjustment costs to capital, and can invest in capital and a risk-free
asset. We numerically solve the model and choose the parameters of the firm's productivity
process so that our modeled economy matches the average skewness of the sales growth distribu-
tion we observe among US firms during expansionary periods and the large decline in skewness
observed during a typical recession.
    In our main quantitative exercise we study the aggregate effects of a pure skewness shock--that
is, a decline in the skewness of firms' productivity shocks­while keeping the mean and variance
constant. Our model predicts that a change in the skewness of the distribution of firm-level
accounted for by firms with employment growth below the median, whereas during recessions, this share increases
to 56%.


                                                      2
shocks alone, matching the decline in the skewness of sales growth we observe among US firms,
would reduce GDP by 1.7%. Consistent with our VAR evidence, the decline in aggregate eco-
nomic activity is quite persistent as GDP stays below its pre-shock level several quarters after
the shock. This is in contrast to the standard uncertainty shock analyzed in the literature that
typically generates a sharp drop and rapid rebound of GDP. The significant and persistent drop
in output is driven by a decline in capital investment, which is the result of three forces. First,
the presence of a fixed cost to capital adjustment creates a real options effect that reduces the
incentives of firms to invest when skewness declines. This is a reflection of the Bernanke (1983)
"Bad News Principle' ', that only outcomes about the bad state of the world matter for option
value to delay investment. Second, the drop in skewness makes capital riskier, inducing an
increase in investment in the risk-free asset. Third, relative to the standard uncertainty shock
(a symmetric increase in dispersion), in our model a decline in skewness results in a widening
left tail of the firm productivity distribution without a corresponding widening of the right tail
(an asymmetric increase in dispersion). This ameliorates the impact of the Oi-Hartman-Abel
effect from uncertainty shocks, suppressing the overshoot from pure uncertainty shocks.2

    In summary, our results indicate that a negative shock to the skewness of firms' productivity
(that keeps the mean and variance constant) can generate a moderate recession by itself. Of
course, recessions are likely driven by a combination of shocks to multiple moments - for example,
a negative, positive and negative shock to the first, second and third moments respectively -
so we see our paper as highlighting the additional contribution of left-tail micro-skewness in
driving recessions.

    This paper is related to several strands of literature. First and foremost, our paper re-
lates to the study of the effects of uncertainty on firms' decisions. Several papers have shown
that an increase in uncertainty can have important macroeconomic implications in the pres-
ence of adjustment costs, risk aversion, or financial frictions.3 Our results are complementary
to this literature as we show that dispersion of firms' outcomes­a standard measure of uncer-
tainty­increases as a results of a widening left-tail.

    Second, several authors have suggested that rare disasters--presumably arising from an
asymmetric distribution of shocks--can generate large fluctuations in economic activity, such
as the Great Recession. Reviving the ideas introduced first by Rietz (1988), Barro (2006)
uses a panel of countries to estimate the probability of large disasters and argue that these
low-probability events can have substantial implications for aggregate economic activity and
   2
    See a discussion about the Oi-Hartman-Abel in the survey article of Bloom (2014).
   3
    See, for example, Arellano et al. (2018), Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2011), Schaal (2017), Bachmann and
Bayer (2013), Bachmann and Bayer (2014), Gilchrist et al. (2014), Jurado et al. (2015), Leduc and Liu (2016),
Basu and Bundick (2017), Berger et al. (2017), Alfaro et al. (2018), Kozeniauskas et al. (2018), and Bloom et al.
(2018).


                                                       3
asset pricing. Several papers have confirmed the importance of fluctuation in disaster risk
for aggregate economic activity.4 The results of our paper can be seen as evidence that rare
disasters also occur at the microeconomic level, and because firms are not typically perfectly
insured against micro-economic risk these have real effects.
    Finally, our paper contributes to a growing literature that focuses on the cyclical patterns
of the skewness (and other higher order moments) of worker and firm outcomes, such as labor
earnings (e.g. Guvenen et al. (2014), Busch et al. (2017), and Harmenberg and Sievertsen
(2017)), firm productivity (Kehrig (2011)), employment growth (e.g. Ilut et al. (2018) and
Decker et al. (2015)), and stock returns (e.g. Harvey and Siddique (2000), Oh and Wachter
(2018), and Ferreira (2018)).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data we use and
the statistics discussed in the empirical section. Section 3 shows the main empirical results of
our paper, that is, that the skewness of several firm-level outcomes and productivity shocks
is procyclical. Section 4 describes the model and Section 5 presents our quantitative results.
Section 6 concludes.


2       Data and Measurement
2.1     Data and Sample Selection
    Our analysis is based on five large dataset that encompassing firm- and establishment-level
information for the United States and for almost forty other countries.5 The breadth of our
dataset allows us to provide a detailed description of the cyclical patterns of the distribution of
firm-level outcomes and productivity growth.6
    First, we extract panel data on employment at the firm and establishment level from the
US Census Bureau's Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD provides high-quality
measures of employment, wage bill, industry, and age for the entire US nonfarm private sector
linked over time at the establishment level from 1976 to 2015. From the LBD, we construct
employment at the firm and establishment levels and use it to calculate cross-sectional moments
of the distribution of employment growth at narrow firm population groups. The LBD contains
over 6 million firms per year, which for measuring higher-order moments like skewness is a
major advantage.
    Second, we obtain output, input, and productivity data for a panel of manufacturing estab-
lishment combining information from the US Census of Manufacturing and the Annual Survey
    4
     See for instance Gabaix (2008, 2012), Gourio (2008, 2012, 2013), Wachter (2013), Kilic and Wachter (2015),
Kozlowski et al. (2018, 2016), Venkateswaran et al. (2015), among others.
   5
     Table A.6 in Appendix B.3 shows the list of countries in our dataset.
   6
     Replication files for the empirical section can be downloaded from here.


                                                      4
of Manufacturing (ASM) covering years from 1976 to 2015. From the merged dataset we select
establishment with at least ten years of valid observations on employment and sales, which
by the ASM methodology oversamples larger establishments (and thus implicitly larger firms).
These datasets also include a measure of total factor productivity which is calculated by the
US Census Bureau.

    Third, we draw panel data of publicly traded firms from Compustat. Although this dataset
contains mostly large established firms, it provides several additional variables which are im-
portant in our analysis. In particular, we use data on quarterly and annual sales, annual
employment, and daily stock prices from 1970 to 2017, and we restrict attention to a sample of
firms with more than ten years of data to reduce the types of compositional issues identified in
Davis et al. (2006).

    Fourth, we study whether the patterns we document for the United States are also observed
in other countries, both developed and developing. To that end, we use cross-country publicly
traded firm-level panel data containing sales and employment information between 1986 and
2016 from the Osiris dataset collected by the Bureau van Dijk (BvD). In order to maintain a
homogeneous sampling criteria, we only consider firms with ten or more years of data. Addition-
ally, we restrict our sample to country-year bins with more than one hundred firms, countries
with at least ten years of data, and years with five countries or more. Our main results are
based on an unbalanced panel of firms spanning thirty nine countries from 1991 to 2015. We
complement this dataset with information on firm-level stock prices obtained from the Global
Compustat dataset. Applying similar selection criteria, we obtain a sample of daily stock price
information for firms in twenty-nine countries from 1985 to 2017.

    Finally, we obtain additional firm-level data from the Amadeus dataset also collected by the
BvD. This dataset comprises a smaller sample of countries, for a shorter timespan, but with
rich firm-level information for small and large firms, both publicly traded and privately held.
In particular, Amadeus provides information on sales, employment, value added, capital, and
labor input cost so that we can estimate TFP at the firm level. Our sample contains information
for twenty one European countries starting in the mid 2000s.

    Table I summarizes the data sources and the main sample characteristics.7 Additional
details on data construction, selection criteria, and moment calculation for each dataset used
in our analysis can be found in Appendix B.8


   7
      Appendix Table A.6 shows a list of the countries we consider in our analysis and the data available for each
of them.
    8
      The online appendix available from here and at the author's websites provides further details about the
underlying data and provides the material to replicate the results presented in the empirical section of the paper.


                                                        5
2.2    Measuring Dispersion and Skewness
    For most of our results, we measure the growth rate of a firm-level outcome as the log-
difference between period t and t + k where t is a quarter for stock returns and a year in the
case of employment, sales, and productivity. For both dispersion and skewness, we use quantile-
based measures that are robust to outliers, which are common in micro datasets. As we shall
see, they also have magnitudes that are easy to interpret. Our measure of dispersion is the
differential between the 90th and 10th percentiles, denoted by P 9010t , where t is a quarter or
a year depending on the dataset. Additionally, we use the differentials between the 90th and
50th percentiles, P 9050t , and between the 50th and 10th percentiles, P 5010t , as measures of
dispersion in the right and left tails, respectively. Finally, our preferred measure of skewness is
the Kelley skewness (Kelley, 1947), which is defined as

                                    P 90t - P 50t P 50t - P 10t
                         KSKt =                  -                           [-1, 1].                        (1)
                                    P 90t - P 10t P 90t - P 10t
                                    Right Tail Share   Left Tail Share


    As seen here, the Kelley measure provides a simple decomposition of the share of total
dispersion that is accounted for by the left and the right tails of a distribution. A negative
value of Kelley skewness indicates that the left tail accounts for more than one-half of the total
dispersion and the distribution is negatively skewed, and vice versa for a positive value.9


3     Skewness over the Business Cycle
    In this section, we show that the skewness of the distribution of firm-level growth is positive
during expansions but becomes negative during recessions in both the United States (Section
3.1) and across countries (Section 3.2); we then confirm that our results hold within industries
(Section 3.3) and for firms' productivity shocks (Section 3.4).

3.1    US Evidence
    The first contribution of our paper is to show that the skewness of the growth rates of
firm­level outcomes varies over time and is strongly procyclical. We start by considering the
evolution of the Kelley skewness of the distribution of firms' employment growth from the US
Census Bureau's LBD, which is displayed in the top panel of Figure 2. To calculate Kelley

    9
      An important drawback of this measure of skewness is that it is invariant to 20 percent of the observations
in the sample (the top and bottom 10 percent of the distribution are not considered). In principle, the Kelley
skewness can be computed using any two symmetric percentiles, such as the 95th and 5th or 98th and 2nd. We
have explored some of these alternative choices and did not find them to matter for our results (see Appendix
Figure A.1). Additional measures of skewness can be found in Kim and White (2004).


                                                       6
skewness, we weight observations by firm employment so that our measure reflects the under-
lying firm-size distribution.10 Figure 2 shows, first, that the skewness of employment growth,
on average, is positive and around 0.10 for most of the sample period. Second, the skewness
of the distribution employment growth is strongly procyclical, declining from an average of
0.11 at the peak of the typical recession to around ­0.10 at the trough. Noticeable, the Great
Recession represents the largest declined in the skewness of employment growth over the entire
sample period, with a Kelley Skewness declining to a value of -0.20. This indicates that during
the recession, 60% of the total mass of the distribution is accounted for by firms below the
median.11 Similarly, the bottom of Figure 2 shows the cross-sectional skewness of annual sales
growth for Compustat firms. Relative to the LBD, this is a more selective set of mostly large
firms. Nevertheless, we find that the skewness of the distribution of sales growth is positive on
average and declines around 0.20 points during a recession.

    The procyclicality in the skewness of firm growth is driven by a rapid change in the relative
weight of the tails of the distribution. This can be observed in the top panel of Figure 3,
where we plot the time series of the P 5010t (black line with squares) and the P 9050t (blue
line with circles) of the employment growth distribution using data from the LBD. The bottom
panel of Figure 3 shows the same statistics for the sales growth distribution from Compustat.
Two important aspects are worth noticing. First, during expansionary periods, the right tail
outweighs the left tail (most of the time, P 9050t is above P 5010t ), generating a distribution
of firms growth that is positively skewed during expansions. Second, for both employment
and sales growth, recessions are episodes in which the P 5010t increases, indicating a left tail
that stretches out, whereas the P 9050t decreases, indicating a right tail that contracts. This
asymmetric change in the tails drives the drop in the skewness of firms' employment and sales
growth.12 Appendix Figure A.1 confirms the robustness of these results to a range of different
approaches and sample selection. In particular, we show that the skewness of employment
growth in the LBD is procyclical if we divide firms in groups of different size or age, if we look
at establishment employment growth, if we explicitly consider the entry and exit of firms, and
if we consider different measures of skewness.

    To have a better sense of the magnitude of the change in skewness and its relation with the


   10
      In particular, we weight the employment growth of firm i in period t by the average employment in periods
t and t + 1, that is, E i,t = 0.5 × (Ei,t + Ei,t+1 ). The results for publicly traded firms are unweighted since most
of the firms are large.
   11
      The procyclicality of the skewness of employment growth in the LBD has been discussed in different forms
in previous papers (e.g. Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) and Ilut et al. (2018)). We complement these studies by
looking at the cyclicality of the skewness of employment growth within industries, age, and size categories.
   12
      This asymmetric change is also observed at higher frequencies. For instance, Figure A.2 shows a similar set
of results for the annual change of quarterly sales.


                                                         7
cycle, columns (1) to (3) of Table II show a set of time series regressions of the form

                                    KSKt =  +  GDPt + t + t ,                                              (2)

where the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness of the cross-sectional distribution of dif-
ferent firm-level outcomes. In all regressions, the independent variable is the log change of real
GDP per capita--which we have normalized to have unitary variance so the coefficients are
comparable across columns--and t is a linear trend. The estimated coefficients are positive and
large for all three variables--employment growth, sales growth, and stock returns--and also
economically and statistically significant (at the 1% level for the first two and the 5% level for
the third). For example, the estimated coefficient of 4.6 in column (1) implies that a two stan-
dard deviation--or about a 4%--drop in GDP per capita growth is associated with a 0.09 fall
in the Kelley skewness of the firm employment growth distribution. Column (2) shows a similar
result for sales growth with a larger coefficient (5.4). Column (3) shows a smaller coefficient
for stock returns (2.1) that is still highly significant.13 The change in skewness of stock-returns
over the cycle also suggests the decrease in skewness of sales and employment growth is driven,
at least in part, by a rise in negatively skewed external shocks (e.g. productivity or demand
shocks) rather than skewed firm control variable (like investment and employment). In order
to shed additional light on the cyclicality of the skewness of firms' shocks, in Section 3.4 we
directly test whether firm-level productivity shocks are also left skewed during recessions.

3.2    Cross-Country Evidence
    Is the procyclical skewness we have documented so far a pattern specific to the United States,
or is it also observed in other countries? The second contribution of our paper is to answer this
question using firm-level panel data covering almost fifty countries that are both geographically
and economically diverse, spreading over five continents including developing countries (such as
the United States, Germany, Japan, and others) and developed countries (such as Peru, Egypt,
Thailand, and others).

    The top panel of Figure 4 displays the empirical density of the distribution of log sales
growth (in US dollars as of 2005) for a unbalanced panel of firms pooling all the countries in
our sample from 1991 to 2015. The solid red line is the density of the growth rate of sales
during recession periods, where a recession is defined as a year in which the growth rate of

  13
     As we show in Appendix A, these results are remarkably robust to different specifications and across
several firm-level outcomes. In particular, Table A.2 shows that the skewness remains strongly procyclical if
we residualize the firms' outcomes by the firms' observable characteristics and fixed unobserved heterogeneity
and if we consider the growth of log sales-per-worker (more closely related to firm productivity). Furthermore,
we confirm that the dispersion in firms' growth is countercyclical (Appendix Table A.1) but we do not find
significant business cycle variation in the kurtosis (right panel of Table A.2).


                                                      8
GDP is in the first decile of the country-specific GDP growth distribution. The dashed blue
line is the density of sales growth during expansion periods defined as years in which GDP
growth is above the first decile of the country-specific distribution of GDP growth. Similar to
the results presented in Figure 1, the dispersion in sales growth increases little during recession
years, with P 9010t rising slightly from 0.82 to 0.85. However, this modest increase masks larger
changes in each tail: the left tail stretches out, with P 5010t rising from 0.36 to 0.43, and the
right tail shrinks, although by a smaller amount, with P 9050t falling from 0.46 to 0.43. The
opposite moves of each tail dispersion partially cancel out each other, leading to the smaller rise
in P 9010t just mentioned. In contrast, for skewness, the contraction of the upper tail and the
expansion of the lower tail dispersion reinforce each other to generate a larger decline in Kelley
skewness, which falls from 0.12 to 0.0.

    To have a clearer picture of the cyclical changes of the skewness over the business cycle, the
bottom left panel of Figure 4 shows a scatter plot in which the x -axis is the average of firm
employment growth within a country-year bin, and the y -axis is the Kelley skewness of the
same firm-level outcome. The data points align nicely along a straight line over a wide range of
average employment growth rates (ranging from ­0.15 to 0.20), confirming the strong positive
relationship between skewness and the within-country business cycle. Our results indicate that,
when the average firm employment growth is ­0.15 (typically during a big recession) the Kelley
skewness is ­0.30, implying that two-thirds of the mass of the distribution of employment growth
is accounted for by the left tail. In contrast, when the average employment growth is 0.10, the
skewness is 0.30, indicating the opposite split, with two-thirds of the total dispersion now being
accounted for by the right tail. The bottom right panel of Figure 4 shows a similar result for
sales growth. Importantly, to construct these figures we have controlled for country- and time-
fixed effects, so these results are not driven by fixed characteristics of the countries considered
in the sample or by global shocks--such as the Great Recession--that can affect all countries
at the same time.14

    In columns (4) to (6) in the center panel of Table II we repeat the cyclicality regression
discussed above for the United States but this time exploiting the panel dimension of the
cross-country dataset to assess the cyclicality of skewness in international data. This time, the
dependent variable is the skewness of employment growth, sales growth, or stock returns within a
given country/year cell. The business cycle is captured by the log GDP per capita growth in the
respective country, which we have rescaled to have unitary variance to facilitate the comparison

   14
      One important concern is that our cross-country results are based exclusively on publicly traded firms.
Interestingly, we also find remarkably similar results using an unbalanced panel of firms, private and publicly
traded, drawn from the BvD Amadeus dataset, as Figure A.3 in the Appendix shows. Relative to our baseline
sample, the BvD Amadeus dataset covers a much larger sample of firms, but over a shorter period of time (2000
to 2015 for most countries) over a smaller sample of European countries.


                                                      9
with the rest of the results. The regressions also include a full set of time and country fixed
effects to control for aggregate economic conditions that might affect all countries simultaneously
or fixed differences across countries. The results confirm our previous findings of procyclical
skewness for all three variables with similar levels of statistical significance. Compared with the
United States, the estimated coefficient is slightly higher for employment (5.9 across countries
versus 4.6 for the United States), somewhat lower for sales (3.1 versus 5.4), and nearly identical
for stock returns. These results further confirm the procyclical nature of skewness in firm-level
outcomes.

3.3    Industry-Level Evidence
    We now turn to industry-level data from the United States and investigate whether the
skewness of firms' outcomes is procyclical within different industries. To this end, using LBD
data, the top panel of Figure 5 shows a scatter plot of the skewness of employment growth against
the average employment growth within an industry-year cell, where an industry is defined at
the two-digit NAICS level. In this case, a positive correlation indicates that periods of low
economic activity at the industry level are associated with a negative shift in skewness within
that industry, and vice versa for periods of high economic activity. As in the country-level
results, we include a full set of time and industry fixed effects, so that the results are driven by
within-industry changes rather than aggregate changes in growth rates. In terms of magnitudes,
the top panel of Figure 5 shows that when the average industry employment growth is ­0.08,
the Kelley skewness is around -0.20, indicating that 60% of the total dispersion in employment
growth within an industry is accounted for by the left tail of the distribution. When the average
employment growth is 0.08 instead, the Kelley is skewness is 0.20, indicating that the right tail
accounts for 60% of the total dispersion. Similarly, the bottom panel of Figure 5 shows that the
within-industry skewness of sales growth is higher when the average growth in that industry is
higher.15 Hence, industries that grow faster are also sectors in which the skewness of firm-level
outcomes is positive.

    To further examine the relation of the industry cycle and the skewness of sales growth,
employment growth, and quarterly returns, columns (8) to (10) of Table II display a series of
industry panel regressions in which the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness of the log
   15
      Similarly to the aggregate results discussed in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, the change in the skewness of the
within-industry distribution of firms' growth is driven by an asymmetric response of the right and left tails to
the industry business conditions. This is clearly seen in Figure A.4 in Appendix A that shows that P 9050t of log
sales growth is positively correlated with the within-industry cycle, increasing during periods of high economic
activity within the industry. In contrast, the P 5010t is negatively correlated with the industry cycle, increasing
during periods of low economic activity within industry level. Interestedly, the dispersion in both tails of the
distribution shows a hockey-stick pattern rising sharply as the average sales growth moves away from zero. This
uneven within-industry pattern drives the positive correlation between skewness and the economic conditions
within an industry depicted in Figure 5.


                                                        10
growth of different firm-level outcomes within an industry-year cell. In this case, we capture
the within-industry business conditions by the average log sales growth in an industry-year cell.
To facilitate the interpretation of magnitudes, we have rescaled the sales growth within each
industry to have a variance of one so that the regression coefficient can be interpreted as the
effect of a change in the within-industry sales growth of one standard deviation and can be
easily compared to the coefficients of columns (1) to (3) in Table II. These results again show
a strongly procyclical skewness.16

3.4        Firm-Level Productivity Evidence
         The evidence we have provided so far indicates that the skewness of the distribution of
firm-level outcomes is procyclical, declining during periods of low economic activity. Such
pattern, however, can be the result of shocks with time-varying higher order moments (i.e.
time-varying skewness) and/or the endogenous responses of firms to symmetric shocks that
generate asymmetric changes in firm's outcomes. In order to separate the importance of shocks
from endogenous decisions, in this section we study the cyclical properties of the distribution of
firms' productivity shocks, and we show and that the skewness of this distribution is procyclical,
across countries and for manufacturing establishments in the United States.
         We first use firm-level data for a subsample of European countries for which we have rich
enough data to measure revenue TFP obtained from the Amadeus dataset collected by the
BvD.17 In particular, for each country, we estimate firm-level log productivity, zi , as

                                 zi,t = log Yi,t - K log Ki,t - L log Li,t ,

where Yi,t is the deflated value added of firm i in year t, Ki,t is a measure of the capital stock,
and Li,t is a measure of labor input. As is standard in the productivity literature (e.g. Syverson
(2011)) we assume constant returns to scale at the firm-level (so K = 1 - L ) and measure L
as the industry-country labor share (the ratio of the total wage bill to total value added).
         Once we have calculated zi,t , we obtain a measure of firms' productivity shocks, denoted by
 i,t ,   from the residual of the following firm-level panel regression,

                                     zi,t = 0 + 1 zi,t-1 + µi + t +         i,t ,                                (3)
   16
      We also find a similar positive and statistically significant relationship between industry cycles and skewness
when we consider each industry separately. Appendix Figure A.5 shows the slope coefficient of a set of within-
industry time series regressions of the Kelley skewness of firms' growth on the within-industry average firm
growth. Notice that, although there is substantial heterogeneity across industries, for all of them the coefficient
on the average firm growth is positive and economically and statistically significant.
   17
      Our firm-level data comprises information of small and large firms, both publicly traded and privately
held from seventeen European countries, namely, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, United Kingdom,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Island, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, and Ukraine. Appendix
B.4 describes in full detail the sample selection and estimation procedure.


                                                         11
where µi is a firm fixed effect and t is a year fixed effect. We then calculate different moments
of the distribution of    i,t   within a country-industry-year cell.

    In order to have a simple comparison to our previous results, the top panel of Figure 6 shows
a scatter plot in which each observation is a year-industry-country cell. In the x -axis we plot
the average productivity shock and in the y -axis we plot the Kelley skewness. In this figure,
we have controlled for country, industry, and year fixed effects and therefore, our results are
neither driven by fixed differences across countries and industries, nor by aggregate economic
fluctuations. As before, we find that skewness and average shock are positively correlated. In
terms of magnitudes, an average decline of productivity of 0.05 is associated to a decline of
0.05 in the skewness of the distribution. As we show in Appendix B, the procyclicality of the
skewness of firm's shocks is robust to changes in the estimation method we use to calculate
productivity, holds for each individual country in our sample, and it is robust to changes in
the measure of within-industry cycle. In particular, as we show in column (7) of Table II, the
skewness of firms' productivity shocks is positively correlated with the average sales growth
within a country-industry cell.18

    We complement our cross-country results using data for a sample of manufacturing estab-
lishments in the United States that combines records from the Census of Manufacturing and
the Annual Survey of Manufacturing spanning the years 1976 to 2015. We take the measures of
log-productivity as reported by the Census and we obtain an estimate from firms' productivity
shocks from the residuals of a panel regression as in equation 3. Because Census data only
contains information about manufacturing firms, here we divide our establishment sample in
3-digit NAICS cells within a year and we calculate the average and the Kelley skewness of the
productivity shock within each industry-year cell. As the bottom panel Figure 6 shows, the
skewness of firms' shocks is negative in industries experiencing average productivity declines.
Furthermore, regression results shown in column (11) of Table II indicate a positive and statisti-
cally significant relation between the industry cycle (measured by within-industry sales growth)
and the skewness of productivity shocks.

    In conclusion, these results­along with the procyclical skewness of firms stock-returns re-
ported in Section 3.1­indicate that the shocks driving firm growth also have procyclical skew-
ness. This procyclical skewness could be driven, for instance, by rising bankruptcy during
recessions, which would generate left-skewed demand shocks (e.g. if a major customer goes

  18
      For further robustness, in Appendix B.4 we use three additional measures of productivity. In the first,
we reestimate the productivity residuals, zi,t , by running an OLS panel regression using firm-level data at the
country level; Second, we estimate zi,t using the method developed by Olley and Pakes (1996); third, we estimate
labor productivity by regressing firm value added on employment and a firm industry fixed effect. All these
methods deliver similar results, qualitatively and quantitatively: the skewness of firm-level productivity shocks
is strongly procyclical.


                                                       12
bankrupt this will generate a large left-tail shock). Another could be the underlying driving
process itself heterogeneously impacts firms­that is, a few firms lose badly in recessions and
a few firm gain heavily in booms­which is similar in spirit to the granularity work in Gabaix
(2011).

3.5    VAR Estimates of the Impact of a Skewness Shock
    To have a preliminary assessment of the impact of changes in the cross-sectional skewness
on aggregate economic activity, we estimate a range of monthly VARs using data for the United
States from January of 1964 to December of 2015. To make our results comparable to the
existing literature, we consider a standard set of variables including­in the following order­
the S&P500 stock market index, a measure of stock-market volatility, a measure of firm-level
stock market skewness, the Federal Funds Rate, the average of hourly earnings, the consumer
price index, the level of hours, the level of employment, and an index of industrial production.
We focus on the impact of a change in the skewness of stock market returns on industrial
production and employment. The skewness of stock returns­measured by the cross-sectional
Kelley skewness of daily returns within a month­is included third in VAR so as to ensure
that the impact of first- and second-order moments­proxied by the S&P500 and the 90th-to-
10th percentiles differential of stock returns within a month respectively­are pealed out before
looking at the impact of a skewness shock.19

    The upper panel of Figure 7 shows a persistent and economically significant decline of
industrial production after a skewness shock: industrial production drops 0.5% four months
after the shock, and reaches a declines of 0.8% after a year. Consistent with previous studies,
a volatility shock generates 0.5% decline in industrial production after six months. Relative
to a skewness shock, however, the economy recovers rapidly seven months after the jump in
volatility. The bottom plot of Figure 7 displays similar patterns for aggregate employment.
As we show in Appendix C, the significant and persistent decline of economic activity after
a skewness shock is remarkably robust to several alternative specifications, variable ordering,
measures of skewness, detrending (Figure A.8), or if we estimate the effect of a skewness shock
using local projections as in Jordà (2005) (Figure A.9).

    In summary, our empirical analysis shows that the skewness of firm-level outcomes declines
sharply during recessions, both at the country and at the industry level. Motivated by this
robust evidence, in the next section we study a heterogeneous agents model that we use to

   19
      All variables with the exception of the Federal Funds Rate, the measure of volatility, and the measure of
skewness are in logs. All variables, with the exception of the measures of volatility and skewness, are detrended
using the Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter equal to 129,600. We do not detrend volatility or
skewness to facilitate the comparison to the rest of the empirical analysis. As we show in Appendix C, however,
considering detrended measures of volatility and skewness does not change our results.


                                                       13
evaluate the macroeconomic importance of the large swings in the skewness we observe in the
data.


4        Model
     Given the evidence discussed in the previous section, a natural question is to ask whether the
observed fluctuations in the skewness of firms' outcomes and productivity have any implication
for aggregate economic activity. To answer this question, we build a heterogeneous-agent model
populated by a large number of infinitely lived households/entrepreneurs who combine capi-
tal and labor using a technology which is subject to aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity
shocks to produce a homogeneous good. We make two modeling choices that are important in
generating large impacts of skewness shocks, but which we also think are empirically reasonable.
     First, entrepreneurs are not able to insure against idiosyncratic shocks, so they are exposed
to idiosyncratic risk. This seems plausible­very few businesses are able to insure fully (or even
partially) against the risks they face, and since the managers of most firms have significant
equity stakes in their businesses, they are exposed to business risk.20 Second, entrepreneurs are
able to save in the form of both the capital good and a one-period bond with a risk-free return.
The risk-free return can be thought of as a government or foreign sector, which at least from the
perspective of the entrepreneur, provides a return which is independent of idiosyncratic risk.
We now describe each component of the model in more detail.

4.1      Entrepreneurs
4.1.1     Production Technology
     The production function of entrepreneur j is given by

                                                   
                                  yj,t = At ej,t kj,t nj,t , with  +  < 1,

so it displays decreasing returns to scale. The aggregate productivity shock, At , follows the
first-order autoregressive process

                                       log At = A log At-1 +  t ,

where t is a Gaussian innovation with zero mean and unitary variance. The idiosyncratic
productivity process ej,t is given by

                                            ej,t = ej,t-1 +     j,t ,                                       (4)
    20
    Even in very large publicly traded firms in the United States, top executives own substantial equity stakes;
Furthermore, most private firms are owned by the manager or their family.


                                                      14
where   j,t   has zero mean, time-varying variance, denoted by                     ,t-1 ,   and time-varying skewness,
denoted by       ,t-1 .   Notice that we have assumed that the distribution of innovations in period
t depends on the values of the variance and skewness observed in period t - 1. This timing
captures the "news shock" aspect of firm-level risks in the model: an increase in dispersion
or a decline in the skewness of firms' shocks represents news about the characteristics of the
distribution of innovations in the future but not a change in the distribution from which the
current realizations of       j,t   are drawn.

4.1.2   Capital Adjustment Costs

   We consider a flexible combination of convex and non-convex adjustment costs to capital.
To this end, let ij,t denote net investment in capital:

                                           ij,t = kj,t+1 - (1 -  ) kj,t ,                                                    (5)

where  is the depreciation rate of capital. Capital adjustment costs are given by the sum of a
fixed disruption cost, 1 , paid by the entrepreneur for any net investment or disinvestment, a
quadratic adjustment cost, 2 , and a resale cost for net disinvestment (partial irreversibility),
3 . Therefore, the total adjustment cost function for capital input is

                                                                          2
                                                            2      ij,t
                   (kj,t+1 , kj,t ) = 1 I|ij,t |>0 yj,t +                     + (1 - 3 ) |ij,t | Iij,t <0 ,                  (6)
                                                            2      kj,t

where I is an indicator function.

4.1.3   The Problem of the Entrepreneur

   Entrepreneurs do not value leisure and value consumption streams according to the standard
CRRA utility function specified below. Entrepreneurs supply labor to their own firm (they
cannot work for someone else's firm). They can save in capital and in a risk-free asset that pays
an interest rate rt . Denote the entrepreneur's value function by V (kj,t , aj,t , ej,t ; t ) where kj,t
is the entrepreneur's stock of physical capital, aj,t is the beginning-of-the-period holdings in the
risk-free asset, and ej,t is her idiosyncratic productivity.

   For notational simplicity, define the vector of aggregates states as t  (At ,                              ,t-1 ,  ,t-1 , µt )
where At is the aggregate productivity level,               ,t-1   and    ,t-1    are the variance and the skewness
of the distribution of idiosyncratic shock, respectively, and µt is the distribution of entrepreneurs




                                                            15
over idiosyncratic states. Then, we can write the dynamic problem of the entrepreneur as

                                                                    -
                                                                 c1
                                                                  j,t
         V (kj,t , aj,t , ej,t ; t ) =        max                       +  EV (kj,t+1 , aj,t+1 , ej,t+1 ; t+1 ) ,     (7)
                                                                1-
                                          {cj,t , kj,t+1 ,
                                          aj,t+1 , nj,t }

            s.t. cj,t + ij,t + aj,t+1  yj,t - wt (t ) nj,t -  (kj,t+1 , kj,t ) + (1 + rt (t )) ai,t ,
                                                 ij,t = kj,t+1 - (1 -  ) kj,t ,
                                          µt+1 (kj,t+1 , aj,t+1 , ej,t+1 ) =  (t ) ,
                                                 kj,t > 0, aj,t  0, nj,t > 0,

given the laws of motion for At ,  ,t , and  ,t . The term wt  w (t ) denotes the wage rate
in the economy. In what follows, we assume the interest rate on the risk-free asset is fixed,
that is r (t ) = r.21 Let C e (kj,t , aj,t , ej,t ; t ), K e (kj,t , aj,t , ej,t ; t ), N e (kj,t , aj,t , ej,t ; t ), and
Ae (kj,t , aj,t , ej,t ; t ) denote the policy rules for consumption, next period capital, current period
labor, and the risk-free asset for the entrepreneurs.

4.2     Non-Entrepreneurial Households
    The economy is populated by a large number of identical hand-to-mouth households that
consume Ct units of the homogeneous good and supply labor elastically which we denote by
Nt . More concretely, the non-entrepreneurial households solve the static problem

                                                                    1-
                                                                   Ct   N 1-
                                     U (Ct , Nt ) = max                - t               ,                            (8)
                                                        Ct ,Nt     1-   1-

                                                             Ct  wt Nt ,

given the law of motion of the aggregate state, t . Denote by C (t ) and N (t ) the optimal
choices of consumption and labor for the non-entrepreneurial household.

4.3     Recursive Competitive Equilibrium
    Given the exogenous process for aggregate productivity, A, the exogenous process of the
variance and skewness of ej , the interest rate of the risk-free asset, r, and the evolution of
the idiosyncratic productivity processes for the entrepreneurs, {ej }j J , a recursive competitive
equilibrium for this economy is a set of policy functions
                                           
     e , K e , N e , Ae
    Cj                           , C, N          , a wage function {w}, and value functions {V, U } such that
          j     j     j,
                           j J             t=0
   21
     This implies that we will not solve the interest rate in equilibrium. The wage rate, however, is such that
the labor market clears in each period.


                                                                 16
i) the policy and value functions solve (7) and (8), respectively; ii) the labor market clears, that
is,

                               N e (kj , aj , ej ; ) dµ (kj , aj , ej ) = N () ;

and iii) the mapping  ( ) that determines the evolution of the joint distribution of ej , kj , and
aj is consistent with the policy functions, the evolution of the aggregate productivity process,
and the evolution of the process of  and  .

4.4     Parameters and Estimation
      In this section, we describe the quantitative specification of our modeled economy. To solve
the entrepreneurs' problem, we employ non-linear methods similar to Krusell and Smith (1998).
Most of our parameters are standard in the macro literature, and we take them from the existing
estimates when possible. However, the parameters governing the stochastic process of firms'
productivity are novel to our analysis, and we use a simulated method of moments approach to
estimate them.

Frequency, Preferences, and Aggregate Productivity

      We set the time period to be a quarter. For the entrepreneurs, we set  equal to 6.0. The
household's discount rate,  , is set to 0.950.25 , whereas the interest rate on the risk-free asset is
set to match an annual return of 2%. For the non-entrepreneurial sector, we set  to 2. For the
labor supply of the non-entrepreneurial households, we fix a value of  to 1.5, and we choose 
so that they spend an average of 33% of their time working.

      The exponents of the capital and labor inputs in the entrepreneur's technology are set to
 = 0.25 and  = 0.5. The capital depreciation rate,  , is set to match an annual depreciation
of 14%. As for the adjustment cost parameters, we set the fixed adjustment cost of capital, 1 ,
equal to 1.5%, a quadratic adjustment cost, 2 , equal to 7.0, and a resale cost, 3 , equal to
34.0% (Bloom, 2009).

      We assume that aggregate productivity follows a standard first-order autoregressive process
with an autocorrelation of 0.95 and normally distributed innovations with mean 0 and a standard
deviation of 0.75%, similar to the quarterly values used in other papers in the literature (Khan
and Thomas, 2008). The top panels of Table III summarize the set of calibrated parameters.

Idiosyncratic Productivity

      To capture time-varying risk, we assume that the economy transitions between two states.
The first is a low-risk state (denoted by L), which corresponds to periods in which the variance
of the innovations of the idiosyncratic shocks is low and the skewness is positive, as we observe in

                                                    17
non-recession periods. The second state is a high-risk state (denoted by H ), which corresponds
to periods in which the variance of the innovations of the idiosyncratic shocks is high and
the skewness is negative, as we observe during a typical recession. Low- and high-risk states
alternate following a first-order Markov process.

    Since high and low risk periods differ in the skewness of measured productivity, we need
to depart from the standard assumption of Gaussian shocks. Although there are several alter-
natives to model idiosyncratic shocks with time-varying higher order moments, here we take a
simple approach and we assume that, conditional on the risk state of the economy, the inno-
vations of the firms' idiosyncratic productivity process,           j,t ,   are drawn from a mixture of two
normally distributed random variables, that is,
                                       
                                       N (µs ,  s )          with prob ps
                                               1
                              j,t                                                                           (9)
                                       N - ps s µs ,  s      with prob 1 - ps ,
                                          1-p        2


where s denotes the risk state of the economy, s  {H, L}. Hence, to fully characterize the
stochastic process faced by firms, we need to find ten parameters, namely, {µs , 1
                                                                                 s ,  s , ps } with
                                                                                     2
s  {H, S }, and the parameters governing the transition probabilities between low- and high-
risk periods, denoted by L and H , respectively.22

    Since we do not directly observe the productivity process faced by the firms, we choose the
parameters of the stochastic process of firms' productivity to match the features of the US data
described in the empirical section of the paper. In particular, we take the data of quarterly
sales growth from Compustat, and we search for parameters of the stochastic process so that
the cross-sectional distribution of sales growth derived from the model reproduces the observed
average values of the 90th-to-50th log percentiles differential, the 50th-to-10th log percentiles
differential, the Kelley skewness, and the 90th-to-10th log percentiles differential of the quarterly
sales growth distribution during expansion periods and the same set of moments for recession
periods for a total of eight moments.23 The probability of being in the high-risk state in the
next period conditional on being in the high-risk state in this period, H , is set to be equal to
the fraction of recession quarters that are followed from another recession quarter in the data,
H = 0.84, whereas the transition probability of the low risk state, L , is set so that the share
of expansion quarters following another expansion quarter is 0.95. Recession and expansion
  22
      A different approach is to assume that idiosyncratic shocks are drawn from a skewed normal distribution
or from a nonlinear transformation of normal shocks as in Orlik and Veldkamp (2014). Alternatively, we could
consider a hybrid approach as in McKay (2017) who estimates a labor income process in which innovations
are drawn from a mixture of three normally distributed random variables. In his specification, the parameters
governing the normal mixture are tied to the aggregate conditions of the economy.
   23
      Appendix Figure A.2 displays the evolution of the dispersion and skewness of the sales growth distribution
for our sample of publicly traded firms from Compustat at the quarterly frequency.


                                                      18
periods in the data correspond to the recession quarters defined by the NBER from 1970 to
2014.

    Based on our estimations, we find that in periods of low risk, the variance of the idiosyncratic
productivity shocks,  , is equal to 4.85%, whereas the coefficient of skewness is equal to 0.85.
In contrast, in periods of high-risk, the variance of the productivity shocks is equal to 6.85%,
and the coefficient of skewness is negative and equal to -1.14. The bottom panels of Table
III displays our estimates for the different parameters of the idiosyncratic productivity process,
whereas Table IV shows the targeted and model-simulated moments.24 Furthermore, our model
is consistent with the standard business cycle statistics in terms of the cyclicality and volatility of
aggregate output, consumption, investment, and employment (see Table A.4 in the Appendix).


5     Quantitative Results
    In this section we evaluate the macroeconomic impact of a change in the skewness of the
distribution of firms shocks. We start by showing that our model is able to separate a skewness
shock from a mean and variance shock, and we then evaluate the impact of the change in
skewness in terms of output and other macroeconomic aggregates.

5.1     Idiosyncratic Shocks and Model Fit
    To evaluate the effects of a decrease in the skewness of firm-level shocks, we independently
simulate 1,000 economies, each of 300 quarters' length. For the first 150 periods, the economy
remains in the low-risk state, and then all economies are hit by a change in the level of risk (i.e.
a decrease in the skewness of firm-level shocks, an increase in the dispersion of firm-level shocks,
or both at the same time). From that period on, all economies evolve normally. We then average
different macroeconomic outcomes across all simulated economies and calculate the impact of
the change in risk as the log percentage deviation of a given macro variable relative to its value
in the period previous to the shock.

    We begin by analyzing the response of the distribution of firm productivity growth after
a change in aggregate risk. The left panels of Figure 8 display moments of the distribution
of firms' idiosyncratic productivity growth, ej,t = ej,t - ej,t-4 , for three cases. In the first
case, the economy moves from the low-risk state to the high-risk state, leading to an increase
in the variance and a decrease in the skewness of idiosyncratic shocks (blue line with circles),
   24
      The variance of a random variable  , which is distributed as a mixture of two normally distributed
random variables, is given by V ar ( ) = E  2 - E ( )2 , whereas the skewness is given by Skew ( ) =
                                             3
 E  3 - 3E ( ) V ar ( ) - E ( )3 /V ar ( ) 2 . Here E ( ) is the first moment of the  given by E ( ) = p1 µ1 +p2 µ2 .
Similarly, E ( )2 = p1 µ2    2        2       2
                        1 + 1 + p2 µ2 + 2 and E 
                                                         3
                                                              = p 1 µ3         2        3        2
                                                                       1 + 3µ1 1 + p2 µ2 + 3µ2 2 are the second
and third moments.


                                                         19
which corresponds to what it is observed during a typical recession. In the second case, the
increase in risk leads only to a decrease in the skewness of idiosyncratic shocks (black line with
diamonds), and finally, in the third case, the increase in risk leads to an increase in the variance
of idiosyncratic shocks only, which is the typical uncertainty shock studied in the literature
(red line with triangles).25 The top left panel of Figure 8 shows that the average firm in our
model does not experience a change in productivity when risk changes. This ensures that our
results are not driven by a change in average productivity and are driven solely by changes in
the shape of the distribution of productivity shocks. Then, comparing the black line in the
middle and bottom left panels, one can see that our model is able to generate a pure change in
the skewness, that is, a change in the productivity distribution that reflects only a decrease in
the skewness but a muted change in the mean and the variance of the firm-level productivity
distribution.26 Similarly, our model can generate a pure uncertainty shock (the red line with
triangles in the middle panels of Figure 8).

    We now analyze the response of the sales growth distribution­our empirical target­to a
change the dispersion and skewness of firms' shocks. The right panels of Figure 8 show the
average, the dispersion, and the skewness of the annual change in quarterly sales implied by
the model calculated as yj,t = log yj,t - log yj,t-4 . It is not surprising that a change in
risk that combines a simultaneous increase in the variance and a decrease in the skewness of
firm-level productivity shocks generates an increase in the cross-sectional dispersion of sales
growth and a large decrease in skewness (blue line with circles in the middle and bottom right
panels). Comparing the case in which only dispersion changes--which is the typical uncertainty
shock--with the case in which only the skewness changes--the baseline case we discuss in the
following section--one can see that by considering a shock with time-varying skewness, the
model is able to capture the asymmetric response of the tails of the sales growth distribution
(compare the red line with triangles to the blue line with circles in the bottom right panel).27

5.2    The Macroeconomic Effect of a Skewness Shock
    We now study the macroeconomic effect of a decrease in the skewness of firm-level produc-
tivity. For doing that, we shock the economy with a change in the skewness of the innovations of
ej,t and calculate the response of different macroeconomic aggregates as the percentage change
   25
      To make this comparison, we reestimate the parameters of the stochastic process in (9) to separate the
changes in dispersion (a symmetric increase in risk) from changes in dispersion and skewness (an asymmetric
increase in risk). Appendix Table A.5 shows the estimation targets for each case.
   26
      The median firm, however, experiences an increase in productivity after a decline in the skewness. Disen-
tangling the mean and the median of the distribution of firms' shocks allow us to keep the mean and variance
constant after a change in skewness.
   27
      As we show in Appendix Figure A.7b, the Kelley skewness of the employment growth distribution also
declines after the drop in the skewness of firms' shocks. Importantly, as we show in Figure A.7a in the Appendix,
the dispersion and the skewness of sales growth do not change after a decline in aggregate productivity, At .


                                                       20
relative to their value prior to the shock. In our exercise, when the economy receives a skewness
shock that drives the skewness of idiosyncratic shocks from positive to negative, we keep the
mean and variance of the idiosyncratic productivity process constant at their low-risk level, so
our results reflect a pure change in the skewness of the distribution of firms' shocks.

    Figure 10a shows that output declines by 1.4% four quarters after a skewness shock and
1.7% after eight quarters. This is a significant decline in aggregate economic activity considering
that only the shape of the distribution of firm-level shocks has changed. Moreover, the decline
in output is quite persistent, staying below its pre-shock level even after twelve periods after
the shock. This is in contrast with the typical uncertainty shock that generates a decrease
in output and a rapid rebound a few quarters after the shock. In our model, the drop in
output is generated by the rapid and persistent decline in capital investment after a change in
skewness. The top right panel of Figure 10b shows that capital investment drops around 15%
during the first quarter after the shock and stays below its pre-shock level for several quarters.
Labor does not drop in the first period after the shock because labor input is fully flexible and
news about the future conditions of risk does not change firms' hiring decisions.28 In contrast,
consumption declines rapidly in response to the decrease in the skewness of firm-level shocks,
dropping by around 1% relative to its pre-shock level, whereas the accumulation of the risk-free
asset increases because productive capital is now riskier.

    Importantly, in the first quarter after the shock, the response of investment and consumption
is not driven by a change in the skewness of the realizations of ej,t received by the firms--recall
our timing assumption in equation (4)--but by a change in the perception about the risk in the
economy: at the moment of the shock, entrepreneurs receive news that in the future the distri-
bution of ej,t will be left-skewed, and their endogenous responses drive a decline in investment
and consumption. A decrease in skewness triggers a precautionary increase in entrepreneurs'
savings, but since capital is riskier, investment in the risk-free asset surges, as shown in the bot-
tom right panel of Figure 10a. We conclude that a decline in the skewness of the distribution
of idiosyncratic shocks can by itself generate a persistent drop in aggregate economic activity.

5.3    Skewness and Uncertainty Shocks
    The results shown in the previous section trace the macroeconomic impact of a change in
the skewness of the distribution of firm's shocks while keeping the variance of these shocks
constant. As a consequence, the dispersion of the sales growth distribution generated by our
model remains more or less invariant after a skewness shock (see center panel of Figure 8).
Our empirical evidence, however, showed that recessions are characterized by an increased in
  28
     Adding labor adjustment costs will trigger an automatic response of labor to changes in risk, increasing the
aggregate impact of a change in variance and skewness.


                                                       21
dispersion paired with a sharp decline in the skewness of the distribution of firms outcomes and
productivity. Hence, in this section, we analyze the joint impact of an increase in dispersion
and a decline in the skewness as we see a typical recession.

    As Figure 10 indicates (blue line with squares), the joint impact of a variance shock and
a skewness shock magnifies and accelerates the impact of output relative to the impact of a
pure skewness shock: output, in this case, declines up to 2% four quarters after the shock. This
additional decline in output is explained by a larger decline in investment and consumption, and
a surge in the investment in the risk-free asset. The combined effect of variance and skewness
accelerates the recovery after the shock as output starts to recover rapidly six quarters after the
shock. Hence, our results suggest that a joint change of the dispersion and skewness of firm's
productivity shock­which is consistent with the observed changes in dispersion and skewness of
firm-level outcomes­can generate aggregate dynamics that are similar to what is observed in a
typical recession.

5.4    Understanding the Macroeconomic Impact of Skewness Shocks
    How do the model ingredients interact with a change in the skewness of firms' productivity
shocks? To answer this, in this section we perform a series of experiments, changing different
parameters or assumptions in the model­while keeping all other parameters at their baseline
level­in order to isolate their contribution to the results discussed in the previous section.

News Shock

    In our baseline results, in the period in which a change in risk occurs, firms do not experience
a change in the actual realizations of shocks but only receive news that in the next period,
the skewness of productivity shocks will be lower. After that, firms' productivity distribution
changes as the shocks are drawn from a left-skewed distribution. We compare this baseline
case to one in which we keep the underlying distribution of firms shocks fixed so that we can
evaluate the pure effect of a change in news about the future risk conditions.29 This exercise is
similar to an increase in the probability of a disaster (Gourio, 2008; Barro and Ursua, 2011),
although in our case it represents an increase in disasters at the microeconomic level. The red
line with triangles in Figure 10 shows that a shock that only represents news about the future
skewness of the distribution of firms' shocks generates a decline in output of about 0.5%, which
is around one-third of the overall decline in our baseline results. The first-period impact on

   29
      In particular, we simulate our model using the same realizations of the aggregate risk process used in
our baseline analysis. In period T all economies receive a skewness shock, however, in this case, we keep the
parameters determining the actual underlying idiosyncratic productivity process fixed at their pre-shock low-risk
level. While this violates rationality­firms expect more skewed shocks but this never arises­it is a useful device
for distinguishing the expectation and the realization impacts of a skewness shock.


                                                       22
investment in capital and in the risk-free asset is the same as in the baseline results as these
are forward-looking variables that rapidly react to future risk conditions.

Adjustment Costs and Risk Aversion

   In our model, capital adjustment costs and risk aversion play an important role in the
propagation of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. On the one hand, fixed adjustment costs to
capital create inaction regions that expand during periods of high uncertainty making firms more
cautions and freezing investment (Bloom, 2009). On the other hand, risk-averse entrepreneurs
might prefer to reduce the size of their firms as physical capital becomes riskier when skewness
drops, and therefore invest a larger fraction of their wealth in the risk-free asset, further reducing
capital investment. In order to quantify the relative importance of these two channels, in this
section we compare the impact of an increase in risk in two economies, one in which we maintain
the level of risk aversion of entrepreneurs as in the baseline case but we allow flexible capital
investment by shutting down all adjustment costs; and a second economy in which adjustment
costs are as in the baseline case but entrepreneurs value consumption using a risk-neutral linear
utility function.

   Figure 10 shows the response of different macro aggregates after a decrease in skewness
when we shut down the adjustment costs. In this case, the output response is stronger and
steeper relative to the baseline case (compare the line with + symbols to baseline in the top left
panel of Figure 10). Hence, capital adjustment costs dampen the impact of a skewness shock.
The decline in output is driven by a decline in capital investment, which drops as entrepreneurs
scale back their firms in response to a decline in the skewness of shocks, moving their wealth
into the risk-free asset as the bottom right panel of Figure 10 shows.

   When we consider entrepreneurs with linear utility­basically making them risk-neutral­the
impact of a decrease in the skewness of firms' shocks generates a much larger decrease in
output (compare the line with x symbols to the baseline results in Figure 10). Consumption,
however, increases after the shock as entrepreneurs reduce their capital investment due to the
increase in the inaction regions generated by the adjustment costs and the increase in risk.
Investment in the risk-free asset remains almost unaltered since risk-neutral individuals invest
most of their wealth in their firm. The increase in aggregate consumption is counterfactual
as a typical recession is characterized by a concurrent decrease in skewness and aggregate
consumption. Hence, we conclude that to obtain plausible business cycle fluctuations stemming
from a decrease in the skewness of firms' productivity shocks, a combination of risk-averse
entrepreneurs and adjustment costs is appropriate.




                                                 23
Changes in the Returns of the Risk-Free Asset

    Throughout our analysis, we have assumed that the interest rate of the risk-free asset is fixed
and does not respond to aggregate economic conditions. As we showed in the previous section,
entrepreneurs respond to a skewness shock by reducing their position in the risky asset­physical
capital­and increasing their investment in the risk-free asset. This means that our quantitative
results could change if the interest rate of the risk-free asset drops enough to counteract the
aggregate impact of a skewness shock.

    One way to evaluate whether changes in the interest rate have a large quantitative impact
on our results is to fully endogenize the interest rate of the risk-free asset. This comes at the
additional cost of having to solve a larger general equilibrium loop. Instead, we take a simpler
route. In particular, we consider a pseudo-GE case in which the annual return of the risk-free
asset declines by 110 basis points when the economy is at the high-risk state (high variance and
negative skewness). Importantly, this is fully incorporated in the solution of the entrepreneurs'
problem as they correctly predict that during periods of high aggregate risk, the interest rate
of the risky-free asset is lower.

    The line with circles in Figure 10 displays the evolution of different macroeconomic aggre-
gates after a risk shock that decreases the skewness of productivity shocks paired with a decline
in the interest rate of the risk-free asset. Interestingly, the concurrent decrease in the interest
rate has little impact on the overall drop in aggregate economic activity generated by a skewness
shock, although the results move in the expected direction with capital investment declining
less and investment in the risk-free asset increasing less relative to the baseline case. There
are two factors that explain the rather small relative impact of the decline in the interest rate
on our baseline results. The first is the relatively high risk aversion of entrepreneurs, which
combined with the large swings of the distribution of the productivity shocks, generates strong
incentives for the entrepreneurs to move their wealth into the risk-free asset, despite its lower
returns. The second relates to the fixed adjustment costs. It is well established that fixed ad-
justment costs generate regions of inaction that increase after an uncertainty shock. Therefore,
after a decrease in skewness, entrepreneurs become less responsive to changes in the interest
rate. Hence, we conclude that changes in the interest rate do not have a large impact on our
quantitative results.


6    Conclusions
    This paper studies how the distribution of the growth rate of firm-level variables changes
over the business cycle. Using firm-level panel data for the United States from Census and
non-Census datasets and firm-level panel data for almost forty other countries, we reach three

                                                24
main conclusions. First, recessions are characterized by a large drop in the skewness of firm-
level employment growth, sales growth, productivity growth, and stock returns. Second, the
decline in the skewness of firms' outcomes is a phenomenon observed not only in the United
States but also in other countries, both developed and developing. Finally, we also find strong
procyclicality of the skewness at the industry level, in that industries with low and high growth
rates experience a negative and positive skewness of shocks, respectively.

   In the second part of our paper, we analyze the impact of a change in the skewness of firms'
idiosyncratic productivity in the context of a heterogeneous-agent model. We assume that the
exogenous idiosyncratic productivity process faced by entrepreneurs is subject to time-varying
skewness, and we choose the parameters of this model to match the evolution of the dispersion
and skewness of the sales growth distribution in the United States. Our results suggest that
a change in the skewness of the firm-level productivity distribution can by itself generate a
significant decline in aggregate economic activity (even though the mean and variance of firms'
shocks are held constant). In fact, in our modeled economy, a decline in the skewness of
firms' shocks of the magnitude observed in a typical US recession generates a drop in GDP of
1.7%. The combined impact of a variance and a skewness shock generates an even large decline
in output (-2.0%), consumption (-2.0%), and investment (-40.0%), suggesting higher moment
micro-shocks can play a major role in explaining business cycle dynamics.




                                               25
References
Alfaro, I., Bloom, N. and Lin, X. (2018). The Finance Uncertainty Multiplier. Working
 Paper 24571, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Arellano, C., Bai, Y. and Kehoe, P. (2018). Financial markets and fluctuations in uncer-
 tainty. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report.
Bachmann, R. and Bayer, C. (2013). 'wait-and-see' business cycles? Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 60 (6), 704­719.
-- and -- (2014). Investment Dispersion and the Business Cycle. American Economic Review,
  104 (4), 1392­1416.
Barro, R. and Ursua, J. (2011). Rare Macroeconomic Disasters. NBER Working Papers
 17328, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 121 (3), 823­866.
Basu, S. and Bundick, B. (2017). Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand. Econo-
 metrica, 85 (3), 937­958.
Berger, D., Dew-Becker, I. and Giglio, S. (2017). Uncertainty shocks as second-moment
 news shocks. Working Paper 23796, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983). Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 98 (1), 85­106.
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica, 77 (3), 623­685.
-- (2014). Fluctuations in uncertainty. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28 (2), 153­76.
--, Floetotto, M., Jaimovich, N., Saporta-Eksten, I. and Terry, S. J. (2018). Really
  uncertain business cycles. Econometrica, 86 (3), 1031­1065.
Busch, C., Domeij, D., Guvenen, F. and Madeira, R. (2017). Asymmetric Business Cycle
 Risk and Government Policy. Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Davis, S. J. and Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and
 employment reallocation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (3), 819­863.
--, --, Jarmin, R., Miranda, J., Foote, C. and Nagypal, E. (2006). Volatility and dis-
  persion in business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms. NBER Macroe-
  conomics Annual, 21, 107­179.
Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and Miranda, J. (2015). Where has all the
 skewness gone? The decline in highgrowth (young) firms in the US. Working Paper 21776,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., Guerron-Quintana, P., Rubio-Ramirez, J. F. and Uribe,
  M. (2011). Risk Matters: The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks. American Economic Review,
  101 (6), 2530­2561.
Ferreira, T. (2018). Stock market cross-sectional skewness and business cycle fluctuations.
Gabaix, X. (2008). Variable Rare Disasters: A Tractable Theory of Ten Puzzles in Macro-
 finance. American Economic Review, 98 (2), 64­67.

                                             26
-- (2011). The granular origins of macroeconomic fluctuations. Econometrica, 79 (3), 733­772.
-- (2012). Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-finance.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (2), 645­700.
Gilchrist, S., Sim, J. W. and Zakrajsek, E. (2014). Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
  investment dynamics. Tech. Rep. 20038, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gourio, F. (2008). Disasters and recoveries. American Economic Review, 98 (2), 68­73.
-- (2012). Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review, 102 (6), 2734­2766.
-- (2013). Credit risk and disaster risk. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5 (3),
  1­34.
Guvenen, F., Ozkan, S. and Song, J. (2014). The nature of countercyclical income risk.
 Journal of Political Economy, 122 (2), 612­660.
Harmenberg, K. and Sievertsen, H. H. (2017). The Labor-Market Origins of Cyclical In-
 come Risk. Working paper, Institute for International Economic Studies.
Harvey, C. R. and Siddique, A. (2000). Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. Journal
 of Finance, 55 (3), 1263­1295.
Ilut, C., Kehrig, M. and Schneider, M. (2018). Slow to hire, quick to fire: Employment
  dynamics with asymmetric responses to news. Journal of Political Economy, 126 (5), 2011­
  2071.
Jordà, Ò. (2005). Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections. American
  economic review, 95 (1), 161­182.
Jurado, K., Ludvigson, S. C. and Ng, S. (2015). Measuring uncertainty. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 105 (3), 1177­1216.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., Villegas-Sanchez, C., Volosovych, V. and Yesil-
 tas, S. (2015). How to construct nationally representative firm level data from the ORBIS
 global database. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kehrig, M. (2011). The Cyclicality of Productivity Dispersion. Working Paper 11-15, Center
 for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
Kelley, T. L. (1947). Fundamentals of Statistics. Harvard University Press.
Khan, A. and Thomas, J. K. (2008). Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Nonconvexities in
 Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics. Econometrica, 76 (2), 395­436.
Kilic, M. and Wachter, J. A. (2015). Risk, Unemployment, and the Stock Market: A Rare-
  Event-Based Explanation of Labor Market Volatility. NBER Working Paper 21575.
Kim, T.-H. and White, H. (2004). On more robust estimation of skewness and kurtosis.
  Finance Research Letters, 1 (1), 56­73.
Kozeniauskas, N., Orlik, A. and Veldkamp, L. (2018). What are uncertainty shocks?
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 100, 1­15.
Kozlowski, J., Veldkamp, L. and Venkateswaran, V. (2016). The tail that wags the
 economy: Belief-driven business cycles and persistent stagnation.


                                               27
--, -- and -- (2018). The tail that keeps the riskless rate low. Tech. rep., National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Krusell, P. and Smith, A. A. (1998). Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy.
 Journal of Political Economy, 106 (5), 867­896.
Leduc, S. and Liu, Z. (2016). Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks. Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 82, 20­35.
McKay, A. (2017). Time-varying idiosyncratic risk and aggregate consumption dynamics.
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 88, 1­14.
Oh, S. and Wachter, J. A. (2018). Cross-sectional Skewness. Working paper, Wharton School
 at University of Pennsylvania.
Olley, G. S. and Pakes, A. (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
 equipment. Econometrica, 64 (6), 1263­1297.
Orlik, A. and Veldkamp, L. (2014). Understanding uncertainty shocks and the role of black
 swans. Tech. Rep. 20445, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rietz, T. A. (1988). The equity risk premium: a solution. Journal of Monetary Economics,
  22 (1), 117­131.
Schaal, E. (2017). Uncertainty and unemployment. Econometrica, 85 (6), 1675­1721.
Syverson, C. (2011). What determines productivity? Journal of Economic literature, 49 (2),
  326­65.
Venkateswaran, V., Veldkamp, L. and Kozlowski, J. (2015). The Tail that Wags the
 Economy: Belief-Driven Business Cycles and Persistent Stagnation. 2015 Meeting Papers
 800, Society for Economic Dynamics.
Wachter, J. A. (2013). Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market
 volatility? Journal of Finance, 68 (3), 987­1035.
Yasar, M., Raciborski, R. and Poi, B. (2008). Production function estimation in stata
 using the olley and pakes method. The Stata Journal, 8 (2), 221­231.




                                              28
             Figure 1 ­ The Skewness of Firm Outcomes Is Lower During Recessions
                                     (a) Census LBD: Log Employment Growth




                                           (b) Compustat: Log Sales Growth
                   2




                                                                                                 Expansion
                                                                                                 Recession
                   1.5
                Density
                  10.5
                   0




                          -1.5      -1.0          -.5           0             .5           1.0           1.5
                                                        Log Sales Growth

Note: The top panel of Figure 1 shows the employment-weighted empirical density of the distribution of firms' log
employment growth between years t and t + 1 constructed from the LBD. The lower panel shows the empirical density
of the distribution of firms' log sales growth between years t and t + 1 constructed from Compustat. Each density has
been rescaled to have a median of zero and unitary variance. The blue-dashed line shows the density of a pooled sample
of Expansion years (2003 to 2006 and 2010 to 2014) whereas the red-solid line shows the density of a pooled sample of
Recession years (2001 and 2008). In the top panel, the unscaled 10th percentile of the log employment growth distribution
during expansion (recession) periods is -0.17 (-0.27), the 50th is 0.01 (-0.02), and the 90th is 0.23 (0.18). In the bottom
panel, the corresponding moments are -0.22 (-0.47), 0.05 (-0.03), and 0.45 (0.33). See Appendix B for additional details
on the sample construction and moment calculations in the LBD and Compustat.



                                                            29
                 Figure 2 ­ The Skewness of Firm-Level Outcomes is Procyclical
                                                                    (a) Census LBD: Skewness of Log Employment Growth



                                        .3
                  Kelley Skewness of Log Employment Growth
                      -.1        0      -.2.1        .2




                                                             1978     1982   1986   1990   1994    1998    2002     2006     2010     2014


                                                                       (b) Compustat: Skewness of Log Sales Growth
                                        .3
                  Kelley Skewness of Log Sales Growth
                  -.1        0          .1
                                        -.2        .2




                                                             1970     1975   1980   1985    1990    1995     2000     2005     2010

Note: The top panel of Figure 2 shows the time series of the employment-weighted cross-sectional Kelley skewness of the
distribution of firms' log employment growth between years t and t +1 constructed from the LBD. The bottom panel shows
the time series of the cross-sectional Kelley skewness of the distribution of firms' log sales growth between years t and
t + 1 constructed from Compustat. Shaded areas represent the share of the year (in quarters) declared as a recession by
the NBER. See Appendix B for details on the sample construction and moment calculations in the LBD and Compustat.




                                                                                            30
     Figure 3 ­ The Dispersion of Left Tail of Firm-Level Outcomes is Countercyclical
                                                                           (a) Census LBD: Dispersion of Log Employment Growth



                                                              .35
                  P90-P50 and P50-P10 of Log Employment Growth
                          .2          .25          .3




                                                                                P9050
                                                                                P5010
                                           .15




                                                                    1978     1982    1986   1990    1994    1998    2002     2006     2010     2014


                                                                               (b) Compustat: Dispersion of Log Sales Growth
                                           .5




                                                                                P9050
                                                                                P5010
                  P9050 and P5010 of Log Sales Growth
                     .2           .3       .1   .4




                                                                    1970      1975   1980    1985    1990    1995     2000     2005     2010

Note: The top panel of Figure 3 shows the time series of the cross-sectional dispersion of the distribution of firms' log
employment growth between years t and t + 1 constructed from the LBD. The bottom panel shows the time series of the
cross-sectional dispersion of the distribution of firms' annual log sales growth between years t and t + 1 constructed from
Compustat. Shaded areas represent the share of the year (in quarters) declared as a recession by the NBER. See Appendix
B for details on the sample construction and moment calculations in the LBD and Compustat.




                                                                                                     31
      Figure 4 ­ The Skewness of Firm-Level Outcomes is Procyclical Within Countries
                                                              (a) BvD Osiris: Cross-Country Log Sales Growth



                                              1.5
                                                                                                                             Expansions
                                              1                                                                              Recessions
                                    Density
                                              0.5
                                              0




                                                    -1.5          -1           -.5             0            .5           1            1.5
                                                                                       Log Sales Growth


                              (b) BvD Osiris: Log Employment Growth and Log Sales Growth by Country-Year

                                                       Log Employment Growth                                     Log Sales Growth
                           .6




                                                                                               .2
                           .45




                                                                                               .15
                           .3




                                                                                               .1
         Kelley Skewness




                                                                                               .05
                           .15




                                                                                               0
                           0




                                                                                               -.05
                           -.15




                                                                                               -.1
                           -.3




                                  -.1                -.05       0      .05      .1       .15          -.2   -.1       0       .1       .2   .3
                                                    Average of Log Employment Growth                        Average of Log Sales Growth

Note: The top panel of Figure 4 shows the empirical density of firms' log sales growth in US dollars between years t and
t + 1 constructed from the BvD Osiris dataset. Each density has been rescaled to have a median of zero and unitary
variance. The red-solid line is the empirical density over all the observations of firms during recession years, defined
as years in which the country is in the first decile of the country-specific distribution of the growth rate of GDP per
capita (74K firm-year observations). The blue-dashed line is the empirical density over all the observations of firms during
expansion periods (523K firm-year observations) which are years not classified as recessions. The unscaled 10th percentile
of the sales growth distribution during expansion (recession) periods is -0.31 (-0.42), the 50th percentile is 0.06 (0.00), and
the 90th percentile is 0.51 (0.44). The bottom left (right) panel displays a scatter plot showing the relation between the
within-country average firm log employment growth between years t and t + 1 (log sales growth) and the within-country
Kelley skewness of firms' log employment growth between years t and t + 1 (log sales growth) constructed from the BvD
Osiris dataset. The regression slope is equal to 1.59 (0.50) which is significant to the 1%. Scatter plots controlling for
time and country fixed effects. See Appendix B for details on the sample construction and moment calculations.


                                                                                         32
     Figure 5 ­ The Skewness of Firm-Level Outcomes is Procyclical Within Industries
                                                                (a) Census LBD: Log Employment Growth by Industry-Year



                                        .3
                  Kelley Skewness of Log Employment Growth
                      -.1        0      -.2.1       .2




                                                             -.08           -.04              0            .04            .08          .12
                                                                                     Average of Log Employment Growth


                                                                    (b) Compustat: Log Sales Growth by Industry-Year
                                        .4          .3
                  Kelley Skewness of Log Sales Growth
                    -.1      0       .1 -.2  .2




                                                             -.15     -.1          -.05         0         .05        .1     .15   .2
                                                                                          Average of Log Sales Growth

Note: The top panel of Figure 5 displays a scatter plot showing the relation between the within-industry business cycle,
measured by the average growth rate of employment, and the within-industry skewness, measured by the Kelley skewness
of firms' employment growth constructed from the LBD. Each dot is a quantile of the industry-year distribution of the
average log employment growth, where an industry is defined by a two-digit NAICS group. scatter plots controlling for
industry and time fixed effects. The slope coefficient is equal to 1.99 which is statistically significant at the 1%. The
bottom panel shows the same statistics for sales growth distribution from Compustat. The slope coefficient is 1.33 which
is statistically significant at the 1%. See Appendix B for details on the sample construction and moment calculations in
the LBD and Compustat.


                                                                                                  33
      Figure 6 ­ The Skewness of Productivity Shocks is Procyclical Within Industries

                                                        (a) BvD Amadeus: Firm-Level Productivity Shocks by Industry-Year

                                                 .1
                 Kelley Skewness of TFP Shocks
                                                 .05
                                                 0
                                                 -.05




                                                        -.05              -.025                0              .025         .05
                                                                                    Average of TFP Shocks


                               (b) Census ASM: Establishment-Level Productivity Shocks by Industry-Year
                                                 .1
                                                 .05
                 Kelley Skewness of TFP Shocks
                                                 0
                                                 -.05
                                                 -.1
                                                 -.15




                                                        -.03       -.02           -.01         0        .01          .02   .03
                                                                                    Average of TFP Shocks

Note: The top panel of Figure 6 displays a scatter plot showing the relation between the skewness of firms' productivity
shocks within a country-industry-year cell, and the average productivity shock within the same cell constructed from the
BvD Amadeus dataset. Each dot is a quantile of the industry-year distribution of average TFP shocks, where an industry
is defined by a two-digit NAICS group. To reduce the impact of outliers on our estimates, we winsorize the distribution
of Kelley skewness and average growth at the top and bottom 0.05. The slope coefficient is 1.43 which is statistically
significant at the 1%. The bottom panel displays similar statistics calculated from the US Census data for a sample of
manufacturing establishments. The slope coefficient is 3.27 which is statistically significant at the 1%. Binscatter plots
controlling for industry, country, and time fixed effects. See appendix B.4 for additional details on the sample selection
and the TFP estimation procedure.
                                                                                          34
                                                      Figure 7 ­ Macroeconomic Impact of a Skewness Shock
                                                                      (a) Industrial Production



                                    1
                                                              Skewness
                                                              Volatility
                  % Impact on Industrial Production
                      -.5        0  -1       .5




                                                       0        4          8          12          16   20   24
                                                                               Months After Shock


                                                                           (b) Employment
                                    .2




                                                              Skewness
                                                              Volatility
                                       .1
                  % Impact on Employment
                  -.2   -.1     0   -.3




                                                       0        4          8          12          16   20   24
                                                                               Months After Shock
Note: The top panel of Figure 7 shows the impact of a shock to the skewness of daily stock returns of two standard
deviations (line with squares) and the impact of a shock to the volatility of daily stock returns (line with circles). Dashed
lines show the corresponding 95% confidence intervals. The skewness (volatility) is measured as the Kelley skewness
(90th-to-10th log percentiles differential). The standard deviation of the time-series of the Kelley skewness (90th-to-10th
log percentiles differential) is 9.5% (1.95%). The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows the impact on aggregate employment.
See appendix C for details on the data and robustness.




                                                                                   35
                             Table I ­ Data and Sample Characteristics

      Source                                Country             Sample      Frequency     Comments
                                                                Period
      Census Longitudinal                United States       1976-2015       Annual       Employment for entire
      Business Database                                                                   nonfarm private sector


      Census and Annual Survey           United States       1976-2015       Annual       Employment, sales,
      of Manufacturing Firms                                                              and TFP
                                                                                          for manufacturing
                                                                                          establishments


      Compustat                          United States       1970-2017      Quarterly     Employment, sales,
                                                                                          and stock prices for
                                                                                          publicly traded firms


      BvD Osiris                       Several Countries     1991-2015       Annual       Employment and sales
                                                                                          for publicly traded
                                                                                          firms in 39 countries


      BvD Amadeus                      Several Countries     1996-2018       Annual       Sales, employment,
                                                                                          and TFP for firms
                                                                                          in 21 countries


      Global                           Several Countries     1985-2017        Daily       Stock Prices for firms
      Compustat                                                                           in 29 countries

Note: Table I shows the list of datasets and time-frame used in the analysis. Data availability varies country by country.
See Table A.6 in the Appendix for a complete list of countries and available data.




                                                           36
                          Table II ­ The Skewness of Firms Outcomes is Lower During Recessions and Rises in Expansions

       Dependent Variable:                                                  Kelley Skewness of Log Growth of Firms Outcomes
              Sample:                         United States                               Cross-Country                                        Cross-Industry
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)              (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)
             Outcome:                Emp.        Sales    Returns          Emp.        Sales      Returns         TFP              Emp.        Sales     Returns       TFP


             GDPi,t                 4.64        5.40          2.09        5.94        3.10         2.16
                                     (1.45)      (1.06)       (1.03)       (1.36)     (1.07)       (0.87)


               Sj,t                                                                                              1.14             6.43       13.44        1.36        2.20
                                                                                                                 (0.35)           (1.16)      (1.41)       (0.51)     (1.04)


                R2                    0.32        0.23        0.07          0.27       0.38         0.41          0.14             0.27        0.49         0.24       0.26
                 N                     39         47           184          701         720        2, 428         3, 503           1, 045     1, 046       4, 133       457
              Period                 76-14       70-17        70-16        91-15       91-15       70-17          99-18            70-17       70-17       70-16      76-15




37
               Freq.                   Yr          Yr          Qtr           Yr         Yr          Qtr            Yr               Yr          Yr          Qtr         Yr
                F.E.                    -          -            -         Yr/Ctry     Yr/Ctry    Qtr/Ctry     Yr/Ind/Ctry         Yr/Ind      Yr/Ind      Qtr/Ind     Yr/Ind
              Source                  LBD       CSTAT      CSTAT            BvD        BvD       GCSTAT         Amadeus           CSTAT       CSTAT       CSTAT        ASM
              Sample                    -        231K         650K         357K        633K       5,800K          357K             231K        231K        733K          -

     Note: The left panel of Table II shows a set of time series regressions for the United States in which the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness of the distribution of
     one-year firm log employment growth from the LBD (column 1), one-year log sales growth (column 2) from Compustat (CSTAT), and one-year stock returns (column
     3) from CSTAT. In each regression, the independent variable is the one-year log GDP per capita growth. LBD moments are weighted by firm size measured by the
     average employment of the firm between years t and t + 1. All regressions include a linear trend. Newey-West standard errors in parentheses below the point estimates.
     Columns (4) to (7) show a set of country-panel regressions in which the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness of different firm-level outcomes. Employment and
     sales data come from BvD Osiris dataset, stock returns are from Global Compustat (GCSTAT), and TFP shocks are estimated using data from the BvD Amadeus
     dataset. In each regression, the independent variable is the one-year of log GDP per capita growth. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Columns (8) to
     (11) show a series of industry-panel regressions in which the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness of the within-industry distribution of firms-level outcomes. In
     columns (8) to (10) an industry is defined as a 2-digit NAICS cell; in column (11) an industry is a 3-digits NAICS cell within manufacturing (NACIS 31-33). Results
     shown in column (11) come from the US Census of Manufacturing (CM) and the Annual Survey of Manufacturing Firms (ASM). In each regression, the independent
     variable is the average log sales growth within an industry-year cell. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. The row labeled Sample shows the underlying
     sample of firms/periods used to calculate the cross-sectional moments. Underlying sample sizes in LBD and the Census' CMF/ASM are not disclosed. * p < 0.1, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                          Table III ­ Parameterization

                  Preferences and Technology
                           0.45      Frisch elasticity of labor supply
                            2.5      Leisure preference, non-entrepreneurs spend 1/3 time working
                            2.0      Risk aversion, non-entrepreneurial sector
                            6.0      Risk aversion, entrepreneurs
                          0.950.25   Annual discount factor of 95%
                   r       0.005     Annual return of risk-free asset of 2%
                           0.25      CRS production, markup of 33%
                           0.50      CRS labor share of 2/3, capital share of 1/3
                           3.8%      Annual depreciation of capital stock of 14.4%
                  a        0.95      Quarterly persistence of aggregate productivity
                  a       0.75%      Standard deviation of innovation of aggregate productivity
                           0.95      Quarterly persistence of idiosyncratic productivity
                  Adjustment costs
                  1       1.50%      Fixed cost of changing capital stock
                  2         7.0      Quadratic cost of changing capital stock
                  3       34.0%      Resale loss of capital
                  Estimated Parameter of Idiosyncratic Stochastic Process
                  L
                  1        1.45      Standard deviation of first mixture in low-risk periods (%)
                  L
                  2        7.55      Standard deviation of second mixture in low -risk periods (%)
                  µL       -0.92     Mean of first mixture in low-risk periods (%)
                      L
                  p        63.67     Probability of first mixture in low-risk periods (%)
                  H
                  1        4.37      Standard deviation of first mixture in high-risk periods (%)
                  H
                  2        9.06      Standard deviation of second mixture in high-risk periods (%)
                  H
                  µ        1.98      Mean of first mixture in high-risk periods (%)
                  pH       78.28     Probability of first mixture in high-risk periods (%)
                  Transition Probabilities of Risk States
                  L        0.97      Quarterly probability of remaining in low risk state
                  H        0.84      Quarterly probability of remaining in high-risk state

Note: The top two panels of Table III shows the calibrated parameters referring to preferences, technology, and adjustment
costs. The two bottom panels of Table III shows the parameters of the stochastic process of firm-level productivity. We
target moments of the annual change of quarterly sales in Compustat. The parameters for low-risk periods (denoted by an
upper script L) are obtained by targeting the P 9010t , P 9050t , and the P 5010t percentiles differential, and Kelley skewness
of the log sales growth distribution for all the expansion years between 2000 and 2014. The parameters for high-risk periods
(denoted by an upper script H ) are obtained by targeting the same set of moments for years 2001 and 2008 (full recession
years). See Table IV for comparison between the targeted and model generated moments. The transition probability L
is calculated as the share of expansion quarters that were followed by another expansion quarter, whereas H is calculated
as the share of recession quarters that were followed by another recession quarter using data from 1970 to 2014.




                                                              38
                                     Table IV ­ Risk Process Moments

                                    P 90 - P 10    P 90 - P 50    P 50 - P 10    KSK           Y rs
                  Data


                  Low-Risk             0.54            0.30           0.24        0.10     03-06;10-14
                  High-Risk            0.70            0.31           0.39        -0.11       01,08
                   (H - L)             0.16            0.01           0.15        -0.20          -

                  Model


                  Low-Risk             0.48            0.27           0.20        0.15           -
                  High-Risk            0.58            0.26           0.32        -0.10          -
                   (H - L)             0.10           -0.01           0.12        -0.25          -


Note: The top panel of Table IV shows cross-sectional moments log quarterly sales growth between quarters t and t +4 from
Compustat for low-risk periods­quarters in the years 2003 to 2006 and quarters in the years 2010 to 2014­and high-risk
periods­quarters in years 2001 and 2008. Quarters in years 2002 and 2009 are discarded for not representing full recession
years. The model moments, shown in the lower panel of Table IV, are calculated from a 5,000-quarters simulation with
the first 500 quarters discarded.




                                                           39
                                                Figure 8 ­ Productivity and Sales Growth after an Increase in Risk

                                                                                                    (a) Average

                                                            Productivity Growth                                                            Sales Growth
                                       1




                                                                                                                1
      Deviation from Value in Quarter 0
                              0




                                                                                                                0
                     -1




                                                                                                                -1
             -2




                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                 Variance and Skewness
                                                                                 Skewness Only
                                                                                 Dispersion Only
    -3




                                                                                                                -3
                                           -2   0   2      4      6     8    10 12 14          16     18              -2   0   2      4      6     8     10 12 14       16   18
                                                        Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)                                         Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)


                                                                                                 (b) P90-P10

                                                            Productivity Growth                                                            Sales Growth
                                     15
     Deviation from Value in Quarter 0




                                                                                 Variance and Skewness
                                                                                                                15




                                                                                 Skewness Only
                                                                                 Dispersion Only
                         10




                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                5
               5




                                                                                                                0
    0




                                           -2   0   2      4      6     8    10 12 14          16     18              -2   0   2      4      6     8     10 12 14       16   18
                                                        Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)                                         Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)


                                                                                             (c) Kelley skewness

                                                            Productivity Growth                                                            Sales Growth
                                       5




                                                                                                                5
      Deviation from Value in Quarter 0
                                0




                                                                                                                0
    -25 -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                -5
                                                                                                                -10
                                                                                                                -15
                                                                                                                -20




                                                                                 Variance and Skewness
                                                                                 Skewness Only
                                                                                 Dispersion Only
                                                                                                                -25




                                           -2   0   2      4      6     8    10 12 14          16     18              -2   0   2      4      6     8     10 12 14       16   18
                                                        Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)                                         Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)
Note: The top left panel of Figure 8 shows the model-generated average of the one-year productivity growth distribution
(ej,t = ej,t+4 - ej,t ), whereas the top right shows the average of the log sales growth distribution (yj,t+4 = log yj,t+4 -
log yj,t ) for different risk shocks. The middle and bottom panels show the dispersion and skewness. Each plot is based
on independent simulations of 1,000 economies of 300-quarter length. In each simulation, we assume that the economy
is in the low-risk state for 150 periods. We then impose a risk shock in quarter 151, allowing normal evolution of the
economy afterwards. We plot the deviation relative to the moment value in quarter 0. The red line with triangles trances
the impact of an increase in the variance of firms' shocks; the black line with diamonds trances the impact of a drop in
the skewness of firms' shocks; the blue line with circles trances the joint impact of an increase in variance and a decrease
in skewness.
                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                              Figure 9 ­ Effect of Skewness Shock on Output

                                                                                                                                         (a) Output


                                                                                         .5
                                                                     Deviation from Value in Quarter 0 (%)
                                                                       -1.5       -1     -2-.5      0




                                                                                                             -2       0     2      4       6      8      10    12                    14    16    18
                                                                                                                                  Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)


                                                                                                                                (b) Macroeconomic Aggregates


                                                                                                                      Labor                                                 Investment in Capital
                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0




                                                                                                                                                    0
         Deviation from Value in Quarter 0 (%)




                                                                                                                                                    -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                    -2 0                                     2    4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18                           -2 0    2   4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18


                                                                                                                  Consumption                                        Investment in Risk-Free Asset
                                                                                                                                                    .02
                                                 .5
                                                 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0




                                                                                                                                                    .01
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                    -.01




                                                                    -2 0                                     2    4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18                           -2 0    2   4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18

                                                                                                                            Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)
Note: Figure 9 shows the effect of a decline in the skewness of firm idiosyncratic productivity. The plot is based on
independent simulations of 1,000 economies of 300-quarter length. In each simulation, we assume that the economy is in
the low-risk state for 150 periods. We then impose a drop in the skewness of firms' shocks in quarter 151, allowing normal
evolution of the economy afterwards. We plot the log percentage deviation of each macroeconomic aggregate from its value
in quarter 0. Top panel shows the effects of output, whereas the bottom panel shows the impact on labor, investment in
capital, consumption, and investment in the risk-free asset.
                                                                                                                                              41
                                          Figure 10 ­ Effect of Skewness and Variance Shocks on Macro Aggregates


                                                                    Output                                              Investment in Capital
                                         1




                                                                                                   0
                                         0




                                                                                                   -25
                                                                                                                                     Baseline
 Deviation from Value in Quarter 0 (%)




                                                                                                                                     Variance and Skewness
                                         -1




                                                                                                   -50
                                                                                                                                     News Shock
                                                                                                                                     Risk Neutral
                                         -2




                                                                                                   -75
                                                                                                                                     No Adjustment Costs




                                                                                                   -150
                                                                                                                                     Psudo GE
                                         -3




                                              -2   0   2   4    6     8   10   12   14   16   18          -2   0    2    4   6   8     10   12      14   16   18

                                                               Consumption                                         Investment in Risk-Free Asset


                                                                                                   .15
                                         8




                                                                                                   .1
                                         4




                                                                                                   .05
                                         0




                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.05
                                         -4




                                              -2   0   2   4    6     8   10   12   14   16   18          -2   0    2    4   6   8     10   12      14   16   18

                                                                          Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)
Note: Figure 10 shows the effect of a decline in the skewness of firms' idiosyncratic productivity for several different
parameterizations of the model. Each plot is based on independent simulations of 1,000 economies of 300-quarter length.
In each simulation, we assume that the economy is in the low-risk state for 150 periods. We then impose a risk shock
in quarter 151, allowing normal evolution of the economy afterwards. We plot the log percentage deviation of each
macroeconomic aggregate from its value in quarter 0. The Baseline (diamonds) is the estimated effect under the baseline
parameterization; Variance and Skewness (squares) traces the impact of a skewness shock pared with a variance shock;
News shock (triangles) traced the impact after a change in the skewness of shocks that does not change the realizations of
shocks faced by firms; Risk neutral (x symbols) traces the impact of a skewness shock in the case that entrepreneurs have
linear utility functions; No Adjustment costs (+ symbols) traces the impact of a skewness shock in the case all adjustment
costs have been set to 0; Psudo GE (circles) traces the impact of a skewness shock paired with a decline in the returns of
the risk-free asset. Labor is omitted since it follows the same pattern of output.




                                                                                              42
                                                                                                                                                                                 A


                                      Table A.1 ­ Dispersion of firms Outcomes is Higher During Recessions

                                           90th-to-10th Log Percentiles Differential of the Log Growth of Firms' Outcomes
                                                            United States                                                    Cross-Country
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)                (7)             (8)             (9)
                                         Firm Sales                Stock Returns            Firm Emp.          Firm Sales      Firm Stock      Firm Emp.
                                One Year      Three Year      One Year      Three Year       One Year            Growth         Returns          Growth


                  GDPi,t        -3.91***         2.55**        -3.93**       -4.78***          0.93*              -0.79           -1.84           -0.76
                                  (1.14)         (0.99)         (1.62)         (1.78)          (0.50)             (0.59)          (1.79)          (0.74)


                      N            184            182            180            180              39                838            4,306            824




43
                                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix: Robustness Results




                    Freq.          Qtr            Qtr            Qtr            Qtr              Yr                 Yr             Qtr              Yr
                     F.E.           N                 N           N              N               N              Yr/Ctry         Qtr/Ctry        Yr/Ctry
                   Source        CSTAT          CSTAT          CSTAT          CSTAT            LBD                 BvD          GCSTAT            BvB

Note: The left panel of Table A.1 shows a series of time series regressions in which the dependent variables are the 90th-to-10th log percentiles differential of the one-year
and three-year growth rate of sales (columns 1 and 2), stock returns (columns 3 and 4), and employment growth (columns 5) for a sample of firms from Compustat
(columns 1 to 4) and the LBD (columns 5). Compustat data cover the period 1970 to 2017 whereas LBD data covers the period 1976 to 2015. In each regression, the
independent variable is the annual growth rate of quarterly GDP per capita. All regressions include a linear trend. Newey-West standard errors in parentheses below
the point estimates. The right panel of Table A.1 shows a series of country-panel regressions where the dependent variable is the within-country P90-P10 log percentiles
differential of firm-level sales growth, stock returns, or employment growth. The independent variable is the growth rate of GDP per capita at the country level. Sales
and employment data are obtained from the BvD Osiris database, whereas stocks returns are obtained from Global Compustat. All regressions consider a full set of
time and country fixed effects. The row labeled Sample shows the underlying sample of firms used to calculate the cross-sectional moments. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.
                                                  Table A.2 ­ Higher Order Moments of Firm-Level Outcomes

                                                       Kelley Skewness                                                        Crow-Siddiqui Kurtosis
                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)                (5)                 (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
                               Residual Sales             Sales per Employee          Sales Deviation                  Firm Sales                 Stock Returns
                         One Year      Three Years      One Year     Three Years                              One Year      Three Years     One Year      Three Years


            GDPi,t         3.80            1.48          3.01           4.17               1.46                0.36            -0.19         0.16            -0.21
                           (1.42)         (0.91)          (1.23)         (0.97)            (0.58)               (0.08)         (0.12)         (0.06)         (0.13)


                N            178            178            174            166                47                  184            182            180             180




44
              Freq.         Qtr             Qtr            Qtr            Qtr                Yr                  Qtr            Qtr            Qtr             Qtr
             Sample         500K           500K           500K           500K               113K                640K           640K           650K            650K
             Source       CSTAT          CSTAT           CSTAT          CSTAT             CSTAT                CSTAT          CSTAT          CSTAT          CSTAT

     Note: The left panel of Table A.2 shows a series of time series regressions for the United States in which the dependent variable is the Kelley Skewness of the one-year
     and three-year growth rate of residualized sales growth (columns 1 and 2) and the growth rate of sales per employee (columns 3 and 4) for a sample of firms from
     Compustat. In columns (1) and (2), we have orthogonalized the growth rates of sales from time fixed-effects, firm-fixed effect, size, and other firm-level observable
     characteristics. Column (5) shows the correlation of GDP growth and the cross-sectional skewness of the deviation of annual firms' sales from an HP trend. Compustat
                                                                                                                                                              .5t -P 02.5t
     data cover the period 1970 to 2017. The dependent variable in columns (6) to (9) is the Crow-Siddiqui measure of kurtosis defined as CKUt = P 97       P 75t -P 25t
                                                                                                                                                                           . In
     each regression, the independent variable is the annual growth rate of quarterly GDP per capita. All firm-level moments were calculated weighting the growth rate
     observations by firm size measured by the average sales of the firm between periods t and t + k. All regressions include a linear trend. Newey-West standard errors in
     parentheses below the point estimates. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
        Table A.3 ­ Census LBD: Cross Sectional Moments of Log Employment Growth

                                          (1)             (3)                   (3)           (4)            (5)
                     Moment:            Kelley      Coefficient of          P 9010jt      P 9050jt      P 5010t
                                      Skewness        Skewness


                     AveEj,t           0.92***          8.15**              -1.38***      -2.47***      1.09***
                                        (0.16)          (4.05)               (0.34)        (0.42)        (0.08)


                         R2              0.56            0.31                 0.58            0.66           0.52
                         N                900             900                 900             900            900
                        F.E.            Yr/Ind          Yr/Ind              Yr/Ind        Yr/Ind        Yr/Ind
                      Period             76-14           76-14               76-14         76-14         76-14

Note: The results in Table A.3 are based in firm-level data from the Census' LBD dataset. Each column shows the results
of an industry panel OLS regressions in which the dependent variables is a different moment of the of employment growth
distribution and the independent variable is the average employment growth within an industry-year cell. An industry is
a 2-digit NAICS industry group. Standard errors clustered at the industry level, below the point estimates in parenthesis.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


                                    Table A.4 ­ Business Cycle Statistics

                                                      Data                                            Model
                                          (x)      (y ) / (x)         (x, y )           (x)      (y ) / (x)          (x, y )


            Output                       1.47         1.00            1.00             2.00           1.00           1.00
            Capital Investment           6.86         4.64            0.91             9.38           4.69           0.30
            Consumption                  1.21         0.82            0.87             1.81           0.91           0.65
            Hours                        1.89         1.28            0.87             2.00           1.00           1.00



Note: The left panel of Table A.4 displays business cycle statistics for quarterly US data covering 1970Q1 to 2017Q4. The
column  (x) is the standard deviation of the log variable in the first column. The column  (y ) / (x) is the standard
deviation of the variable relative to the standard deviation of log output. All business cycle data are current as of February
3, 2019. Output is real gross domestic product (FRED GDPC1), investment is real gross private domestic investment
(FRED GPDIC1), consumption is real personal consumption expenditures (FRED PCECC96), and hours is total non-farm
business sector hours (FRED HOANBS). The second panel contains business cycle statistics computed from a simulation
of the model of 5,000 quarters with the first 500 periods discarded. All series are HP-filtered with smoothing parameter
1,600, in logs expressed as percentages.


                      Table A.5 ­ Targeted Moments for Numerical Comparison

                                                      P 9010        P 9050       P 5010       KSK
                                    Low-Risk           0.54          0.30         0.24        0.10
                                    High-Risk          0.70          0.31         0.39        -0.11
                                 Only Skewness         0.54         0.243        0.297        -0.11
                                  Only Variance        0.70          0.39         0.31        0.10

Note: Table A.5 shows the target used in the estimation of the firm-level productivity process. Rows labeled "Low-Risk"
and "High-Risk" are used in the baseline estimation. The values for "Only Skewness" are used to estimate the parameters
when the economy is shocked with a change in the skewness only. Similarly, the values for "Only Variance" are used to
estimate the parameters when the economy is assumed to be shocked only by a change in the variance of firms' shocks
while keeping the skewness constant.


                                                               45
 Figure A.1 ­ Census LBD: Skewness of Log Employment Growth is Robustly Procyclical

                                                                        (a) Small Firms                                                                 (b) Medium and Large Firms
                                                .3




                                                                                                                                        .3
     Kelley Skewness of log Employment Growth
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                -.1




                                                                                                                                        -.1
                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                        -.2
                                                                                                       All                1-19                                                            All                 100-499
                                                                                                       20-49              50-99                                                           500-999             1000+
                                                -.3




                                                                                                                                        -.3
                                                      1978   1982   1986   1990    1994       1998   2002   2006   2010     2014              1978   1982   1986     1990   1994   1998   2002      2006   2010   2014



                                                                           (c) Firm Age                                                                (d) Establishments and Firms
                                                .3




                                                                                                                                        .2
     Kelley Skewness of Log Employment Growth
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                0




                                                                                                                                        -.1
                                                -.1




                                                                                                                                        -.2
                                                -.2




                                                               All                Young                                                                All Firms
                                                               Middle             Mature                                                               All Establishments
                                                -.3




                                                                                                                                        -.3




                                                      1978   1982   1986   1990    1994       1998   2002   2006   2010     2014              1978   1982   1986     1990   1994   1998   2002      2006   2010   2014



                                                              (e) Entry and Exit of Firms                                                             (f) Other Measures of Skewness
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                        .2
     Kelley Skewness of Log Employment Growth
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                -.1




                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                       KSK (P90,P10)
                                                               KSK of Log-change                                                                       KSK (P95,P5)
                                                -.2




                                                               KSK of Arc-percentage change                                                            KSK (P97.5,P2.5)
                                                                                                                                        -.2




                                                      1978   1982   1986   1990    1994       1998   2002   2006   2010     2014              1978   1982   1986     1990   1994   1998   2002      2006   2010   2014

Note: Figure A.1 is based on firm- and establishment-level from the Census' LBD dataset. The top panels show the Kelley
skewness of the distribution of firms' log employment growth within different firm size groups. The center-left panel shows
the skewness of the distribution of firms' log employment growth within different firm age groups. Young firms are those
less than five years old, middle-aged firms are those between six and ten years old, and mature firms are those of more
than ten years old. Firms already in the sample in 1976 are not considered in any of these groups. Shaded areas represent
the share of the year (in quarters) declared as recession by the NBER. All moments weighted by average employment at
the firm or establishment level. See Appendix B for details on the sample construction and moment calculations in the
LBD.

                                                                                                                                   46
   Figure A.2 ­ The Skewness of Firm-Level Quarterly Log Sales Growth is Procyclical
                                                              (a) Compustat: Skewness of Log Sales Growth Distribution




                                         .3              .2
                      Kelley Skewness of Log Sales Growth
                    -.2       -.1      0 -.3    .1




                                                       1970q1 1975q1 1980q1 1985q1 1990q1 1995q1 2000q1 2005q1 2010q1


                                (b) Compustat: Upper and Lower Tail Dispersion of Log Sales Growth
                                         .5




                                                                      P90P50
                                                                      P50P10
                    P9050 and P5010 of Log Sales Growth
                       .2           .3   .1       .4




                                                       1970q1 1975q1 1980q1 1985q1 1990q1 1995q1 2000q1 2005q1 2010q1

Note: The top panel of Figure A.2 shows the time series of the cross-sectional Kelley skewness of the distribution of
the annual growth rate of quarterly sales for a sample of firms from Compustat. The bottom panel of Figure A.2 shows
the time series 90th-to-50th log percentiles differential and the 50th-to-10th log percentiles differential of the annual log
quarterly sales growth for a sample of firms from Compustat. The shaded areas represent NBER recession quarters. See
Appendix B.2 for additional details on the sample construction and moment calculations.




                                                                                        47
   Figure A.3 ­ Skewness of Firm-Level Outcomes Including Private Firms is Procyclical
                                                                      (a) BvD Amadeus: Log Employment Growth



                                                         .2
                Kelley Skewness of Log Employment Growth
                 -.3      -.2     -.1    0
                                       -.4      .1




                                                               -.15       -.1           -.05           0           .05   .1
                                                                                Average of Log Employment Growth


                                                                         (b) BvD Amadeus: Log Sales Growth
                                       .1
                Kelley Skewness of Log Sales Growth
                -.3       -.2      -.1 -.4    0




                                                              -.15       -.1           -.05             0          .05   .1
                                                                                   Average of Log Sales Growth

Note: Figure A.3 shows scatter plots of the Kelley skewness and average of the employment growth and sales growth
distribution within a country-year cell. The figure is based on an unbalanced panel of firms from the BvD Amadeus
database in the following European countries: AUT, BEL, BLR, CHE, DEU, DNK, ESP, FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HUN,
IRL, ISL, ITA, NLD, NOR, POL, PRT, SWE, UKR. The data cover years 2000 to 2015. BvD Amadeus contains private
and publicly traded firms. See Appendix B.4 for additional details the data construct and moment calculation.




                                                                                           48
                 Figure A.4 ­ Right and Left Tail Dispersion and Industry Cycle
                                                        (a) Compustat: Right Tail Dispersion of Log Sales Growth



                                 .6         .5
                  P9050 of Log Sales Growth
                        .3       .2
                                 .1.4




                                                  -.2             -.1           0            .1           .2       .3
                                                                         Average of Log Sales Growth


                                                        (b) Compustat: Left Tail Dispersion of Log Sales Growth
                                 .4         .35
                  P5010 of Log Sales Growth
                       .25        .3
                                 .2
                                 .15




                                                  -.2             -.1           0            .1           .2       .3
                                                                         Average of Log Sales Growth
Note: The Figure A.4 displays a scatter plot showing the relation between the within-industry business cycle, measured by
the average growth rate of sales growth, and the within industry dispersion of sales growth constructed from Compustat
data. The top panel shows the 90th-to-50th log percentiles differential whereas the bottom panel shows the 50th-to-10th
log percentiles differential.




                                                                                    49
Figure A.5 ­ The Skewness of Firm-Level Outcomes is Procyclical Within Narrow Industry
Groups
                                                                  (a) Compustat: Firm-Level Employment Growth


                                      40
                  Value of  and Confidence Intervals
                                             30




                                                          Kelleyj,t =  + Mej,t + j,t
                   10           20    0




                                                       Man3     HSer      Info      ASer     Man2  Man1    Util Cons    Tran1    Mini      Agro
                                                           Prof      Ret1      Ret2      FiIn   WhTr   OSer AdmW    ESer    Tran1     Arts     Tran2



                                                                       (b) Compustat: Firm-Level Sales Growth
                                      40
                  Value of  and Confidence Intervals
                                               30




                                                          Kelleyj,t =  + Mej,t + j,t
                    10           20   0




                                                       Mini   Info   Man3     Prof     FinI Arts FiIn    WhTr     Oser      Util     Agro
                                                          Man1    Man2   ASer     ReTr1 AdmW WhTr    ReTr2   ESer     Tran1      ReEs    Tran2

Note: Figure A.5 shows the coefficients and confidence intervals for within-industry regression of the cross-sectional Kelley
skewness on the average growth of employment (top panel) and sales (bottom panel) for a sample of publicly traded
firms from Compustat. Each industry regression includes a linear trend. Confidence intervals are calculated at 95% of
significance. Industries are defined as two-digit NAICS. In each plot, the dashed line is the coefficient of a panel regression
of the within industry skewness and average firm growth controlling for time and fixed effect. See Appendix B.1 for
additional details on the sample construction and moment calculations in Compustat.



                                                                                               50
                                                                            Figure A.6 ­ Model-Generated Moments

                                                  (a) Aggregate Productivity Shock does not Affect Dispersion or Skewness of Sales Growth

                                                                     P90-P10                                                                                                        Kelley Skewness




                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                      Variance and Skewness
                                       15




                                                                                                                        Deviation from Value in Quarter 0
   Deviation from Value in Quarter 0




                                                                                      Skewness Only




                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                      Variance Only
                                                                                      Mean Only




                                                                                                                                              -5
                                       10




                                                                                                                         -20 -15 -10
                                       5
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                            -25
                                             -2    0    2    4       6      8      10     12     14   16      18                                                  -2   0   2    4       6      8      10    12      14   16        18
                                                            Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)                                                                                 Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)



                                                                              (b) Skewness of Employment and Sales Growth

                                              Kelley Skewness of Sales and Employment Growth                                                                               Kelley Skewness of Sales Growth
                                       5




                                                                                                                                                            5
   Deviation from Value in Quarter 0




                                                                                                                        Deviation from Value in Quarter 0
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                     0
   -25 -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                         -20 -15 -10          -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     One Year
                                                                                         Employment Growth                                                                                                           Three Years
                                                                                         Sales Growth                                                                                                                Five Years
                                       -30




                                                                                                                                                            -25




                                             -2     0   2    4       6      8      10     12     14   16      18                                                  -2   0   2    4       6      8      10    12      14   16        18
                                                            Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)                                                                                 Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)



                                                                           (c) Right and Left Tail Dispersion of Sales Growth

                                                                     P90-P50                                                                                                            P50-P10
                                       10




                                                                                                                                                            15




                                                                                      Variance and Skewness
   Deviation from Value in Quarter 0




                                                                                                                        Deviation from Value in Quarter 0




                                                                                      Skewness Only
                                                                                      Variance Only
                                       5




                                                                                                                                                            10
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                            5
                                       -5
                                       -10




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                             -2    0    2    4       6      8      10     12     14   16      18                                                  -2   0   2    4       6      8      10     12     14   16        18
                                                            Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)                                                                                 Quarters (risk shock in quarter 1)

Note: Figure A.6 shows different model-generated moments of the sales growth and employment growth distribution. Each
plot is based on independent simulations of 1,000 economies of 300-quarter length. In each simulation, we assume that
the economy is in the low-risk state for 150 periods. We then impose a drop in the skewness of firms' shocks in quarter
151, allowing normal evolution of the economy afterwards. We plot the deviation of each macroeconomic aggregate from
its value in quarter 0. The red line with triangles trances the impact of an increase in the variance of firms' shocks; the
black line with diamonds trances the impact of a drop in the skewness of firms' shocks; the blue line with circles trances
the joint impact of an increase in variance and a decrease in skewness.

                                                                                                                   51
B     Appendix: Data
     This appendix describes the data sources, the sample selection, and the calculations of the moments
we use for our empirical analysis. In Section B.1 we describe the firm- and establishment-level data for
the United States obtained from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). Section
B.2 describes our sample of Compustat firms. For our cross-country comparisons, we use firm-level data
available in the Bureau van Dijk's Osiris database and Global Compustat which we describe in Section
B.3. Finally, Section B.4 describes our sample and TFP estimation for our sample of firms from the
BvD Amadeus dataset and the establishment-level data for the US Census of Manufacturing and the
Annual Survey of Manufacturing. The online appendix and replication packet--available in this link
https://bit.ly/2ZfaMVR and on the authors' websites--contains further details and corresponding
do-files for most of our calculations.

B.1    United States: Longitudinal Business Database
    We construct measures of employment growth at the firm- and establishment-level using the Census
Bureau's LBD. The LBD covers the universe of establishment in the nonfarm private sector in the
United States from 1976 to 2015. It provides detailed establishment and firm-level information on
employment, payroll, location, firm age, industry, legal form of organization, and others. Crucially,
firm and establishment identifiers in the LBD allow us to construct measures of employment growth
at different time horizons. From the LBD, we select a sample of establishments that, in a given year,
have nonnegative, non-missing employment and payroll and have valid industry data. We then sum
up the employment within the same firm across all establishments to construct an annual measure of
employment. We measure the growth rate of employment of firm j in period t as the log-difference
                               e
between periods t and t + k , gj,t = log Ej,t+k - log Ej,t where k  {1, 5}. In order to capture the entry
and exit of firms, we replace by a 0 the level of employment in the period before the establishment is
observed for the first time and the period after the establishment is observed for the last time in the
sample. We then calculate the growth rate of employment using the arc-percentage change between
                                         arc      Ej,t+k -Ej,t
periods t and t + k which is given by gj,t   = 0.5×(Ej,t+k +Ej,t ) .
    To calculate the Kelley skewness we require the computation of specific percentiles of the distribution
of employment growth. Notice that a percentile provides information about a particular firm, which
violates the disclosure criteria imposed by the Census Bureau. Hence, to avoid the disclosure of any
sensitive information, we calculate the pth percentile of the employment growth distribution as the
employment-weighted average on a band of +1 and -1 percent around percentile pth. For instance,
the 90th percentile of the distribution is the weighted average of the employment growth across all
observations between the 89th and 91st percentiles of the distribution, both ends included. We proceed
in the same way to construct the 10th and 50th percentiles of the distribution and use these values to
calculate the Kelley skewness, the 90th-to-10th log percentiles differential and the rest of the measures
of dispersion. The massive sample size of the LBD (around 6 million observations per year) ensures that
the sample used to calculate each of the percentiles is large enough to have an accurate approximation
to the actual quantiles of the distribution. All moments are weighted by the average employment of the
firm (or establishment) between periods t and t + k , that is, E j,t = 0.5 × (Ej,t+k + Ei,t ).
    We also use the LBD to compare the empirical distribution of employment growth between recession
and expansion years using a kernel density estimation. The sample selection is the same used in the rest
of our results; however, the Census Bureau requires to drop the bottom and top 5% of the distribution
when estimating empirical densities. The kernel densities presented in Figure 3 were calculated using
the remaining sample.

B.2    United States: Compustat
    We construct time series of the cross-sectional dispersion and skewness of the sales growth distri-
bution, the employment growth distribution, the stock returns distribution, and others using data of
publicly traded firms from Compustat accessed through the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS).

                                                    52
    For our results at the annual frequency, we obtain firm-level data from 1970 to 2017. The raw
annual dataset contains 500,004 year/firm observations. We drop all observations with negative sales
(Compustat variable sale), duplicated entries, and firms incorporated outside the United States (Com-
pustat variable fic equal to "USA"). We also drop all observations that do not have a SIC classification
or with a classification above 90. We deflate nominal variables using CPI (FRED series CPIAUCSL)
and we calculate the growth rate of sales and employment (Compustat variable emp) as the log change
between year t and t + k with k  {1, 3, 5}. This leaves us with 266,192 firm/year observation (sales
growth) between 1970 and 2016, with an average of 5,663 firms per year. Our main sample considers
firms with at least 10 years of data (not necessarily continuous) but our results remain robust if we drop
this restriction or if we consider firms with at least 25 years of data. When accounting for entry and
exit of firms using the arc-percentage change, for each firm we add an observation upon entry (equal
to 2) and one additional observation upon exit (equal -2) under the assumption that before and after
exit, the firm has a value of sales or employment equal to 0. We consider entry firms as newly listed
firms, while exiting firms are those delisted in a particular period, independent of the reason (M&A,
bankruptcy, or any other).
    For our results based on quarterly data, we begin by retrieving firm-level data of net sales and stock
prices at the annual and quarterly frequency, and employment at the annual frequency, from 1964q1
to 2017q4 . The raw dataset of sales (Compustat variable saleq) and stock prices (Compustat variable
prccq) contains more than 1.7 million quarter-firm observations with an average of approximately 4,660
firms per quarter. We drop all observations with negative sales, duplicated observations, and firms
incorporated outside the United States (Compustat variable fic equal to "USA"). We also drop all
observations that do not have a SIC classification or with a classification above 90. Then, we deflate
nominal sales by the CPI (FRED series CPIAUCSL), and we calculate the growth rate of sales as the
log-difference and the arc percentage change between quarter t and t + k with k  {4, 12, 20}. This leaves
us with around 1 million sales growth (log-difference) observations. For our main results, we consider
firms with at least 10 years of data on quarterly sales (40 quarters, not necessarily continuous), which
further reduces the sample to 819,977 observations between 1970q4 and 2017q2, with an average of 5,359
firms per quarter. Finally, in each quarter we calculate different cross-sectional moments discussed in
the main body of this document. Our main sample considers firms with at least 10 years of data (40
quarters), although our results remain robust if we drop this restriction or if we consider firms with
25 years of data (more than 100 quarters). When accounting for entry and exit of firms using the
arc-percentage change, for each firm we add an observation upon entry (equal to 2) and one additional
observation upon exit (equal to -2) under the assumption that before entering and after exit, the firm
has a value of sales or employment equal to 0. We consider entry firms as newly listed firms while exiting
firms are those delisted in a particular period, independent of the reason (M&A, bankruptcy, or any
other).

B.3       Cross-Country: BvD Osiris and Global Compustat
    Cross-country firm-level panel data on sales and employment come from the Bureau van Dijk's
Osiris database.30 Osiris is a database of listed public companies, commodity-producing firms, banks,
and insurance companies from over 190 countries. The combined industrial company dataset which we
use in our analysis contains financial information for up to 20 years and 80,000 companies.
    The raw dataset contains 977,412 country/firm/year observations from 1982 to 2018. We drop all
observations with missing or negative sales, all duplicated entries, and all firms with missing NAICS
classification. We transform all observations into US dollars using the exchange rate reported in the
same database. Then, we deflate nominal sales using US annual CPI and calculate the growth rate of
real sales as the log change and arc percentage change between years t and t + k with k  {1, 3}. This
leaves us with 748,574 observations (log change of sales). We further restrict the sample to firms with
more than 10 years of data; country/year cells with more than 100 observations; countries with more
  30
       See Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2015) for additional details on the Orbis dataset.


                                                        53
than 10 years of data; and years with more than 5 countries. This sample selection reduces the dataset
to an unbalanced panel of 678,563 observations in 45 countries between 1989 and 2015. We complement
this data with real GDP in US dollars from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database.
    The cross-country data on daily stock prices come from the Global Compustat database (GCSTAT),
which provides standardized information on publicly traded firms for several countries at annual, quar-
terly, and daily frequencies. The raw data contain firm-level observations of daily stock prices between
1985 and 2018 for 48 countries. We drop all duplicated observations and drop all firms with less than
2000 observations (firms with approximately 10 years of data). Then we calculate daily price returns
as the log-difference of the stock price between two consecutive trading days. We apply a similar sam-
ple selection, keeping firms with at least 10 years of daily price data. The total sample contains an
unbalanced panel of 44 countries from 1985 to 2017 from which we drop all country quarters with less
than 100 firms. The final data contains a total of 29 countries from 1985 to 2017. Then, within each
quarter, we calculate the cross-sectional moments of the daily stock price distribution. We complement
this dataset with per capita GDP growth from the World Bank's World Development Indicators and
quarterly GDP growth from the OECD Stats. Table A.6 shows the list of countries available in our
dataset and the data available for each country.




                                                  54
                                                           Table A.6 ­ Data Availability by Country

            Source:     BvD Osiris      Global Compustat           BvD Amadeus                        BvD Osiris       Global Compustat     BvD Amadeus
                       Sales    Emp           Returns          Sales    Emp     TFP                  Sales    Emp          Returns        Sales   Emp   TFP
             ARG         x        x                                                          IRN       x        x
              AUS        x        x               x                                          ISL                                           x       x     x
             AUT                                                  x       x                  ISR       x        x             x
              BEL        x        x               x              x        x                  ITA       x        x             x            x       x     x
             BLR                                                 x        x                 JPN        x        x             x
             BMU         x        x                                                         KOR        x        x             x
             BRA         x        x               x                                         MEX        x        x
             CAN         x        x                                                         MYS        x        x
             CHE         x        x               x               x       x                 NLD        x        x             x            x       x     x
             CHL         x        x               x                                         NOR        x        x             x            x       x     x
             CHN         x        x                                                         NZL                               x




55
             DEU         x        x               x              x        x       x         PAK        x        x
             DNK         x        x               x              x        x       x         PER        x        x
             EGY         x        x                                                         PHL        x        x
              ESP        x        x               x              x        x       x         POL                               x            x       x     x
              FIN        x        x               x              x        x       x         PRT                                            x       x     x
             FRA         x        x               x              x        x       x         RUS        x        x             x
             GBR         x        x               x              x        x       x         SGP        x        x
             GRC         x        x               x              x        x       x         SWE        x        x             x            x       x     x
             HKG         x        x                                                         THA        x        x
             HUN                                                  x       x       x         TUR        x        x             x
              IDN        x        x               x                                         UKR                                            x       x     x
              IND        x        x               x                                         ZAF        x        x             x
              IRL                                 x              x        x       x


     Note: Table A.6 shows data available for each country (identified by its isocode). US data sources are omitted.
B.4       TFP Estimation
B.4.1       Cross-Country: BvD Amadeus
     In this appendix, we describe in detail the construction of our measure of firm-level TFP using data
from Amadeus. We consider a set of countries, namely, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France,
United Kingdom, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Island, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Swe-
den, and Ukraine, for which firm-level information is available for enough industries and sectors. For
each country in the sample, we retrieve firm-level panel data from Amadeus trough WRDS. Our data
contains a large range of firms, from small to very large firms (V+L+M+S: plus Small Companies
dataset), both publicly traded and privately held. The main variables we use in our analysis are the
following (Amadeus names of variables in parenthesis):

    · Sales (TURN),
    · Operating revenues (OPRE),
    · Employment (EMPL),
    · Cost of Employees (STAF),
    · Cost of Material (MATE),
    · Total Fixed Assets (FIAS),
    · Industry (NAICS and SIC codes),
    · Exchange rate from local currency to Euros (EXCHANGE2).

In order to estimate firm-level productivity for a large number of firms within each country, we perform
a simple sample selection. For each country, we drop duplicates, observations without information on
industry (NAICS), and firms with discrepancies between the country identifier and the firm identifier
(INDR).31 We also drop all observations with missing, zero, or negative values in either of the following
variables: OPRE, MATE, FIAS, and STAF. We also drop all observation with zero or negative value of
VA = OPRE - MATE which is our measure of value added.
    We deflate all monetary values by the country-specific CPI (obtained from the World Bank). Firms
in Sweden report information in their local currency, which we transform to Euros using the exchange
rate also reported by Amadeus.

B.4.2       Estimating TFP
     The literature has considered several different methods to measure TFP at the firm-level (Syverson,
2011) and in this section we consider few standard methods. If we assume that the firm's production
function is Cobb-Douglas, we can estimate the firm-level productivity, zi,j,t , as the residual of the
following equation,
                           log yi,j,k,t = K log Ki,j,k,t + L log Ei,j,k,t + zi,j,k,t ,              (10)
where yi,j,k,t is the value added of firm i, in industry j , in country k , in year t, Ki,j,k,t is the deflated
measure of fixed assets, and Ei,j,k,t is a measure of labor input (employees or wage bill).
    We use four different methods to estimate zi,j,t . The first method­which we use in our main empirical
results­uses country-industry factor shares to estimate L and K . In particular, we calculate the total
wage bill and total value added at the country-industry-year level. Industries are defined by two-digit
NAICS. To ensure our measure of factor shares is calculated with enough firms, we restrict our estimates


  31
       The first two characters in the firm identifier in Amadeus refer to the country.


                                                         56
to years in which the country-industry-cell contains more than one hundred observations and periods
with more than five sectors within a country-year. We then obtain the labor share as

                                                           iIj,k,t   wi,j,k,t
                                           L,j,k,t =                            ,
                                                           iIj,k,t   yi,j,k,t

where Ij,k,t is the set of firms in the industry-sector-year cell and wi,j,k,t is the cost of employees at
the firm-level (STAF). Then, we calculate the capital share as K,j,k,t = 1 - L,j,k,t .32 We then apply
these factor shares in equation 10 to obtain our first measure of productivity as the difference between
log yi,j,k,t and ((1 - L,j,k,t ) log Ki,j,k,t + L,j,k,t log Ei,j,k,t ).
    In the second method, we obtain zi,j,t as the residuals of a firm-level OLS panel regression. In order
to control for differences in labor quality across firms, we use the wage bill (STAF) at the firm level as
a measure of labor input. We then run, an OLS panel regression to obtain z     ^i,j,k,t for each firm.
     The third approach uses the methodology developed by Olley and Pakes (1996) to estimate z     ^i,j,k,t .
This method has stricter data requirements and therefore, we further restrict our within-country sample
to firms with information about investment expenditure (change in the value of total fixed assets, FIAS),
and firms with at least 5 years of data. Furthermore, because the data available in BvD Amadeus was
increasingly populated until 2005, we consider information only after that year. To obtain the Olley
and Pakes (1996) estimates we use the Stata command OPREG as implemented by Yasar et al. (2008).
    The fourth method abstracts from capital differences across firms and proxies a measure of labor
productivity. In particular, we obtain labor productivity as the residual of the following equation
estimated using OLS within each country

                                    log yi,j,k,t = ~ L log Ei,j,k,t + µi + z
                                                                           ~i,j,k,t .                   (11)
Then, for each productivity measure, we estimate firm level productivity shocks as the residual of the
following OLS panel regression within each country

                                z
                                ^i,j,k,t = 0,k + 1,k z
                                                     ^i,j,k,t-1 + µi + t +          i,j,k,t ,           (12)

where µi and t are firm and year fixed effects respectively. In order to reduce the impact of outliers that
normally appear in micro data, for each country, we winsorize each measure of productivity shock at the
top and bottom 1%. Additionally, we use the average of the real sales growth within a bin (defined by
country, industry, or year) as a measure of business conditions. Then, for each measure of productivity
shock, we calculate the average shock within a country-industry-year bin and different percentiles of
the distribution. To further ensure our results are not driven by outliers at the country-industry level,
after we have obtained these percentiles, we trim the measures of Kelley skewness and the average
productivity shocks at the top and bottom 1% and we restrict our sample to country-industry-year bins
with more than 100 firms. Our results, however, follow through is we relax these conditions.

B.4.3       Additional Evidence on the Skewness of Productivity Shocks
    As we discussed in Section 3.4, the skewness of productivity shocks is robustly negative during peri-
ods of low economic activity within a country or an industry. Here we show some additional robustness
results. Figure A.7 shows that the positive relation between the skewness of the productivity shocks
and the business conditions is robustly positive, independently of the estimation method one uses to
calculate firm-level productivity. For comparison, the top left panel repeats our main results shown in
Figure 6.
   Comparing the slopes in the plots in Figure A.7 is difficult to appreciate whether some measures of
productivity lead to more cyclical measures of skewness of TFP shocks since each plot has a different
  32
       In this calculation, we use the nominal values of value added and cost of employees.


                                                          57
      Table A.7 ­ Positive Correlation of Sales Growth and Skewness of Firm's Shocks

                                      (1)                 (2)                   (3)                    (4)
       Estimation Method:       Factor Shares      Panel Regression      Olley and Pakes      Labor Productivity


        Ave. Sales Growth           1.21***             1.10***              1.18***                1.256***
                                    (0.40)              (0.31)                (0.40)                 (0.37)


                R2                   0.18                0.14                  0.31                   0.17
                 N                   3,873               3,873                 3,873                  3,873

Note: Table A.7 shows a set of country-industry panel regressions in which the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness
of firm productivity shocks calculated using the four different methods described in Section B.4.2. In all regressions, the
explanatory variable is the average sales growth within the same bin. All regressions control for country, industry, and
year fixed effects. Standard errors (below the point estimates) are clustered at the country level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.


x-axis. In order to have a more direct comparison between the skewness across different estimation
methods, Table A.7 shows a series of panel regressions in which the independent variable is the skewness
of TFP shocks for each of the four methods described in Section B.4.2 and the main regressor is the
average of the real sales growth (log change of operative revenues) within a country-industry-year cell.
The coefficient associated to the average sales growth is positive and statistically significant at the 1%
in all cases and of the same order of magnitude. This indicates that in periods in which industries
experience a decline in sales, the skewness of the productivity shocks affecting the firms in that industry
is negative as well.
     Finally, Table A.8 shows that the skewness of firm's shocks is procyclical at the country level. In
particular, we show the results of an industry-panel regression for each country in our sample using
the average TFP shock as our measure of business condition. The results are indicative that the
procyclicality of the skewness of firm shocks is not driven by any particular country in our sample and
it is stronger in countries such as Germany and France.

B.4.4      United States: US Census and Survey of Manufacturing
    Here we describe the sample selection and moment construction using data from the US Census
of Manufacturing (CM) and the Survey of Manufacturing firms (ASM). The CM, which is part of the
Economic Census, is conducted every five years, in every year ended in 2 or 5 and was first implemented
in 1963. It covers all establishments with at least one paid employee in the manufacturing sector
(NAICS 31-33) for a total sample between 300,000 and 400,000 establishments per Census. Information
is delivered by firms at the establishment level and Census provides a unique identifier (lbdnum) which
we use to follow establishments over time. The Census Bureau complements the CM data with the ASM
every year the Economic Census is not conducted since 1973. Relative to the CM, the ASM is skewed
towards large firms as it covers all establishments of firms covered by the CM above a certain threshold
and a smaller sample of small and medium size firms. The average sample of firms in our sample is
around 30,000 establishments per year for a total of around 1.1 million establishment/year observations.
The merged CM/ASM contains consistent data in industry, sales, employment, capital expenditures,
materials, and others. Importantly, from 1976 to 2015, the data contains measures of log-productivity
prepared by the Bureau of Labor Statistics which we directly use in our analysis.
    To keep a consistent sample selection across datasets, we consider establishments for ten or more
years of data. Since the ASM sample is refreshed every Census year, this sample selection criteria
naturally select large and stable firms. Our results, however, are robust to the changes in the 10 years
threshold.

                                                            58
                                                 Figure A.7 ­ The Skewness of Firms' Shocks is Robustly Procyclical

                                                 (a) Method 1: Factor Shares                                                                         (b) Method 2: Panel Regression




                                                                                                                          .15
                  .15
   Kelley Skewness of TFP Shocks




                                                                                                           Kelley Skewness of TFP Shocks
                                                                                                                                     .1
                            .1




                                                                                                                            .05
                    .05




                                                                                                                     0
             0




                                                                                                           -.05
   -.05           -.1




                                                                                                                          -.1
                                          -.1       -.05       0          .05        .1         .15                                        -.08           -.04             0           .04         .08
                                                           Average TFP Shocks                                                                                     Average TFP Shocks



                                                (c) Method 3: Olley and Pakes                                                                       (d) Method 4: Labor Productivity
                  .2




                                                                                                                          .15
   Kelley Skewness of TFP Shocks




                                                                                                           Kelley Skewness of TFP Shocks
                                                                                                                                    .1
                        .1




                                                                                                                     0      .05
          0




                                                                                                           -.05           -.1
                  -.1




                                   -.08             -.04         0            .04         .08                                                -.08         -.04            0          .04     .08
                                                           Average TFP Shocks                                                                                     Average TFP Shocks

Note: Figure A.1 is based on a sample of firms from BvD Amadeus. Each plot shows a scatter plot polling information
across all countries, industries, and years in the sample. In each plot, the y-axis is the Kelley skewness of the within
country-industry-year distribution of firm productivity shocks whereas the x-axis is the average productivity shock with
the same cell. Productivity shocks are calculated using four different methods: Factor shares (top left plot), panel
regression (top right plot), Olley and Pakes (bottom left), and labor productivity (bottom right). The slopes (standard
errors) sorted from top left to bottom right are the following (standard errors in parenthesis): 0.69 (0.04), 1.79 (0.07),
1.97 (0.11), and 1.41 (0.07). To create this figure, we winsorize the distribution of Kelley skewness and average growth at
the top and bottom 1%. Scatter plots controlling for country, industry, and time fixed effects.


     We construct measures of employment growth, sales growth, and productivity growth as the log-
change between years t and t - 1. Productivity shocks instead are calculated as the residual of the
following regression,

                                                                           zi,t     = 0 + 1 zi,t-1 + µi + t +                                             i,t ,

where µi is a establishment fixed effects and t is a year-fixed effect. Similarly to what we do in the
LBD sample, we construct percentiles of the distribution of firm's growth and productivity residual
as the average level of the corresponding variable over a 2 percentage point band around the desired
percentile. For instance, to calculate the 10th percentile of the distribution of TFP residuals within
a industry-year cell, we select a sample of establishment between located between the 8 and the 12
percentiles of the distribution. Then, our measure of the 10th percentile is the average over all the
establishment in this sample. We proceed in a similar fashion for the 50th and the 90th percentiles.


                                                                                                      59
          Table A.8 ­ Skewness of Firms' Shocks is Procyclical at the Country Level

                      (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
       ISO            DEU           DNK               ESP             FIN           FRA             GBR             GRC             HUN             IRL


      Sales         5.27***      4.47***         1.69***         2.27***           3.24***       2.25***         1.27***        0.87***         1.70***
     Growth         (0.70)          (1.02)          (0.32)          (0.14)          (0.45)          (0.14)          (0.24)          (0.24)          (0.19)


       R2             0.66            0.63            0.60            0.64            0.56            0.74            0.47          0.76            0.66
        N             208             73              392             245             334             275             179             271             186


     Continuation
                             (10)            (11)            (12)            (13)            (14)            (15)            (16)            (17)
              ISO             ISL            ITA             NLD             NOR             POL             PRT             SWE             UKR


              Sales         2.56***         1.29***         2.12***         2.04***         1.87***         1.74***         2.86***         1.56***
            Growth           (0.31)          (0.19)          (0.21)          (0.35)          (0.36)          (0.17)         (0.228)         (0.209)


               R2            0.84            0.55            0.72            0.51            0.52            0.61            0.65            0.55
               N              102             306             152             208             264             234            228             229

Note: Table A.8 shows a set of industry panel regressions in which the dependent variable is the Kelley skewness of firm
productivity shocks. Firm-level productivity was calculated as the residuals of a firm-level panel regression (the second
method described in section B.4.2). In each column, the independent variable is the average TFP shock within an industry.
Each regression includes a set of industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors (below the point estimates) are clustered
at the industry level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


Then, we use these percentiles to calculate dispersion and skewness. This ensure that our results do not
disclose any sensitive information. Furthermore, in order to further avoid any disclosure concerns, none
of our results are based in industry-year cells that do not pass the basic disclosure criteria required by
the Census Bureau. In practice, since industries are defined at the 3-digit NAICS levels, we do not use
any industry-year cell that has 200 establishment observations or less.


C      VAR data and Robustness
    In this section, we describe in additional detail the data and methods used to estimate the VAR and
impulse responses discussed in Section 7 of the main text and we provide some additional robustness
results. The variables we consider in the analysis are the log of the S&P500 stock market index (closing
value of last trading date of the month), a measure of stock-market volatility and a measure of stock
market skewness (both explained below), the Federal Funds Rate (FRED variable FEDFUNDS), the log-
level of the average of hourly earnings (FRED variable AHETPI), the log-consumer price index (FRED
variable CPIAUCSL), the log-level of hours (FRED variable AWHMAN), the log-level of employment
(FRED variable PAYEMS), and the log of an index of industrial production (FRED variable INDPRO).
    We construct measures of volatility and skewness using daily returns from publicly traded firms
obtained from CRSP dataset acceded through WRDS. In particular, for each firm i we calculate the
day-to-day log-change of the stock price within a month m, di,m and then we calculate the difference
between the 90th-to-10th percentile differential and the Kelley skewness using all observation of daily
returns over all the firms within a month m. As an alternative measure, we consider four-weeks log-
change of daily prices of firm i within a month m, and then we calculate the 90th-to-10th percentile

                                                                              60
differential and the Kelley skewness within a month. All variables in our baseline results are HP
detrended using a smoothing parameter of  = 129, 600, with the exception of the measures of volatility
and skewness
    Figure A.8 displays a series of robustness results for our VAR analysis. In particular, the top panel
A.8 repeats the impulse response in our baseline results (square symbols); the resulting impulse response
calculated after dropping all data during and after the Great Recessions (diamond symbols); a case in
which we drop the measure of volatility and consider only skewness (x symbols); a case in which we
reverse the order of the VAR considering first the measure of skewness, then volatility, and then the
S&P500 (triangle symbols); a case in which we consider monthly returns rather than daily returns to
construct our measures of volatility and skewness (hollow square symbols); and a case in which we have
HP filtered the measures of volatility and skewness (v symbols). In all cases, we find that a decline in the
skewness of firms' returns­that can be interpreted as an exogenous shock to firms­ generates a persistent
decline in industrial activity that overshoots after 24 months. Figure A.8 shows two additional cases, a
four variables VAR in which we consider the S&P500, volatility, skewness, and the industrial production
indicator or employment (circle symbols), and a five variables VAR in which we consider the S&P500,
volatility, skewness, the industrial production indicator, and employment (+ symbols). The effect of
a skewness shock in these cases is even stronger relative to the baseline results. The bottom panel of
Figure A.8 shows the response of log-employment. Hence the response of industrial production and
employment to a skewness shock seems to be robust to different sample selection or variable ordering.
    For additional robustness, Figure A.9 shows the response of industrial production and employment
to a skewness shock estimated using the Local Projection Method proposed by Jordà (2005). Here, we
consider the same variables as in our baseline VAR but we run a set of OLS time series regressions of
the form,

                             yt+h   = 0 + 1,h volt + 2,h skewt + Xt +         t

for h = 0, .., 16 using monthly data. We then plot the value of 1,h and 2,h ­and corresponding confidence
intervals­for industrial production and employment. As before, the measure of market volatility is the
90th-to-10th log percentiles differential of the within-month daily returns and the measure of skewness
is the Kelley skewness form the same distribution. The results shown in Figure A.9 are similar to
those obtained using standard VAR methods, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Hence, we conclude
that the response of industrial production and employment to a skewness shock is robust to different
estimation methods.




                                                    61
              Figure A.8 ­ Robustness: Macroeconomic Impact of a Skewness Shock
                                                                   (a) Industrial Production




                                                  .5
                  % Impact on Inudstrial Production
                                      0




                                                                                                         Baseline
                                                                                                         Pre 2008
                                                                                                         Only Skewness
                         -.5




                                                                                                         Reverse
                                                                                                         Four Variables
                                                                                                         Five Variables
                                                                                                         Monthly
                                                                                                         HP Filtered
                                    -1




                                                       0   4   8       12     16      20       24   28        32      36
                                                                        Months after shock

                                                                       (b) Employment
                                    .2
                  % Impact on Employment
                      -.2        0  -.4




                                                       0   4   8       12     16      20       24   28        32      36
                                                                        Months after shock
Note: Figure A.8 shows the impact on industrial production (top panel) and employment (bottom panel) of a two-standard
deviation shock to the skewness of the stock returns under different specifications. Baseline (filled squares) considers the
same specification as in the main body of the text; Pre 2008 (diamonds) consider the same specification but estimates the
VAR using data pre 2008 only; Only skewness (x) drops the measure of volatility from the Baseline; Reverse (triangles)
estimates a VAR in which we order skewness first, volatility second, and then the S&P500; Four variables (circles) keeps
the S&P500, volatility, skewness, and industrial production (or employment); Five variables (+) adds back employment in
both estimations. Monthly (hollow squares) considers a case in which we estimate skewness and volatility using monthly
returns; HP filtered (v) consider a case in which the baseline measures of volatility and skewness are HP-filtered using a
smoothing parameter of  = 129, 600.

                                                                              62
         Figure A.9 ­ Local Projections: Macroeconomic Impact of a Skewness Shock
                                                         (a) Industrial Production



                                           0
                  % Impact on Production
                                           -.2
                                           -.4
                                           -.6
                                           -.8




                                                 0   2   4    6        8       10     12   14       16
                                                             Months After the Shock


                                                             (b) Employment
                                           0
                  % Impact on Employment
                                           -.1
                                           -.2
                                           -.3




                                                 0   2   4    6        8       10     12   14       16
                                                             Months After the Shock
Note: Figure A.9 shows the impact of a two-standard deviation shock to the skewness of the stock returns estimated using
Local Projections (Jordà, 2005). The data period is 1964 to 2008.




                                                                    63
