                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SOCIAL MEDIA AND XENOPHOBIA:
                               EVIDENCE FROM RUSSIA

                                     Leonardo Bursztyn
                                      Georgy Egorov
                                     Ruben Enikolopov
                                       Maria Petrova

                                     Working Paper 26567
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26567


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




We are grateful to Matthew Gentzkow, Brian Knight, Aakaash Rao, Alvaro Sandroni, David
Strömberg, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi for very helpful discussions, to Danil Fedchenko for
excellent research assistance, and to numerous seminar participants for comments and
suggestions. Ruben Enikolopov and Maria Petrova acknowledge financial support from the
BBVA foundation grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Georgy Egorov, Ruben Enikolopov, and Maria Petrova. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Media and Xenophobia: Evidence from Russia
Leonardo Bursztyn, Georgy Egorov, Ruben Enikolopov, and Maria Petrova
NBER Working Paper No. 26567
December 2019
JEL No. D7,H0,J15

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the causal effect of social media on ethnic hate crimes and xenophobic attitudes in
Russia using quasi-exogenous variation in social media penetration across cities. Higher
penetration of social media led to more ethnic hate crimes, but only in cities with a high pre-
existing level of nationalist sentiment. Consistent with a mechanism of coordination of crimes,
the effects are stronger for crimes with multiple perpetrators. We implement a national survey
experiment and show that social media persuaded young and low-educated individuals to hold
more xenophobic attitudes, but did not increase respondents' openness to expressing these views.
Our results are consistent with a simple model of social learning where penetration of social
networks increases individuals' propensity to meet like-minded people.


Leonardo Bursztyn                                 Ruben Enikolopov
Department of Economics                           Barcelona IPEG
University of Chicago                             Universitat Pompeu Fabra
1126 E. 59th Street                               Barcelona GSE, New Economic School
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Edif. Mercè Rodoreda 23.105 (IPEG)
and NBER                                          C/ Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
bursztyn@uchicago.edu                             08005 Barcelona, Spain
                                                  ruben.enikolopov@upf.edu
Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management                      Maria Petrova
Northwestern University                           Barcelona IPEG
2211 Campus Drive                                 Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
Evanston, IL 60208                                Barcelona
and NBER                                          Spain
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu                 petrova.ma@gmail.com




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3066
1         Introduction

In recent years, the world has witnessed a large increase in expression of hate and xenopho-
bia.1 Candidates and platforms endorsing nationalism and views associated with intolerance
toward specific groups have also gathered increased popular support both in the U.S. and
across Europe. Social media has been widely named a major factor in the increase in expres-
sion of hate, and hate crimes in particular.2 In this paper, we document the causal effects
of social media exposure on hate crimes and xenophobic attitudes in Russia, a country with
more than 180 ethnic groups. Furthermore, we use survey experiments to provide evidence
of the particular mechanisms behind these effects.
        Conceptually, social media may affect expression of hate, and hate crimes in particular,
through different channels. First, social media can facilitate coordination and collective
action: for example, Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming) show that social media facilitated the
coordination of political protests in Russia in 2011-2012. Coordination through social media
may be particularly relevant for illegal and stigmatized activities, such as hate crimes, as
social media make it easier to find like-minded people through online communities and
groups and possibly to out oneself as someone having such views. Second, social media
may influence individual opinions: previously tolerant individuals might become exposed to
intolerant views, while intolerant individuals might end up in "echo chambers" (Sunstein,
2001, 2017; Settle, 2018) that might make their views even more extreme. Finally, beyond
changing attitudes, social media can may also affect people's perceptions of the acceptability
of expressing hate, and therefore their willingness to express hate, conditional on holding a
certain view. Indeed, individuals might be exposed to different reference groups that might
    1
     For example, according to the Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism, across eight major metropoli-
tan areas in the U.S., the number of hate crimes increased by more than 20% in 2016, which is significantly
larger in both absolute and relative terms than any year-to-year increase in these cities since 2010.
   2
     See, for example, "How Everyday Social Media Users Become Real-World Extremists," New York Times,
April 25, 2018.



                                                     1
shape their perceptions about how society thinks of a certain view.
   The main challenge in identifying a causal effect of social media is that access and con-
sumption of social media are not randomly assigned. To overcome this challenge, we follow
the approach of Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming) and exploit the history of the main Russian
social media platform, VKontakte (VK). This online social network, which is analogous to
Facebook in functionality and design, was the first mover in the Russian market and secured
its dominant position with user share of over 90 percent by 2011. VK was launched in
October 2006 by Pavel Durov, who was at the time an undergraduate student at Saint Pe-
tersburg State University (SPbSU). Initially, users could only join the platform by invitation
through a student forum of the University, which had also been created by Durov. As a
result, the vast majority of early users of VK were Durov's fellow students of SPbSU. This,
in turn, made friends and relatives of these students more likely to open an account early
on. Since SPbSU attracted students from across the country, this sped up propagation of
VK in the cities these students had come from. As a result, the idiosyncratic variation in
the distribution of the home cities of Durov's classmates had a long-lasting effect on VK
penetration. This allows us to use fluctuations in the distribution of SPbSU students across
cities as an instrument for the city-level penetration of VK. We then evaluate the effect of
higher VK penetration on hate crimes and attitudes towards migrants using data on hate
crimes collected between 2007 and 2015 by an independent Russian NGO, SOVA, as well as
newly collected survey data on hate attitudes.
   Using the instrumental variables approach, we show that penetration of social media led
to more ethnic hate crimes, and that this effect is stronger in cities with a higher baseline
level of nationalist sentiment prior to the introduction of social media. To proxy for baseline
local nationalist sentiment, we use the city-level vote share of Rodina ("Motherland"), an
explicitly nationalist and xenophobic party, in the 2003 parliamentary election, the last one
before the creation of VK. We show that the impact of social media on hate crime victims

                                              2
positively and significantly depends on the strength of pre-existing support of nationalists
in the city: for example, a 10% increase in VK penetration increased hate crimes by 25.8%
in cities where Rodina received most votes, but had zero effect in cities where Rodina got
minimal support.
       This stark heterogeneity is consistent with results on traditional media, which suggest
that the impact of media on active manifestation of xenophobic attitudes depends on pre-
dispositions of the population. For example, Adena et al. (2015) demonstrate that radio
propaganda by the Nazis in the 1930s was effective only in areas with historically high level
of antisemitism, while Yanagizawa-Drott (2014), finds that social interactions allow the ef-
fect of traditional media (radio) on conflict to propagate. We further show that the effect of
social media is stronger for crimes committed by multiple perpetrators (as opposed to those
committed by single persons), consistent with social media likely playing a coordinating role.
       To provide further evidence on the mechanisms behind the effect we next turn to the
impact of social media on xenophobic attitudes of the population. To study these attitudes,
we designed and conducted an online survey in the summer of 2018, with over 4,000 respon-
dents from 125 cities.3 The survey was positioned as a study of patterns of usage of social
media and the Internet, to which we added the questions of interest that were related to
ethnic hostility.
       Given the potential for a stigma associated with directly reporting xenophobic views in
a survey, we use the list experiment technique, one of the main methods to elicit truthful
answers to sensitive survey questions (Blair and Imai (2012), Glynn (2013)) which was shown
to perform particularly well in online surveys (Coutts and Jann (2011)).4 . This approach
gives our main measure of ethnic hostility, "elicited ethnic hostility."
   3
    The survey and its analysis was pre-registered in the AEA RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0003066).
   4
    The intuition behind this technique is that the respondents are asked only to indicate the number of
statements with which they agree from a list. By adding the statement of interest to a random subgroup of
respondents one can estimate the share of respondents agreeing with this statement without being able to
identify who exactly agrees with it. See subsection 3.1.1 for more detail.


                                                   3
      We also use this setup to infer whether social media could have affected this described
stigma of reporting ethnic hostility. As mentioned before, it is conceivable that social media
may affect perceptions of about the social acceptability of xenophobia. In the survey, We
can measure this potential change in perceptions in a specific situation: communication in
a survey. This admittedly does not capture the full extent to which the "change in stigma
channel" might operate (it could be differentially relevant in other types of interactions), but
might approximate what happens in a communication with strangers. To that end we use
randomly included a direct question regarding negative attitudes toward other ethnicities,
which we call "reported ethnic hostility."
      Use the same IV approach we find a positive effect of social media penetration on elicited
ethnic hostility, i.e. the share of respondents that hold xenophobic attitudes, regardless of
whether they are willing to openly report them. The magnitude of the effect is particularly
large in certain subsamples, specifically younger respondents and those with lower levels of
education, i.e., groups more likely to use social media and to be engaged in hate crime.5
Numerically, a 10% increase in VK penetration makes respondents 2.0% more likely to agree
with the hateful statement in the list experiment.
      We also investigate the effect of social media on self-reported ethnic hostility, i.e., the
share of respondents who admit having xenophobic attitudes in a survey. In this case, we do
not find a positive effect of social media on self-reported xenophobic preferences; if anything,
the coefficients are negative, but generally insignificant. We obtain similar results if instead
of our sample, we use the answers to the same direct question from a much larger, nationally
representative survey of more than 30,000 respondents conducted in 2011 by one of the
biggest Russian survey company, FOM (Fond Obschestvennogo Mneniya, Public Opinion
Foundation).
  5
    This goes in line with the argument in Boxell et al. (2017); Allcott and Gentzkow (2017) that the
presumed impact of social media should be higher for groups more likely to be affected.



                                                 4
       The difference between elicited and reported ethnic hostility provides a measure of the
perceived stigma associated with the expression of such attitudes in a survey. Our results
thus indicate that there is no evidence that social media reduced that perceived stigma.
On the contrary, we find that, if anything, the perceived stigma increased as a result of
social media exposure. This result also highlights the importance of using survey methods
that reduce concerns of social acceptability bias, such as the list experiment: without these
methods, we would be bound to erroneously find a negative or null effect of social media on
xenophobic attitudes.
       Finally, we show that our different results are all consistent with a simple model that
captures the idea that social media increase the propensity of individuals to meet like-minded
people, thereby resulting in higher polarization of opinions. We assume that each individual
has a certain position, such as their attitude towards immigrants, but this position may
change as a result of interaction with other people. To prevent convergence and ensure a
nontrivial stationary distribution, we assume that each individual's attitude is subject to a
random shock in every period.6 If social media increase the propensity of individuals to meet
like-minded people, this results in a society with a higher polarization of opinions, but with
the same mean. The share of individuals who dislike immigrants beyond any given threshold
(be it agreeing with the statement we provided or committing a hate crime) should therefore
increase (and we argue below that the heterogeneity is as expected). At the same time, one
should not expect a lower stigma of answering a direct question: indeed, higher polarization
   6
     We thus employ a variant of DeGroot (1974) type of learning model, except that we assume that
individuals adjust their political preferences rather than update their beliefs as a result of interactions with
others. The model would be similar if we assumed that individuals learn about the optimal policy, such as
the number of migrants that need to be admitted in the country. Like our paper, Dasaratha et al. (2019)
introduces periodic shocks that may result in a nontrivial distribution in the long run. There, it is the object
of social learning that is subject to shocks, and they show conditions under which opinions do not converge
in a Bayesian framework. Here, we assume that individuals' opinions rather than the object of study are
subject to shocks. These shocks may be interpreted as influence of books or news that individuals read,
but the exact interpretation is not important; we merely aim at capturing some generic opinion formation
process. See Golub and Sadler (2016) for an overview of models of learning in networks.



                                                       5
implies that the share of individuals who like immigrants also goes up, and social stigma of
expressing xenophobia may go up as well, with the effect on the share of people answering
the question affirmatively being ambiguous. The model therefore captures our results very
closely, and while our empirical exercise was not designed as, and therefore is not, a proper
test of it, we believe that this close connection between the theory and the empirics would
stimulate further research in this area.
   Our paper contributes to the growing literature on the impact of social media on po-
larization, xenophobia, and hate crime. Allcott et al. (2019), Mosquera et al. (2018), and
Yanagizawa-Drott et al. (2019) provide evidence that social media makes people's political
opinions more diverging. In contrast to these papers, we study more extreme outcomes, such
as hate crime and hate attitudes. Qin et al. (2017) find that publications in the Chinese
microblogging platform Sina Weibo predict future protests, strikes, conflicts, while Qin et al.
(2019) show that the spread of information over online social networks leads to the spread
of offline protests and strikes in China. M¨
                                           uller and Schwarz (2018) look at the relationship
between social media and hate crime in Germany. Differently from our work, the paper
focuses on short-run effects of social media during the week a particular content is posted,
rather than the long-run effects of media penetration. M¨
                                                        uller and Schwarz (2019) find that
anti-Muslim hate crimes in the United States have increased in counties with high Twitter
penetration users, but only since the start of Donald Trump's presidential campaign, and
also analyze the effect of Trump's tweets on that type of hate crime. These fidings imply
that social media can be instrumental for spreading incendiary messages from an important
influencer, such as the president of the country. In contrast, our paper examines the long-run
effect of penetration of social media on both hate crimes and hate attitudes, treating the
content as endogenously formed. Moreover, we contribute to the literature by examining the
underlying mechanisms behind the results, both empirically and theoretically.
   This paper also contributes to a larger literature on the effect of media and, in particular,

                                               6
social media on individual behavior. Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming), using an identification
approach similar to ours, show that higher social media penetration increased the probability
of political protests in Russia in 2011. In a similar vein, Manacorda and Tesei (2016) show
that 3G penetration in Africa is associated with stronger cell-level protest participation.
Bond et al. (2012) show that that political mobilization messages in Facebook increased
turnout in the U.S. elections, Enikolopov et al. (2018) show that anti-corruption blog posts
by a popular Russian civic activist had a negative impact on market returns of targeted
companies and led to a subsequent improvement in corporate governance. Acemoglu et al.
(2018) find that the protest-related activity on Twitter preceded the actual protest activity
on Tahrir Square in Egypt. Steinert-Threlkeld et al. (2015) show that the content of Twitter
messages was associated with subsequent protests in the Middle East and North Africa
countries during the Arab Spring.
   We also add to a growing literature studying the recent rise in populism and nationalist
attitudes. Bursztyn et al. (2019) and Enke (2019) study the 2016 U.S. election. Algan
et al. (2017) show that Great Recession triggered a trust crisis and led to higher voting
shares of non-mainstream, particularly populist parties. Guriev et al. (2019) show that 3G
penetration around the globe promoted populist voting and reduced government support. By
also examining the effect of social media on the social acceptability of expressing intolerant
views, this paper also relates to a growing literature that studies the role of social image
concerns in a variety of settings (see DellaVigna et al. (2012) on charitable giving, DellaVigna
et al. (2017) on voting decisions, Perez-Truglia and Cruces (2017) on campaign contributions,
Bursztyn and Jensen (2015) on classroom participation, Bursztyn et al. (2018) on status
goods, and Enikolopov et al. (2017) on political protests).
   The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. We discuss our identification strat-
egy, data, and results on hate crimes in Section 2. In Section 3, we discuss survey results on
xenophobic attitudes. We then present a model that reconciles our results from a unified per-

                                               7
spective in Section 4. Section 5 concludes. The paper also includes three not-for-publication
Appendices, with Appendix A containing all the proofs from Section 4, Appendix B contain-
ing additional tables, and Appendix C containing the survey script (translated into English).



2     Social Media and Hate Crimes

2.1    Identification Strategy

Our empirical strategy for identification of the causal effect of social media penetration fol-
lows the approach in Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming). In particular, we look at the penetra-
tion of the most popular social network in Russia, VKontakte (VK), which had substantially
more users than than Facebook throughout the whole period we analyze. For example, in
2011, VK had 55 million users in Russia, while Facebook had 6 million users. VK was created
in the fall of 2006 by Pavel Durov who at the time was a student at the Saint Petersburg
State University (SPbSU). The first users of the network were largely students who studied
with Durov at SPbSU. This made their friends and relatives at home more likely to open an
account, which let to a faster spread of VK in these cities. Network externalities magnified
these effects and, as a result, the distribution of the home cities of Durov's classmates had
a long-lasting effect on VK penetration. In particular, the distribution of home cities of
the students who studied at SPbSU at the same time as Durov predicts the penetration of
VK across cities. This prediction is robust to controlling for the distribution of the home
cities of the students who studied at SPbSU several years earlier or later. This effect persists
throughout the period between 2007 and 2016 which we analyze, although the magnitude
of the effect decreases over time. Thus, the effect of social media penetration is identified
using a cross-sectional variation in the number of VK users across Russian cities, driven
by the number of students from different cities who happened to study at SPbSU at the



                                               8
time the network was created. The results of the first stage regression, similar to the one in
Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming), are reported in Table A2 in the Online Appendix.78 How-
ever, for the outcomes observed in the late 2010s, the first stage becomes weaker over time.
As a result, for most of our empirical tests, the strength of the instruments is not always
enough to make inference using conventional methods. Throughout the paper, we follow the
recommendation in Andrews et al. (2019) and use the appropriate methods applicable in our
particular case. In particular, in all tables we report weak instrument robust confidence sets
developed by Chaudhuri and Zivot (2011) and Andrews (2017) and implemented in Stata
by Sun (2018). Likewise, in all tables we denote the significance level of the endogenous
coefficients based on these weak instrument robust sets and tests.


2.2     Data

The data on social media penetration and socioeconomic controls comes from Enikolopov et
al. (forthcoming). The sample consists of 625 Russian cities with a population over 20,000
according to the 2010 Census.9 To measure social media penetration we use information
on the number of users of the most popular social media in Russia, VK. In particular, we
calculate the number of VK users who report a particular city as their city of residence
as of the summer of 2011. We use information on the city of origin of the students who
studied at SPbSU based on the information provided in public accounts of the users of
another social network, Odnoklassniki (Classmates). Specifically, we calculate the number
of students coming from each city in five-year cohorts. We mostly focus on three cohorts in
   7
      We use a more succinct set of controls than Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming), because we have a much
smaller number of cities and we are facing power issues in survey analysis. The results of the analysis of the
effect on hate crime are quantitatively and statistically similar to using exactly the same list of controls as
in Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming).
    8
      We also show that future VK penetration does not predict past nationalist party support in column (2)
aof Table A2.
    9
      The exceptions are cities with similar names that caused problems with disambiguation in the data, as
well as Moscow and Saint Petersburg, which are excluded from the sample as outliers.



                                                      9
our analysis: i) those who were born the same year as the VK founder or within two years of
it; ii) those who were born from three to seven years earlier than the VK founder; iii) those
who were born from three to seven years later than the VK founder.
      Data on hate crimes comes from the database compiled by SOVA Center for Informa-
tion and Analysis.10 This is a Moscow-based Russian independent nonprofit organization
providing information related to hate crimes, which is generally considered to be the most
reliable source of information on that issue. The dataset covers incidents of hate crimes and
violent acts of vandalism, as well as convictions on any article of the Criminal Code relating
to "extremism." These data are collected consistently starting 2007, with some incomplete
data for 2004-2006. In the analysis we use data for 2007-2015. We classify all hate crimes
as "ethnic" or "non-ethnic" based on the type of victim reported in the database. Table 1
presents more detailed information on the number of victims for each type. Based on the
textual description of each incident in the database we have also manually coded the number
of perpetrators for all the incidents. Non-ethnic crimes are more likely to be conducted by
single perpetrators (see Figure 1), whereas ethnic hate crimes are more likely to be conducted
by groups, with the modal number of perpetrators being two.
      A potential concern with this data is that there could be a differential likelihoods of
recording crimes across cities related to social media penetration, which could explain our
results. Although We do not have evidence directly ruling out differential likelihoods of
recording crimes, we believe that is highly unlikely that ethnic hate crimes were dispropor-
tionately more reported in areas with both higher penetration of VK and a higher baseline
level of nationalist sentiment, and especially so for crimes with multiple perpetrators. We
also provide evidence that the effects are stronger in larger cities, in which the likelihood of
recording crimes being related to social media penetration is lower. Furthermore, our results
on attitude changes are also consistent with social media having an effect beyond just the
 10
      The database can be found at https://www.sova-center.ru/en/database/


                                                   10
reporting of hate crimes.
       As a measure of nationalist sentiments in a city before the creation of the VK social net-
work we use the vote share of the Rodina ("Motherland") party in the parliamentary election
of December 2003, the only election this party participated in and the last parliamentary
election before the creation of VK. This party ran on an openly nationalist platform. It
received 9.2 percent of the vote and got 37 of the 450 seats in the State Duma, the lower
house of the Federal Assembly of Russia. The data on electoral outcomes come from the
Central Election Commission of the Russian Federation. We validate that the vote share
for the party can serve as a proxy for nationalist sentiments by showing that it is positively
and significantly correlated with ethnic hate crime in the subsequent years, as well as with
xenophobic attitudes revealed in the opinion polls.
       City-level data on population, age, education, and ethnic composition come from the Rus-
sian Censuses of 2002 and 2010. Data on average wages come from the municipal statistics
of RosStat, the Russian Statistical Agency. Additional city characteristics, such as latitude,
longitude, year of city foundation, and the location of administrative centers, come from the
Big Russian Encyclopedia.11
       The data on attitudes towards other ethnicities come from a survey of over 4,000 indi-
viduals that we conducted in the summer of 2018 in 125 Russian cities. The survey was
conducted by a professional marketing firm, Tiburon Research, with a representative panel
of urban Internet users in Russia. The sample consists of 4,327 respondents, of which 2,166
were allocated to the control group and 2,161 to the treatment group.12
  11
     The electronic version of the Encyclopedia can be found at https://bigenc.ru/
  12
     We collected the data in two batches, the pilot and the main experiment. As part of the pilot, we
surveyed 1,007 individuals from 20 cities. Individuals from this batch were randomized into three groups,
with one containing a statement about ethnic minorities as part of the list experiment, another containing a
statement about LGBTQ individuals, as well as a control group. As we found no reliable data on hate crimes
against LGBTQ individuals, we dropped the second group of 336, leaving us with 671 individuals from the
pilot. As part of the main experiment, we surveyed 4,034 individuals from 111 cities. In this batch, the
cities were randomly chosen by the firm we were working with, and since we had the data on VK penetration
for only 105 of these cities, we had to drop 246 observations from six cities. Additional 12 surveys were


                                                    11
   We also use data from the MegaFOM opinion poll conducted by FOM (Fond Obschestvennogo
Mneniya, Public Opinion Foundation) in February 2011. This is a regionally representative
survey of 54,388 respondents in 79 regions of Russia, of which 29,780 respondents come from
519 cities in our sample. In particular, we use information on answers to exactly the same
direct question about hostility to different ethnicities that was asked in our survey conducted
in 2018.


2.3     Social Media and Hate Crime: Empirical Specification

Our main hypothesis is that social media penetration (specifically, VK penetration) has an
impact on hate crime. Thus, we estimate the following model:


                       HateCrimei = 0 + 1 VKpenetrationi + 2 Xi + i ,                                (1)


where HateCrimei is a measure of hate crime, which reflects either the total number of
victims of hate crimes in city i during the period 2007-2015, or the number of victims of
particular types of hate crime (ethnic or non-ethnic crimes, conducted by single or multiple
perpetrators). We also consider three sub-periods 2007-2009, 2010-2012, and 2013-2015
separately. VKpenetrationi is the logarithm of the number of VK users in city i in summer
2011.13 This endogenous variable is instrumented using the number of students from each
city in a five-year student cohort who have studied at the same year as the founder of VK,
Durov, as well as one or two years earlier or later. Xi is a vector of control variables that
include the number of students from the city in the other two five-year student cohorts,
those that studied three to seven years earlier than Durov, and those that studied three
incomplete, which left us with 3,776 observations from the main part. In most analyses, we pool the two
batches together, but our results are robust to looking at the second batch only. The survey was approved
by the University of Chicago Institutional Review Board (IRB18-0858) and was pre-registered in the AEA
RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0003066).
  13
     We add one to the variable in our logarithm measures to deal with zeros.


                                                   12
to seven years later than Durov. It also includes the following socioeconomic controls: the
logarithm of the population, the indicator for being a regional or a subregional (rayon )
administrative center, the average wage in the city, the number of city residents of different
five-year age cohorts, the share of population with higher education in 2010 in each five-year
age cohort, the indicator for the presence of a university in the city, ethnic fractionalization,
and the logarithm of the number of Odnoklassniki users in 2014. For all specifications we
report weak-instrument robust confidence sets.14 Similarly, for our heterogeneity analysis we
estimate the equation:


            HateCrimei = 0 + 1 VKpenetrationi × Nationalist Supporti + 2 Xi + i ,                    (2)


where NationalistSupporti denotes the votes for the nationalist Rodina party in 2003 and
Xi is the new set of controls.


2.4       Social Media and Hate Crime: Results

Table 2 summarizes the results of estimating Equation (1) for the average impact of exposure
to VK on hate crime. There is no consistent evidence of a significant effect of VK penetration
on hate crime, for either ethnic- or non-ethnic- hate crime or for crimes conducted by single
or multiple perpetrators. At the same time, the confidence intervals do not allow us to rule
out large effects (e.g., at maximum 57 percent increase, i.e. 0.58 of a standard deviation of
the dependent variable in column 1), though only one out of nine coefficients in the table is
marginally significant.
       However, this approach masks an important heterogeneity of the effect with respect to
the underlying level of nationalism. People in cities with very few nationalists to begin with
  14
    As discussed above, we report weak instrument robust confidence sets developed by Chaudhuri and Zivot
(2011) and Andrews (2017) and implemented in Stata by Sun (2018) throughout the paper.



                                                   13
and people from very nationalist cities can respond differently to the arrival of social media.
To capture this dimension of heterogeneity into account, we interact VK penetration with a
measure of pre-existing nationalist support, as captured by the Rodina party vote share in
2003.
       Table 3 summarizes the results of estimating Equation (2). The nationalist party support
variable is demeaned to simplify interpretation of the direct coefficient. In all specifications
except one the effect of social media penetration on hate crime is significantly stronger in
cities with higher preexisting level of nationalism. Numerically, the results imply that the
effect of a 10% increase in social media penetration ranges from being close to zero (non-
significant with different signs) at the minimum level of nationalist party support to a 25.8%
increase in total number of hate crime victims at the maximum level of nationalist support
(column 1 of Table 3).
       The results indicate that in cities with high pre-existing level of nationalism, social media
increased the total number of victims of hate crimes. This is true for the victims of ethnic and
non-ethnic crimes, as well as of crimes conducted by either single or multiple perpetrators.
In other words, social media spurs acts of hate crime in places with higher levels of pre-
existing nationalism. Another important takeaway from Table 3 is that the coefficient of
interest is noticeably larger for incidents that involved multiple perpetrators, i.e., acts of
violence that require coordination.15 At the same time, the results are significant for crimes
with single perpetrators as well (with the exception of non-ethnic crime in column 8), which
suggests that while social media facilitated coordination and thus contributed to hate crime,
coordination alone does not fully explain the overall impact of social media.
       To interpret the evidence on the link between social media and hate crime victims pre-
sented in Tables 2 and 3, it is important to distinguish between the intensive and extensive
  15
    In the seemingly unrelated regressions specification the difference between the interaction coefficients in
columns 2 (single perpetrator) and column 3 (multiple perpetrators) is statistically significant at the 10%
level; the differences for ethnic and non-ethnic crimes are similarly large in magnitude.


                                                      14
margins. In Table A3, we estimate equation 2 with the number of crimes rather than the
number of victims as the dependent variable. The results suggest that the number of crimes
responds to the introduction of social media and to the number of victims very similarly,
both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance. For example, the impact of 10%
increase in social media of social media penetration on the number of crimes is bounded by
24.8% for total crimes, a figure very similar to the maximal effect on the number of victims.
In other words, the increase in the number of hate crime victims is well explained by the
increase in the number of crimes, so it is the extensive margin that seems to play the role.
   We also attempt to understand the evolution of the impact of social media over time.
The beginning of our time period, 2007-2009, was the time of a rapid introduction of social
media into people's lives, with the total number of VK users growing from hundred thousand
to more than thirty million users, while by 2013-2015 the exponential growth had already
stopped and other platforms, such as Twitter, started to gain some popularity. At roughly
the same time, following the Arab Spring and the protests in Russia in 2011-2012, the
Russian government began to regulate online content, which prevented openly xenophobic
communities from being created and sustained. If we examine the effect for the three 3-year
sub-periods separately (see Table A4), one can see that the effects are similar in size in
2007-2009 and 2010-2012, but become noticeably smaller and statistically insignificant in
2013-2015. We should note, however, that the differences in coefficients for the later (2013-
2015) and earlier (2007-2009, 2010-2012) periods is not statistically significant in a seemingly
unrelated regressions framework. On top of that, the predictive power of the instrument in
the first stage regression is going down with time (see Figure A1). Thus, while our findings
are consistent with abatement of the impact of social media over time, we should interpret
these intertemporal results with caution.
   Table 4 reports the results of placebo regressions for hate crime in the period 2004-2006,
i.e., before the creation of the VK social network. The results indicate no significant effect

                                              15
of social media on hate crime even in cities with maximum level of support of the nationalist
party, and the difference between these results and the results in Table 3 is statistically
significant in seemingly unrelated regressions framework.16 The null results in Table 4,
however, may be driven by the fact that the data for this time period are incomplete, in
contrast to the later years.
       As was mentioned in Section 2.2 a potential consern is that the results are driven by
differential likelihoods of recording crimes that is correlated with explanatory variables. Al-
though We do not have direct evidence directly ruling out differential likelihoods of recording
crimes, we can check if the effects that we identify depend on the size of the cities. Arguably,
in smaller cities reporting of hater crimes may be more dependent on whether they were dis-
cussed in social media or not, which should make the measurement error stronger in smaller
cities. However, similarly to the findings in (Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming)), if we restrict
the sample to cities with population above the median, the results become only stronger (see
Table A5 in the Online Appendix). In addition, it is highly unlikely that ethnic hate crimes
were disproportionately more reported in areas with both higher penetration of VK and
a higher baseline level of nationalist sentiment, and especially so for crimes with multiple
perpetrators. We also our results on attitude changes are also consistent with social media
having an effect beyond just the reporting of hate crimes (see the next section).
       Overall, the results in Tables 2-4 indicate that social media had a positive effect on hate
crime, but only in places where the level of nationalism was already sufficiently high before
the creation of social media.
  16
    There are not enough observations of non-ethnic crimes with single perpetrators for that period to
estimate the results.




                                                 16
3     Social Media and Hate Attitudes

The results so far can be explained by various mechanisms in play. More specifically, social
media can increase hate and hate crime through:
    (1) coordination ­ it is easier to find like-minded people online and coordinate activities
(offline meetings) that might eventually lead to hate crimes;
    (2) persuasion ­ social media can change people's opinions and make previously tolerant
people more intolerant toward minorities, while previously intolerant people could become
even more intolerant;
    (3) social acceptability ­ social media can make people more willing to express views that
they previously were reluctant to express in public.
    Numerical differences between crimes committed by single and multiple perpetrators
(combined with the effects being driven by cities with stronger pre-existing nationalism)
point out toward coordination being one of the explanations. However, as noted above, the
results on crimes with a single perpetrator suggest that mechanisms other than coordination
should be at play as well. To further explore the mechanisms behind the effect of social
media on hate crime, we designed and conducted a survey aimed at measuring the true
level of underlying nationalism expressed in an anonymous way through the use of a list
experiment. Examining the effect of social media on implicit xenophobic attitudes will allow
us to see if one of the mechanisms through which social media affects hate crime involves
changing people's preferences and persuading them to become more nationalist.
    As part of this survey, we also measured self-reported intolerance towards migrants as
the share of respondents who admitted such attitude in response to a direct question. By
examining how the effect differs for the self-reported xenophobia as compared to the xeno-
phobia elicited through the list experiment, we are able to check if social media affected the
social stigma of expressing xenophobic attitudes openly.


                                              17
3.1       Survey Evidence

To measure implicit xenophobic attitudes we conducted an online survey in 2018, with a list
experiment embedded as part of it. This design (also called the "unmatched count" and the
"item count technique", originally formalized by Raghavarao and Federer (1979) and further
developed, in recent works by Blair and Imai (2012) and Glynn (2013), among others) is
a standard technique for eliciting truthful answers to sensitive survey questions. The list
experiment works as follows. First, respondents are randomly assigned to either the control
group or the treatment group. Subjects in both groups are then asked to indicate the number
of statements they agree with. In this way, the subject never reveals their agreement with
any particular statement (unless the subject agrees with all or none, which is something
the experimental design should try to avoid), only the total number of statements. In the
control condition, the list contains a set of statements or positions that are not stigmatized.
In the treatment condition, the list includes all the statements from control list, but also adds
the statement of interest, which is potentially stigmatized (and in both cases, the positions
of statements are randomly rotated). The support for the stigmatized opinion can then
be inferred by comparing the average number of statements the subjects agree with in the
treatment and control conditions. For recent applications of list experiments in economics,
see Enikolopov et al. (2017) and Cantoni et al. (2019).
       In our case, the survey participants were asked the following question: "Consider, please,
whether you agree with the following statements. Without specifying exactly which ones you
agree with, indicate just the number of statements that you can agree with." The respon-
dents in the control group were given four statements unrelated to the issues of ethnicity.17
The respondents in the treatment group were given the additional fifth statement: "I feel
  17
     The exact statements were the following: i) Over the week I usually read at least one newspaper or
magazine; ii) I want to see Russia as a country with a high standard of living; iii) I know the name of the
Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation; iv) Our country has a fairly high level of
retirement benefits.


                                                    18
annoyance or dislike toward some ethnicities." Here, we took the exact wording used by one
of the leading opinion polling firms in Russia in their regular large scale surveys, which has
the additional advantage of making our results comparable with the results of the opinion
polls by this firm (see subsection 3.1.5 for more detail). Respondents in the control group,
after answering the question on the number of statements they agreed with (which did not
include the statement on ethnicities), were then asked about annoyance or dislike toward
some ethnicities directly. Overall, the share of respondents who agreed with the xenophobic
statement in the list experiment (i.e., the difference between the average number of state-
ments with which respondents in treatment and control group agreed) was approximately 38
percent, while the percentage of respondents who admitted being xenophobic in the direct
question was 33 percent.


3.1.1   Elicited hostility, individual-level results

Given the randomization, comparing the mean number of positive answers between treatment
and control groups provides a valid estimate of the percentage of respondents who agree
with the sensitive statement about having xenophobic attitudes (Imai (2011)). However,
our goal is to estimate the impact of an independent variable (social media penetration) on
the answer to this sensitive question. Following Imai (2011) and Blair and Imai (2012), we
use the regression model with interactions to estimate how answers to the list experiment
question depend on other parameters, in our case characteristics of the respondent's city.
Formally, we estimate the following model:


        NumberOfStatementsij = 0 + 1 Tij + 2 (Tij × VKj ) + 3 VKj + 4 Xij + ij ,          (3)


where NumberOfStatementsij is the number of statements with which respondent i from city
j agreed, Tij is the dummy variable for whether respondent i from city j was assigned to the


                                             19
treatment group, and textnormalV K j is the measure of VK (social media) penetration in
city j instrumented by the number of students from the city who studied at SPbSU together
with the founder of VK, controlling for the number of students from older or younger cohorts.
Other controls include city level controls and the interaction of pre-existing nationalism with
the treatment dummy to account for the differential response. Standard errors are clustered
at the city level.
       In this specification, the effect of social media penetration on the share of respondents
in city j who have implicitly xenophobic attitudes is captured by coefficient 2 . In what
follows, we also look at the subsamples, paying special attention to the groups more likely
to be involved in hate crime (males, younger respondents (below the median age in the
sample, which is 32), and respondents with lower level of education (below the median in
our sample)).18
       The results presented in Table 5 indicate that social media increases elicited hostility to
other nationalities, both on average and for subgroups of population that are more likely to
engage in hate crime (male, young, or low-educated). The results in column 1 imply that, on
average, the elasticity of elicited hostility with respect to social media penetration is 0.075.
In other words, a 10% increase in VK penetration increases the share of those agreeing with
the statement in the list experiment by 4.5%.19 This magnitude goes up to 6.8% for males
(column 2), 9.0% for those with low education (column 4), and 5.3% for younger respondents
(column 6). We did not find any significant effect of VK for females, those with higher
education, or older respondents, and the magnitude of coefficients is considerably smaller
for these groups than their opposites. We should note that this whole setup is essentially
  18
     Note that we pre-registered heterogeneity by gender in our pre-analysis plan, but later we decided that
these other simple characteristics (being young and low-educated) are also likely to predict being a hate
crime perpetrator, thus we added them to the analysis.
  19
     We got this number by dividing one tenth of the effect, 0.0083, by the baseline level of those agreeing
with the xenophobic statement in the absence of VK, as given by the direct coefficient for the list experiment
option in the whole sample, 0.185. For the other columns, similar calculations apply.



                                                     20
an intention-to-treat framework, as not all survey respondents or their friends actually use
VK, and we do not have an instrument for the exposure to VK at the individual level. As a
result, the numbers in Table 5 may be interpreted as a lower bound for the true effect.


3.1.2      Elicited hostility, city-level results

In this subsection, we repeat the analysis above at the city level.20 Let us denote the variable
NumberOfStatementsij as yij . Then, assuming that Equation (3) is a true data generating
process, we derive the city-level specification we would like to estimate. More specifically,
we first sum individual responses by city and treatment status:


                                 yij = 0                  1 + 3 VKj            1 + 4            Xij +             ij ;
                        Tij =0                   Tij =0               Tij =0           Tij =0            Tij =0



                      yij = (0 + 1 )                      1 + (2 + 3 ) VKj               1 + 4               Xij +             ij .
             Tij =1                              Tij =1                         Tij =1              Tij =1            Tij =1

We then divide both sides of the last two equations by the number of respondents in each
treatment group in a city (                      Tij =a   1) and take the difference. We get


             Tij =1   yij             Tij =0   yij                                 Tij =1   Xij              Tij =0   Xij
                            -                        = 1 + 2 VKj + 4                                -                          + j ,   (4)
              Tij =1   1               Tij =0   1                                      Tij =1   1             Tij =0   1


                                Tij =1 ij            Tij =0 ij
here we denoted                              -                    as j to simplify notation.
                                Tij   =1 1           Tij =0   1

      All city-level controls that were not interacted with an extra treatment option Tij can-
cel each other in (4). For a conservative estimation without simple demographic controls,
the only term that was interacted and that differs between treatment and control group is
 20
      This is the main specification mentioned in our pre-registration.




                                                                      21
NationalistSupportj × Tij . Thus, the city level specification reduces to


                     Tij =1   yij        Tij =0   yij
                                    -                   = 1 + 2 VKj + 4,ns NationalistSupportj + j .   (5)
                     Tij =1    1          Tij =0   1

    We present the results of this estimation in Table 6. As one can see, the results are
largely consistent with the results at the individual level (Table 5), though the coefficients
in Table 6 are slightly larger in terms of magnitudes.
    Overall, the results in Tables 5 and 6 indicate that social media penetration had a positive
effect on the share of people who have implicit xenophobic attitudes, and more so among the
groups of respondents likely to be involved in hate crimes (and, in the case of younger and
low-educated individuals, groups that are arguably likely to be persuadable). These findings
speak in favor of the persuasive effect of social media on xenophobic attitudes.


3.1.3          Self-reported hostility and stigma

The effect of social media on self-reported xenophobic attitudes is estimated at the individual
level using the following specification:


                 SelfReportedHateij = 0 + 1 VKj + 2 ElicitedHostilityj + 3 Xij + ij                    (6)

Here Elicited Hostilityj is the average difference between the numbers of statements that
participants from the treatment group and the control group in city agreed with, i.e.,
  Tij =1   yij       Tij =0   yij
                 -                  from city-level equation (5).
  Tij   =1 1          Tij =0   1

    The results without controlling for the results of the list experiment are reported in
Table 7, Panel A. The coefficient of interest, VKj , is generally not statistically significant
and has a negative sign. For one particular specification in which we look at the subset
of younger respondents (column 4), 95% weak-instrument-robust confidence set lies entirely
below zero. Thus, we find no evidence that social media reduces stigma associated with

                                                                 22
expression of hateful opinions. Even though social media seems to increase actual hostility
to other ethnicities (Tables 5 and 6), it does not decrease (and if anything, increases) the
stigma associated with expressing xenophobic attitudes in public.
   In Table 7, panel B we report the effect of social media on self-reported intolerance when
the elicited level of hostility is controlled for. Unfortunately, here we hit the limits of our
identification approach, with weak instrument robust confidence sets being very imprecise
and some of them even including the entire grid. However, the results for the city-level
estimation of (6) are qualitatively similar and are presented in the Appendix in Table A6.
   Overall, our survey analysis implies that in cities with higher social media penetration
respondents are more likely to have implicit xenophobic attitudes, but at the same time are
not more likely to express them openly to a stranger, such as surveyor (of course, we cannot
rule out differential changes in perceived social acceptability vis-a-vis other audiences, such
as neighbors). In Section 4 below we offer a theoretical model that shows that both of these
findings are consistent with an increased polarization caused my social media.


3.1.4   Interaction with pre-existing nationalism

In Section 2 we showed that pre-existing nationalism increases the effect of social media on
hate crimes. It is natural to wonder whether the effect of social media on hate as measured
by the survey is similarly affected. Unfortunately, the variation in the survey data is not
sufficient to identify the interaction term with a reasonable precision. The instrument turns
out to be too weak for a meaningful analysis (see Table A7 in the Online Appendix) and
weak-instrument-robust confidence sets for this estimation include the entire grid. The
results based on city-level data are presented in Table A8, but they should be interpreted with
extreme caution for two reasons. First, they are based on a small number of observations per
city and the number of observations varies significantly from city to city. Second, and, most
importantly, to the best of our knowledge there is no standard way of computing standard

                                              23
errors in this case, which involves both aggregation of noisy data and weak instruments.
   With these caveats, the results in Table A8 suggest that the interaction term between VK
penetration and pre-existing nationalism is negative in the whole sample, as well as for male,
low-educated, and young subsamples. In other words, the increase in elicited hate is smaller
in cities where pre-existing nationalism was higher. This is particularly interesting and
perhaps surprising in light of our results on hate crimes in Table 3, where the corresponding
interaction term is positive. Nevertheless, our model, which we present below, reconciles and
explains both of these results.
   The interaction results for the self-reported hate are presented in Table A9. As in Tables
7 and A6, the estimates are too noisy to draw any conclusions.


3.1.5   Results from the 2011 survey

To make sure that the lack of an effect on self-reported xenophobic attitudes is not a con-
sequence of the timing of the survey (almost twelve years after VK was founded) or the
number of respondents, we replicate the analysis of our own survey using data from a much
larger survey conducted in February 2011. This MegaFOM opinion poll, conducted by FOM
(Fond Obschestvennogo Mneniya, Public Opinion Foundation), has a regionally representa-
tive sample of 54,388 respondents in 79 regions, of which 29,780 respondents come from the
519 cities in our sample. This survey contained a direct question on dislike toward other
ethnicities with exactly the same wording as the question we used to measure self-reported
hostility in our survey, which we analyzed above.
   The results of estimating equation (6) based on this sample are presented in Table 8.
These results indicate that, as in the case of the 2018 survey, there is no significant relation
between social media penetration and self-reported xenophobic attitudes. This null result
holds regardless of the initial level of nationalism in a city. Weak instrument robust confi-
dence sets are, again, too large to claim that these are indeed zero results, though for the

                                              24
direct effect we can rule out a more than 25% increase in reported xenophobic attitudes
following a 10% increase in social media penetration.



4     Model

We now present a simple model of social learning to show that our empirical findings can be
explained by social networks increasing individuals' propensity to meet like-minded people.


4.1    Social networks and distribution of preferences

Time is discrete and infinite, t = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and there is a continuum of individuals in
a society. Each individual has a political position over some dimension of interest, such
as xenophobia. This political position may be interpreted as taste-based (e.g., whether the
individual likes or hates immigrants) or an opinion about a particular policy (e.g., the number
of immigrants to be allowed, or the minimal requirements such as education and lack of
criminal history that they must satisfy). Importantly, an individual's political position may
evolve over time, so we write xt
                               i to denote the position that individual i has at time t. The

positions at time 0, x0                                                 0             0
                      i , are taken exogenously from some distribution H with c.d.f. F with

finite first (denoted by µ0 = Ex0
                                i ) and second moments; we assume for simplicity that there

is a continuum of individuals at each political position.
    In each period starting from t = 1, individuals may change their political position.
Assume that their new position will incorporate their current one with weight  , and the
positions of other people they talk to with weight 1 -  . In each period, they talk to a
continuum of other people, share  of which are just like them (i.e., with the same political
position), and share 1 -  are random individuals from the society. To capture the idea that
social networks make it easier for like-minded individuals to find each other and spend time
with them, we condsider  to be a proxy for penetration of social networks. In addition, we

                                              25
assume that each individual's position is subject to a random additive shock t
                                                                             i , which has

                          2
normal distribution N (0,   ); these shocks are independent across individuals and time.21
We thus have the following evolution of opinion of individual i:


                                           t-1                       -1
                      xt
                       i = ( + (1 -  )  ) xi   + (1 -  ) (1 -  ) Ext    t
                                                                   -i + i ,                               (7)


          -1
where Ext
        -i equals the integral over political positions of other people in the society in the

previous period.

Lemma 1. The distributions of political positions in the society, F 0 , F 1 , F 2 , . . ., converge in
                                                                +
distribution to N (µ,  2 ) as t  , where µ = µ0 =               -
                                                                    xdF 0 (x) is the mean of the initial
distribution and  2 is given by

                                                      2
                                                    
                                       2 =                       ,                                        (8)
                                             1 - ( + (1 -  )  )2

                       2
which is increasing in   ,  , and  .

       In other words, this model of social learning with shocks predicts convergence of the
distribution of preferences to a normal one, with mean equal to the mean of the original
distribution, whereas all the other information about the original distribution is lost over
time. The variance of the limit distribution is nontrivial because of persistence shocks to
preferences. The more individuals are influenced by people with random opinions, the faster
these preference shocks dissipate, and the smaller the variance of the limit distribution is.
Conversely, if people are mostly influenced by themselves (higher  ) or like-minded people
(higher  ), as in `echo chambers,' the limit distribution has a higher variance, so in other
  21
    The shocks are best thought of as idiosyncratic, but it is easy to amend the model so that these shocks
capture influence by sources that maintain their distribution over time. For example, these might come from
general human knowledge (say, books that individual i might read in period t) or influence by a certain
group of individuals (politicians, celebrities, religious leaders) who have fixed positions that do not evolve
over time.


                                                     26
words, the society is more polarized.22


4.2       Extreme political preferences

We now study how support for different political positions is affected by increased pene-
tration of social networks. By Lemma 1, an increase in  results in a more polarized limit
distribution, i.e. one with a higher variance  . We therefore need to study the effects of an
increase in  .
       Take any cutoff q and consider the shares of individuals with preferences to the left and
to the right of q . Denote these shares by Lq and Rq , respectively, so


                                              1              q
                                                                 (x - µ)2
                    Lq =     Pr (xi   < q) =               exp -                   dx,
                                              2          -         2 2
                                              1              +
                                                                        (x - µ)2
                    Rq =     Pr (xi   > q) =                      exp -              dx.
                                              2          q                2 2


It is straightforward to prove the following result (we formulate it for Rq only, as Lq = 1 - Rq ):

                                                                                Rq
Proposition 1. Suppose that µ < q . Then Rq is increasing in  , so              
                                                                                     > 0. The magnitude
                                            2 Rq                                          2 Rq
of this effect is nonmonotone in µ:        µ
                                                   > 0 for µ  (-, q -  ) and             µ
                                                                                                 < 0 for µ 
                                           Rq           2 Rq                                      2 Rq
(q - , q ). Similarly, if µ > q , then     
                                                < 0,   µ
                                                                 < 0 for µ  (q, q +  ) and       µ
                                                                                                         > 0 for
µ  (q + , +).

       In other words, the opinion of a relative minority (Rq if µ < q or Lq of µ > q ) becomes
more popular as variance  increases. However, the magnitude of the effect is the highest for
values of q about one standard deviation from the mean µ, and it vanishes for values either
very far from or very close to the median. For the former, the density is too low to have an
  22
    Dasaratha et al. (2019) study a society of Bayesian individuals that learn about an ever-changing state
of the world, in which case the shocks can correspond to new private signals that individuals get. Such a
model would generate similar comparative statics; for simplicity we focus to DeGroot (1974) type of learning
with shocks, as in (7).


                                                    27
effect, whereas for the latter, both probabilities are close to 0.5 and their difference is small.
The minimum is attained at the inflection point of the bell curve, which is illustrated on
Figure 1.




 Figure 1: Distributions of political positions before (purple/thick) and after (blue/thin)
 penetration of social networks. For a given cutoff, the increase in the share of individuals
 with positions above this cutoff is the area between the curves to the right of the cutoff,
  with green/diagonally shaded area taken with a positive sign and the red/horizontally
                             shaded area with a negative one.


   This proposition has important implications for our setting. Suppose that the tolerance-
xenophobia axis is oriented such that higher values correspond to stronger xenophobia. On
this axis, there is some cutoff q1 corresponding to the person sometimes experiencing antipa-
thy towards other nationalities (the question we are asking in the list experiment). There
is some cutoff q2 corresponding to the person being just willing to commit a hate crime as
part of a group, and some cutoff q3 corresponding to him being just willing to commit a
hate crime alone. It is natural to expect that q1 < q2 < q3 , but more importantly, all such
xenophobic preferences are expressed by a minority of people. This means that all these cut-
offs exceed µ, and so by Proposition 1 a higher  , e.g. induced by the availability of social

                                               28
media, should increase the share of people with xenophobia exceeding any of these cutoffs.
In other words, more people should dislike migrants (consistent with the individual-level
and city-level results of Section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, see Tables 5 and 6), and more people should
commit hate crimes, both individually and jointly (consistent with the results of Section 2.4,
see Table 2), in places with higher social media penetration.
       Let us now look at how these effects depend on preexisting nationalism, which is natu-
rally captured by µ, with higher µ corresponding to more nationalism and xenophobia. It
is reasonable to think that the cutoffs that guide whether a person commits a hate crime
when given an opportunity, either individually (q3 ) or jointly (q2 ), lie more than a standard
deviation above the median, so we should have q > µ +  . Indeed, for a normal distribution,
the mass of distribution on the right of µ +  equals F (-1)  0.16, which is certainly higher
than the number of potential perpetrators in our setting.23 For these values, Proposition 1
implies that an increase in µ (or, equivalently, a decrease in q ) would increase the derivative
Rq

   .     In other words, a higher level of preexisting nationalism leads to a stronger effect of
social networks on hate crime, consistent with the results of Section 2.4 (See Table 2). Con-
versely, for the cutoff that determines an affirmative answer to the statement we provided
(q1 ), we should have µ < q < µ +  in our setting, because the share of people agreeing
with this statement is about 38%. For this range, Proposition 1 suggests that an increase
                                                                         Rq
in mu would have an opposite effect, decreasing the derivative           
                                                                            .   Thus, a higher level of
preexisting nationalism would alleviate the effect of social networks on elicited hate. As dis-
cussed in Section 3.1.4, (Tables A5 and A6), we should interpret the corresponding empirical
results with caution because of weak instruments, but the signs of the point estimates for
the interaction terms are consistent with this prediction.
  23
    Hate crime is still a relatively rare phenomenon in modern Russia, with the share of perpetrators well
below 1% of the population in all the cities that we consider.




                                                   29
4.3    Self-reported support for extreme positions

Consider an individual i with position xi who is asked, before an audience and therefore
under social pressure, whether it exceeds q . Denote the affirmative answer by di = Y and
the negative answer by di = N . The individual gets disutility from expressing preferences
that are far from his/her own, or to put it another way, there is a cost of lying. Specifically,
if xi > q and s/he chooses di = N , s/he gets disutility h (xi - q ), where h (·) is an increasing
continuous function with h (0) = 0; in other words, we assume that egregious lies are more
costly than little lies. Similarly, if xi < q and s/he chooses di = Y , s/he gets disutility
h (q - xi ). In both cases, telling the truth does not yield direct utility or disutility.
   The individual also cares about social approval. We assume that i's response to the ques-
tion whether xi exceeds q is observed by a random other individual in the society (assuming
that it is observed by several or even all individuals leads to a very similar model with
similar results). This other individual j will form a posterior belief about the individual i's
type. We assume that individual with political position xj dislikes individual with position
xi according to a function g (xj - xi ). Thus, individual i chooses answer di to maximize his
utility Ui that consists of (negative) direct cost Ci and social cost Si :


                   Ui (di , q ) = -Ci (di , q ) - Si (di , q )

               = -I{xi >qdi =N } h (xi - q ) - I{xi <qdi =Y } h (q - xi )
                        
                                                       1       (y - µ)2
                   -   E-i (g (x - y ) | d (x) = di )    exp -                    dy .
                     -                                2           2 2


The latter term Si (di ) captures the expectation of g (xi - y ) by an observer with position
y who knows that individual i chose action di , and then the expectation is taken over the
possible realization of observer's types.
   In general, the game admits multiple equilibria because of strategic complementarity



                                                      30
of adherence to social norms; however, if individuals are sufficiently averse to lying the
equilibrium is unique. We will impose the following sufficient condition; if it does not hold,
then the comparative statics result are true for equilibria with the largest and smallest shares
of individuals giving a particular answer. To simplify expressions we will focus on the case
where g (x) = x2 .

Assumption 1. Function h (·) is such that its inverse, h-1 (·), is differentiable and satisfies
dh-1 (y )
  dy
                   1y         for some  >  .
               2    
                        + 2


    This assumption guarantees that the cost of lying is steeper than a certain linear function
for xi close to q and than a certain quadratic function for large xi . It is satisfied, for example,
for h (x) = ( + ) (x2 + 2x) for  > 0.

Proposition 2. There is a unique equilibrium which is characterized by a cutoff z , such
that individuals with xi > z choose di = Y while individuals with xi < z choose di = N .
Moreover, if q > µ, then z > q , and if q < µ, then z < q .
    Suppose now that q > µ. The cutoff z is decreasing in µ and is increasing in  and q .
The equilibrium share of individuals choosing di = Y is increasing in µ and decreasing in q ;
the effect of an increase in  is ambiguous.

    The first part of Proposition 2 highlights the effect of social stigma: fewer people would
admit holding a minority belief than the number of people actually holding it, because some
types would cave in to social pressure and misstate their preferences. The equilibrium cutoff z
is found as the intersection of two curves (see Figure 2). The first one, Bi = -Ci (Y )+ Ci (N ),
captures the relative benefit of answering Y rather than N ; this curve is upward sloping,
because types with more right position find it easier to answer Y and costlier to answer N .
The second one captures the difference in social costs, Si (Y ) - Si (N ) in case the audience
believes the individual has type above z rather than below z
                                                            . This cost is increasing in z :


                                                31
a higher z means that answering Y implies that one has a more extreme position, whereas
N becomes a more "normal" one. Assumption 1 guarantees that the two curves intersect
exactly once and that the first is steeper than the second, implying the comparative statics
results from the second part of Proposition 2.




 Figure 2: Red/thin line depicts direct benefits (absence of lying costs) of admitting that
the individual's type z is above q . Blue/thick line depicts social costs of appearing above z
rather than below z for an individual of type z . The arrows illustrate shifts of the curves in
                             response to increases in q , µ, and  .


   As q increases, the share of people answering Y becomes smaller, because agreeing that
one's xi exceeds a high q implies that the individual has extreme views, leading to high
social costs. The comparative statics with respect to µ is intuitive as well: an increase in
µ implies a shift in the distribution to the right, which means that being xenophobic is
more socially acceptable. This increases propensity of individuals of any given type to agree
with the statement, so not only does the share of individuals exceeding a given cutoff go


                                              32
up, but also the cutoff for answering Y goes down, thereby unambiguously increasing the
share of individuals choosing Y . The effect of an increase of  , however, is ambiguous,
which might seem counterintuitive given a higher share of xenophobes. However, recall
that a mean-preserving spread implies that the share of people despising xenophobes also
goes up, and in the end of the day the social pressure is determined by the position of the
median individual, which is unchanged. When this individual is moderate and thus dislikes
xenophobes, admitting to being a xenophobe is costlier. As a result, even though the share
of individuals above any given cutoff above µ is increasing in  , the equilibrium cutoff itself is
increasing in  as well, thus implying an ambiguous prediction. This ambiguous prediction is
consistent with the empirical finding of a noisy effect (see Section 3.1.3, Table 7, and Section
3.2, Table 8). Of course, if the lying cost curve is very steep, the effect of cutoff change is
small and a higher  would increase the share of people answering Y .




5     Conclusion

We study the causal effect of exposure to social media on ethnic hate crimes and xenophobic
attitudes in Russia using exogenous variation in initial penetration of social media. We find
that higher penetration of social media increases ethnic hate crime. This effect is stronger in
cities with a higher baseline level of nationalist sentiment as well as for crimes with multiple
perpetrators. The latter finding suggesting that one of the mechanisms behind the effect of
social media is through an increase in coordination (as in Enikolopov et al. (forthcoming).
    Using a national survey on xenophobic attitudes we further show that social media pene-
tration also had a persuasive effect, especially on young individuals and those with low levels
of education. Our design also allows us to investigate whether social media reduced the per-
ceived acceptability of expressing xenophobic attitudes in a survey. We do not find evidence
of such decrease ­ the effect is, if anything, an increase, albeit not significant. We show that

                                               33
all our results are consistent with a simple model where social media increase individuals'
exposure to like-minded individuals, thereby increasing polarization, but inconsistent with
a mere shift in opinions towards more xenophobia.
   These findings contribute to growing body of evidence that social media is a complex phe-
nomenon that has both positive and negative effects on the welfare of people (see also Allcott
et al, 2019), which all have to be taken into account when discussing policy implications of
the recent changes in media technologies.
   It is important to note that some of our results should be interpreted with caution. First,
the problem of weak instruments is an important concern. Even though weak instrument
robust methods allow us to get reasonable estimates for our main findings, in most cases
power issues prevent us from interpreting the lack of significant results as null effects, due
to large confidence intervals, or from studying triple interaction effects to further differen-
tiate between mechanisms. Second, and relatedly, we were only able to conduct our survey
experiment in 2018, when the initial shock to social media penetration had already largely
dissipated. It is quite possible that we could have learned more about individual and social
mechanisms behind the effect if we had conducted our study earlier.
   Our paper also hints at promising directions for future research. One interesting question
is to find more direct evidence on the effect of social media on polarization and see under
which conditions social media may contribute to moderation. More generally, it would be
interesting to understand the factors that determine opinion formation. For example, we find
evidence consistent with young and low-educated individuals being more impressionable than
older or higher-educated ones, but it is an open question which individuals and groups are
more likely to be influenced, by whom, and why. Finally, it would be interesting to provide
direct evidence on how social media facilitates coordination in practice, by both analyzing
the text content in social media forums and understanding how online discussions may lead
to offline interactions as well.

                                              34
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Tarek A. Hassan, and Ahmed Tahoun, "The Power of the Street:
  Evidence from Egypt's Arab Spring," Review of Financial Studies, 2018, 31 (1), 1­42.

Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Eka-
  terina Zhuravskaya, "Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, Nov 2015, 130 (4), 1885­1939.

Algan, Yann, Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou, and Evgenia Passari, "The Eu-
  ropean Trust Crisis and the Rise of Populism," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  2017, Fall, 309­382.

Allcott, Hunt and Matthew Gentzkow, "Social Media and Fake News in the 2016
  Election," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (2), 211­36.

  , Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, and Matthew Gentzkow, "The Welfare Effects
  of Social Media," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019. Mimeo.

Andrews, Donald W. K., "Identification-Robust Subvector Inference," Working Paper
  2017.

Andrews, Isaiah, James Stock, and Liyang Sun, "Weak Instruments in IV Regression:
  Theory and Practice," Annual Review of Economics, 2019 2019, 11, 727­753.

Blair, Graeme and Kosuke Imai, "Statistical Analysis of List Experiments," Political
  Analysis, 2012, 20 (1), 4777.

Bond, Robert M., Christopher J. Fariss, Jason J. Jones, Adam D. I. Kramer,
  Cameron Marlow, Jaime E. Settle, and James H. Fowler, "A 61-Million-Person




                                           35
  Experiment in Social Influence and Political Mobilization," Nature, September 2012, 489
  (7415), 295­298.

Boxell, Levi, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro, "Greater Internet Use
  is Not Associated with Faster Growth in Political Polarization Among US Demographic
  Groups," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2017, 114 (40), 10612­10617.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen, "How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational
  Investments?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1329.

  , Bruno Ferman, Stefano Fiorin, Martin Kanz, and Gautam Rao, "Status Goods:
  Experimental Evidence from Platinum Credit Cards in Indonesia," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2018, 133 (3), 1561­1595.

  , Georgy Egorov, and Stefano Fiorin, "From Extreme to Mainstream: The Erosion
  of Social Norms," working paper 2019.

Cantoni, Davide, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang, "Protests
  as Strategic Games: Experimental Evidence from Hong Kong's Antiauthoritarian Move-
  ment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, may 2019, 134 (2), 1021­1077.

Chaudhuri, Saraswata and Eric Zivot, "A New Method of Projection-based Inference
  in GMM with Weakly Identified Nuisance Parameters," Journal of Econometrics, 2011,
  164 (2), 239 ­ 251.

Coutts, Elisabeth and Ben Jann, "Sensitive Questions in Online Surveys: Experimen-
  tal Results for the Randomized Response Technique (RRT) and the Unmatched Count
  Technique (UCT)," Sociological Methods & Research, 2011, 40 (1), 169­193.

Dasaratha, Krishna, Benjamin Golub, and Nir Hak, "Social Learning in a Dynamic
  Environment," Technical Report 2019.

                                           36
DeGroot, M. H., "Reaching a Consensus," Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  1974, 69, 118­121.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier, "Testing for Altruism
  and Social Pressure in Charitable Giving," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127
  (1), 1.

  ,   ,     , and Gautam Rao, "Voting to Tell Others," Review of Economic Studies, 2017,
  84 (1), 143.

Enikolopov, Ruben, Alexey Makarin, and Maria Petrova, "Social Media and Protest
  Participation: Evidence from Russia," Econometrica, forthcoming.

  ,   ,     , and Leonid Polishchuk, "Social Image, Networks, and Protest Participation,"
  Technical Report 2017.

  , Maria Petrova, and Konstantin Sonin, "Social Media and Corruption," American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (1), 150­74.

Enke, Benjamin, "Moral Values and Voting," working paper 2019.

Glynn, Adam N., "What Can We Learn with Statistical Truth Serum?: Design and
  Analysis of the List Experiment," Public Opinion Quarterly, 01 2013, 77 (S1), 159­172.

Golub, Benjamin and Evan Sadler, "Learning in Social Networks," in Yann Bramoull´
                                                                                e,
  Andrea Galeotti, and Brian Rogers, eds., The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Net-
  works, Oxford University Press, 2016, pp. 504­542.

Guriev, Sergei, Nikita Melnikov, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, "3G Internet and
  Confidence in Government," Technical Report, mimeo, Paris School of Economics 2019.




                                            37
Imai, Kosuke, "Multivariate Regression Analysis for the Item Count Technique," Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 2011, 106 (494), 407­416.

Manacorda, Marco and Andrea Tesei, "Liberation Technology: Mobile Phones and
  Political Mobilization in Africa," Technical Report 2016.

Mosquera, Roberto, Mofioluwasademi Moffii Odunowo, Trent McNamara,
  Xiongfei Guo, and Ragan Petrie, "The Economic Effects of Facebook," Available
  at SSRN 3312462, 2018.

M¨
 uller, Karsten and Carlo Rasmus Schwarz, "Fanning the Flames of Hate: So-
  cial Media and Hate Crime," Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3082972 or
  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3082972, 2018.

  and    , "From Hashtag to Hate Crime: Twitter and Anti-Minority Sentiment," Available
  at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3149103, 2019.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces, "Partisan Interactions: Evidence from
  a Field Experiment in the United States," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (4),
  1208­1243.

Qin, Bei, David Str¨
                   omberg, and Yanhui Wu, "Why Does China Allow Freer Social
  Media? Protests versus Surveillance and Propaganda," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  February 2017, 31 (1), 117­40.

  ,   , and     , "Social Media, Information Networks, and Protests in China," working
  paper 2019.

Raghavarao, Damaraju and Walter T. Federer, "Block Total Response as an Alter-
  native to the Randomized Response Method in Surveys," Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Methodological), 1979, 41 (1), 40­45.

                                            38
Settle, Jaime E., Frenemies: How Social Media Polarizes America, Cambridge University
  Press, Aug 2018.

Steinert-Threlkeld, Zachary C., Delia Mocanu, Alessandro Vespignani, and
  James Fowler, "Online Social Networks and Offline Protest," EPJ Data Science, Nov
  2015, 4 (1), 19.

Sun, Liyang, "Implementing Valid Two-Step Identification-Robust Confidence Sets for
  Linear Instrumental-Variables Models," The Stata Journal, 2018, 18 (4), 803­825.

Sunstein, Cass R., Republic.Com, Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton University Press, 2001.

  , #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media, Princeton, NJ, USA: Prince-
  ton University Press, 2017.

Yanagizawa-Drott, David, "Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Geno-
  cide," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 11 2014, 129 (4), 1947­1994.

  , Maria Petrova, and Ruben Enikolopov, "Echo Chambers: Does Online Network
  Structure Affect Political Polarization?," mimeo 2019.




                                            39
              Table 1. Number of Victims by Type.
Victims                                     Freq.   Percent
Ethnic
  Central Asia                                325   23.81%
  Caucasians                                  265   19.41%
  Blacks                                       74    5.42%
  Russians                                     63    4.62%
  Arabs                                        33    2.42%
  Jews                                         10    0.73%
  Other "non-slavic"                          209   15.31%
  Other Asians                                108    7.91%
  Other Ethnicity                              85    6.23%
                         Total Ethnic         770   56.41%
Non-Ethnic
 Youth groups and left-wing groups            402   29.45%
 Religious Groups                             106    7.77%
 Homeless                                      42    3.08%
 LGBT                                          32    2.34%
 Unknown                                       13    0.95%
                    Total Non-Ethnic          595   43.59%
Total                                       1,365     100%




                                40
                                                           Table 2. Social Media and Hate Crime. Period: 2007-2015.

                                                               Log (# of victims of hate crime)       Log (# of victims of ethnic hate crime) Log (# of victims of non-ethninc hate crime)
                                                              total         single       multiple        total         single       multiple         total         single       multiple
                                                                         perpetrator perpetrators                   perpetrator perpetrators                   perpetrator perpetrators
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)
     Log (number of VK users), 2011                          -0.130         0.238         -0.229        -0.211         0.348*         -0.417         0.350         0.007          0.502
             Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-1.169; .660) (-.262; .787) (-1.265; .558) (-1.167; .516) (-.036; .853) (-1.460; .316) (-.423; 1.196) (-.403; .381) (-.177; 1.393)
                                                             [0.420]       [0.241]        [0.418]       [0.386]       [0.204]        [0.390]        [0.372]       [0.180]        [0.360]
     Nationalist Party Support in 2003                        2.407         -0.127         2.208         2.810         -0.801         3.307         -1.178         0.057         -2.176
                                                             [2.492]       [1.250]        [2.477]       [2.301]       [0.956]        [2.341]        [2.069]       [0.945]        [2.042]
     Log (SPbSU students, one cohort younger)                -0.084         -0.060        -0.060       -0.155**       -0.058*        -0.122*         0.075         -0.015         0.087
                                                             [0.068]       [0.039]        [0.070]       [0.063]       [0.033]        [0.065]        [0.059]       [0.031]        [0.063]
     Log (SPbSU students, one cohort older)                   0.101         0.065          0.089         0.099         0.008         0.113*          0.014         0.057*        -0.035
                                                             [0.077]       [0.040]        [0.076]       [0.067]       [0.035]        [0.068]        [0.066]       [0.031]        [0.067]
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
     Observations                                              625           625            625           625           625            625            625           625            625
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                            13.150        13.150         13.150        13.150        13.150         13.150         13.150        13.150         13.150
     Effective F-statistics (Montiel Olea and Pflueger 2013) 13.571        13.571         13.571        13.571        13.571         13.571         13.571        13.571         13.571
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger threshold for 10% worst case bias       23.109       23.109         23.109         23.109       23.109         23.109        23.109       23.109       23.109
     Endogeneity test p-value                                       0.575        0.484         0.489          0.461         0.163         0.251          0.390       0.949         0.175
     Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is
     a city. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort
     controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in
     each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log




41
     (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.
                                                      Table 3. Social Media and Hate Crime. Specification with Interaction. Period: 2007-2015.
                                                                            Log (# of victims of hate crime)              Log (# of victims of ethnic hate crime)        Log (# of victims of non-ethninc hate crime)
                                                                        total            single          multiple         total           single           multiple        total            single         multiple
                                                                                      perpetrator      perpetrators                     perpetrator     perpetrators                     perpetrator     perpetrators
                                                                         (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)           (7)                (8)            (9)
     Log (number of VK users), 2011
                                                                       12.002***         6.349***        11.605***        10.578***          5.056**        10.282***       10.365***          1.823         9.125**
     x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                    Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets ( 4.537; 23.199) ( 1.588; 13.491) (4.120; 22.833) (3.701; 20.895) ( 1.114; 10.971) ( 3.304; 20.749) ( 3.004; 21.407) (-1.623; 6.991) (1.983; 19.839)
                                                                        [4.570]           [2.915]         [4.583]          [4.211]           [2.414]         [4.272]         [4.507]         [2.110]         [4.373]
     Log (number of VK users), 2011                                       0.053            0.362          -0.055            -0.046           0.446**          -0.276          0.529           0.051          0.667*
                    Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets ( -.976; .740) (-.105; 1.062) (-1.081; .629)             (-.984; .578)    ( .050; 1.041) (-1.215; .351) (-.201; 1.624)     (-.410; .359) ( -.036; 1.720)
                                                                        [0.420]           [0.286]         [0.419]          [0.383]           [0.243]         [0.383]         [0.447]         [0.188]         [0.430]
     Nationalist Party Support in 2003                                    5.384            1.168          5.534*            4.978*            0.180          5.633*           2.214           0.509           1.137
                                                                        [3.298]           [1.527]         [3.260]          [2.930]           [1.281]         [3.006]         [2.557]         [1.096]         [2.504]
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                                     Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
     Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger and their                Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
     interaction with Nationalistic Party Support, 2003
     Observations                                                           625             625              625               625             625               625           625              625            625
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                         6.351            6.351           6.351             6.351            6.351            6.351          6.351           6.351           6.351
     Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest       5.759            5.463           5.640             5.491            6.193            6.793          6.246           0.842           6.001
     Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest      0.056            0.065           0.060             0.064            0.045            0.033          0.044           0.656           0.050
     Endogeneity test p-value                                             0.302            0.204           0.291             0.358            0.178            0.218          0.077           0.713           0.066
     Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support           -0.522            0.057          -0.611            -0.554            0.204          -0.769*          0.032           -0.036          0.229
     p-value for the effect at minimum                                     .255            0.831            .176              .173             .35              .062          0.939            .862           0.573
     Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support                2.584**           1.701**         2.392**          2.184**           1.512**          1.893*         2.715**           0.436         2.591**
     p-value for the effect at maximum                                    0.017            0.027           0.028             0.032            0.021            0.064          0.023           0.380           0.024
     Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city. Logarithm of any
     variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-
     39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional
     center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.




42
                                            Table 4. Social Media and Hate Crime. Specification with Interaction. Period: 2004-2006.
                                                                         Log (# of victims of hate crime)       Log (# of victims of ethnic hate crime) Log (# of victims of non-ethnic hate crime)
                                                                        total           single       multiple     total         single        multiple      total         single       multiple
                                                                                    perpetrator perpetrators                  perpetrator perpetrators                  perpetrato perpetrators
                                                                         (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)           (9)
     Log (number of VK users), 2011
                                                                         -1.898         -0.165          -1.732       -1.321        -0.165        -1.156       -0.576                     -0.576
     x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                      Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-5.311; .378) (-.749; .127) (-5.065; .489) (-4.583; .853) (-.749; .127) (-4.326; .957) (-2.094; .436)     .       (-2.094; .436)
                                                                         [1.393]        [0.179]        [1.360]       [1.331]       [0.179]       [1.294]     [0.619]                    [0.619]
     Log (number of VK users), 2011                                       0.018          0.014          0.005         0.145         0.014         0.132       -0.127                     -0.127
                      Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.258; .433) (-.021; .066) [-.271; .280) (-.075; .476) (-.021; .066) (-.086; .459) (-.376; .039)          .        (-.376; .039)
                                                                         [0.169]        [0.021]        [0.168]       [0.135]       [0.021]       [0.133]     [0.101]                    [0.101]
     Nationalist Party Support in 2003                                   -0.954         -0.217          -0.737      -1.307*        -0.217        -1.091        0.353                      0.353
                                                                         [0.772]        [0.213]        [0.717]       [0.769]       [0.213]       [0.695]     [0.370]                    [0.370]
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                                     Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes                        Yes
     Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger and their                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes                        Yes
     interaction with Nationalistic Party Support, 2003
     Observations                                                          625            625            625           625           625           625          625                        625
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                         6.351          6.351          6.351         6.351         6.351         6.351        6.351                      6.351
     Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest       3.041          0.970          2.578         3.848         0.970         3.330        1.577                      1.577
     Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest      0.219          0.616          0.275         0.146         0.616         0.189        0.455                      0.455
     Endogeneity test p-value                                             0.093          0.468          0.141         0.094         0.468         0.140        0.431                      0.431
     Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support            0.109          0.022          0.088         0.209         0.022         0.187       -0.100                     -0.100
     p-value for the effect at minimum                                    .471            .423           .554          .116          .423           .14        .234                       .234
     Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support                 -0.382         -0.021          -0.361       -0.133        -0.021        -0.112       -0.249                     -0.249
     p-value for the effect at maximum                                    0.340           .504           .364         0.698          .504          .743         .245        .              .245
     Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city.




43
     Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the
     number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts
     according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic
     fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.
                                            Table 5. Social Media and Ethnic Hostility, Elicited from List Experiment.
                                                                                            Number of options in List Experiment
                                                   Subsample:      All          Male        Female         Low           High         Young           Old
                                                                                                         Education     Education
                                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)
     Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in List Experiment (LE)
                                                                 0.075**       0.109*        0.043        0.164***       -0.008       0.105***       0.050
     x Log (Number of VK users, 2011)
               Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets ( .009; .208) (-.005; .222) (-.039; .247) ( .071; .257) ( -.091; .075) ( .026; .224) (-.055; .207)
                                                             [0.041]       [0.069]       [0.050]       [0.057]        [0.051]       [0.049]       [0.064]
     Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                           -0.053        -0.001        -0.080        0.017         -0.085         0.066         -0.067
                                                             [0.167]       [0.277]       [0.189]       [0.228]        [0.220]       [0.191]       [0.253]
     Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in LE                  0.203**         0.110       0.293**        -0.019       0.422***        0.087        0.310**
                                                             [0.101]       [0.173]       [0.123]       [0.131]        [0.130]       [0.119]       [0.157]
     Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                        -0.832        -1.227        -0.363        -1.390        -0.045         0.120         -1.477
                                                             [1.037]       [1.399]       [1.492]       [1.716]        [1.310]       [1.299]       [1.555]
     Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in LE                   1.040         0.680         1.032         0.526          0.762         0.061         2.087
     x Vote share of nationalistic party, 2003               [1.195]       [2.177]       [1.431]       [1.748]        [1.355]       [1.501]       [1.989]
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Observations                                                    4,447         2,118         2,329          1,954         2,493         2,164         2,283
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                    4.541         4.366         4.507          4.469         4.445         4.559         4.012




44
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets,
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a respondent. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level
     controls include logarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-
     49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010
     Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in
     2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census, and SPbSU older and younger student cohorts.
                                        Table 6. Social Media and Ethnic Hostility, Inferred from List Experiment. City Level.
                                                                                                         List Experiment elicited hostility
     Subsample:                                                                                                         Low           High
                                                                          All          Male           Female                                  Young           Old
                                                                                                                    Education      Education
                                                                          (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)     (6)           (7)
     Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                                    0.123***       0.158**          0.050         0.204***        -0.008  0.210***       0.099
                 Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets ( .045, .208) ( .026, .290) ( -.042, .151) ( .099, .334) (-.136, .107) ( .080, .353) (-.022, .219)
                                                                        [0.041]       [0.070]         [0.049]         [0.062]        [0.062]  [0.069]      [0.064]
     Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                                   1.486         1.058           2.725           1.695         -0.362    1.444        2.912
                                                                        [1.522]       [2.700]         [1.896]         [1.953]        [2.178]  [2.500]      [2.188]
     Observations                                                         124           116             122             124             111     121           116
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                       78.994        74.394          81.499          78.994         56.186   73.944       67.506
     Effective F-statistics (Montiel Olea and Pflueger 2013)           105.021        98.222          103.035        105.021         75.060   97.275       92.187
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger threshold for 10% worst case bias            23.109        23.109          23.109          23.109         23.109   23.109       23.109
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, ***
     p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside.




45
                                                       Table 7. Social Media and Self-Reported Hostility to Other Ethnicities.
                                                                                                      Self-reported hostility to other ethnicities
                                                    Subsample:         All           Male          Female          Low              High              Young                 Old
                                                                                                                 Education        Education
                                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)                  (6)                (7)
     Panel A. VK and self-reported hate.
     Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                                   -0.113          -0.200        -0.058          -0.180          -0.087              -0.333              0.159
                 Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.507; .251) (-.706; .269) (-.559; .370) (-.802; .201) (-.581; .446)                   (-.986;-.016)      (-.292; 1.132)
                                                                     [0.147]         [0.189]        [0.188]         [0.203]         [0.199]            [0.188]             [0.240]
     Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                                -0.010          0.862         -0.501           0.303          -0.178              1.203              -1.548
                                                                     [0.805]         [1.134]        [1.115]         [1.302]         [1.127]            [1.129]             [1.251]
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                                 Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                 Yes
     Observations                                                     1,927            927           1,000            853            1,074               943                 984
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                     8.563           8.372          8.486           9.335           8.160              9.561               7.141
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger Effective F-stat                           8.748           8.533          8.786           9.232           8.095              9.775               6.964
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger threshold for 10% worst case bias         23.109           23.109        23.109          23.109          23.109              23.109             23.109
     Panel B. VK, self-reported hate, and inferred city-level hate (ities with at least 40 respondents).
     Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                                   -0.059          -0.257         0.130           0.004          -0.096              -0.195              0.168
                 Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets entire grid             entire grid    entire grid    entire grid      entire grid        entire grid        entire grid
                                                                     [0.235]         [0.396]        [0.287]         [0.269]         [0.335]            [0.385]             [0.349]
     Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                                -0.291          0.928         -1.044          -1.359           0.054              0.782              -1.914
                                                                     [1.392]         [2.254]        [1.809]         [2.119]         [1.382]            [2.025]             [2.296]
     City-level hate to other ethnicities, inferred from LE           0.013           0.016          0.016          0.192**         -0.114              -0.066              0.039
                                                                     [0.061]         [0.100]        [0.091]         [0.095]         [0.075]            [0.083]             [0.079]




46
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                                 Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                 Yes
     Observations                                                     1,382            652            730             569             813                637                 745
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                     2.461           2.023          2.857           4.322           1.927              2.412               2.705
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger Effective F-stat                           2.500           2.054          2.901           4.386           1.957              2.448               2.747
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger threshold for 10% worst case bias         23.109          23.109         23.109          23.109          23.109             23.109              23.109
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, **
     p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a respondent. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of
     population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to
     2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average
     wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census, and SPbSU
     older and younger student cohorts.
                                                    Table 8. Social Media and Self-Reported Hostility to Other Ethnicities, FOM.
                                                                                                           Self-reported hostility to other ethnicities
                                                              Subsample:         All           Male          Female           Low             High       Young           Old
                                                                                                                          Education        Education
     Log (number of VK users), 2011                                            0.003          -0.065          0.053          0.015           -0.069      -0.091         0.094
                           Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.248, .254) (-.442, .199) (-.150, .373) (-.242, .313) (-.513, .197) (-.448, .173) ( -.122, .453)
                                                                              [0.094]         [0.116]        [0.098]        [0.104]          [0.128]    [0.116]        [0.104]
     Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                                          0.487          0.610          0.421          0.455            0.683      0.894          0.134
                                                                              [0.522]         [0.615]        [0.559]        [0.568]          [0.596]    [0.653]        [0.537]
     Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger                              -0.002         -0.005          0.010         -0.005           -0.009      0.008          0.001
     Socioeconomic city-level controls                                           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes
     Individual-level controls                                                   Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes
     Observations                                                             27,696          12,285         15,411         20,766            6,930     13,571         14,125
     Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                              7.897           7.849          7.876          7.798            7.566      8.136          7.368
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger Effective F-stat                                    6.326           6.063          6.500          6.197            6.200      6.179          6.245
     Montiel Olea-Pflueger threshold for 10% worst case bias                  23.109          23.109         23.109         23.109           23.109     23.109         23.109
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence intervals, *** p<0.01,
     ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a respondent. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of
     population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to
     2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average
     wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census. Indivual-
     level controls include gender, education categories, dummy for pilot and age categories.




47
Appendix A

Proof of Lemma 1. First of all, taking the expectation of both sides of (7), and using that
    -1       -1                t-1
Ext
  i    = Ext             t                         t     0
           -i , we get Exi = Exi , and therefore Exi = Exi = µ for each t.
                                 -1 t-2                          t-1
   We can iteratively plug in xt
                               i , xi , . . . into (7) and use Ex-i = µ to get



                                        t 0
                     xt
                      i = ( + (1 -  )  ) xi
                                                       t
                             + (1 -  ) (1 -  )               ( + (1 -  )  )k-1 µ
                                                       k=1
                                    t
                             +            ( + (1 -  )  )k-1 t
                                                            i
                                                              -k+1
                                                                   .
                                    k=1



Since ( + (1 -  )  )  (0, 1), the first term converges to 0 in probability as t  . The
second term equals

                                 1 - ( + (1 -  )  )t
               (1 -  ) (1 -  )                       µ = µ - ( + (1 -  )  )t µ,
                                 1 - ( + (1 -  )  )

which converges to µ in probability. Now the last term is a sum of t independent normal
variables, and thus the sum is also normal. Its mean is zero, and its variance equals

                     t                           2           1 - ( + (1 -  )  )2t 2
                           ( + (1 -  )  )k-1         2
                                                       =                          .
                     k=1                                     1 - ( + (1 -  )  )2

This latter term converges to  2 defined by (8), which implies that the sum converges to
N (0,  2 ) in distribution. Since the last term converges to N (0,  2 ) in distribution, and the
sum of the first two converges to a constant µ in probability, we have that xt
                                                                             i converges to

N (µ,  2 ) in distribution. The comparative statics results are straightforward, which com-
pletes the proof.




                                                 A-1
   Proof of Proposition 1. We have:

                                 1             +
                                                                (x - µ)2                x-µ
                  Rq =                             exp -                      dx =          =y
                                 2         q                      2 2                    
                                           +
                          1                                 y2
                        =                        exp -            dy .
                           2              q -µ
                                            
                                                            2

Now,
                                 Rq  1 q-µ       (q - µ)2
                                    =      exp -                                         ,
                                     2  2           2 2

which is positive if µ < q and negative otherwise. We furthermore have:

                      2 Rq   1      (q - µ)2                                 1    q-µq-µ
                           =  exp -                                      -      +                 ,
                     µ       2         2 2                                    2    2  2


which is positive if |q - µ| >  and negative otherwise. The result follows immediately.


Lemma A1. Let F (·) and f (·) be the c.d.f. and p.d.f. of the standard normal distribution.
Then:
                    xf (x)
   (i)  (x) =   F (x)(1-F (x))
                                 is increasing in x;
                      (x)
   (ii) for x > 0,    x2
                            is decreasing in x
                      d(x)       2(x)
   (iii) for x > 0,    dx
                             <    x
                                      ;
                      d(x)
   (iv) for x > 0,     dx
                             <2      (x) + 1.

Proof. (i) The function  (x) is odd ( (-x) = - (x)), so it suffices to prove the statement
                                                                              
                                                      x                        xf (x)
for x  0. Let us prove that 1 (x) =                F (x)
                                                           and 2 (x) =        1-F (x)
                                                                                        are increasing in x for x > 0;
since both are positive for x > 0 this would imply the result.
   To prove that 1 (x) is increasing in x, consider

                                       1                   
                        d1 (x)         
                                      2 x
                                          F        (x) -      xf (x)         F (x) - 2xf (x)
                               =                            2            =                   .
                         dx                        (F (x))                    2 x (F (x))2

                                                            A-2
To prove that the numerator is positive, notice that its dervative equals f (x) - 2f (x) +
                                                                                                  1
2x2 f (x) = f (x) (2x2 - 1). Thus, the numerator is decreasing on 0,                              2
                                                                                                      and increasing
         1                                                          1                                 1         1
on       2
           ,    , and since it is positive for x =                  2
                                                                        (indeed, it equals F          2
                                                                                                          -   4 e
                                                                                                                    >
1         1
2
    -   4 e   > 0), then it is positive for all x  0 and thus 1 (x) is increasing in x.
     To prove that 2 (x) is increasing in x, consider

                                                                               
                 d2 (x)               2
                                          1
                                          
                                              x
                                                f (x) -   xxf (x) (1 - F (x)) + x (f (x))2
                        =
                  dx                                           (1 - F (x))2
                                         f (x)
                                =                               1 - 2x2 (1 - F (x)) + 2xf (x) .
                                    2 x (1 - F (x))2

Denote the last term as 0 (x) = ((1 - 2x2 ) (1 - F (x)) + 2xf (x)); let us prove that it is
                                       1
positive for x  0. If x                2
                                         ,    the first term is positive and the result follows immediately.
Suppose that x >          1
                            ,   then divide 0 (x) by 2x2 - 1 > 0 to get ~ (x) = F (x) - 1+ 2 x
                                                                                                 f (x);
                          2                                                               2x2 -1

it now suffices to prove that       ~ (x) > 0 for x >           1
                                                                  . Notice that limx+       ~ (x) = 0 and
                                                                2
      ~(x)              (2f (x)-2x2 f (x))(2x2 -1)-2xf (x)(4x)        x2 +1
that ddx
           =  f ( x ) +                 (2x2 -1)2
                                                               = - (26x2 -1)2 f (x) < 0, which means that

~ (x) > 0 for x >
                          1
                            ,   and therefore 0 (x) > 0 for all x  0, which establishes that 2 (x) is
                          2

increasing in x. This implies that  (x) = 1 (x) 2 (x) is increasing in x.
                    (x)              f (x)                                xF (x)(1-F (x))
     (ii) We have   x2
                           =    xF (x)(1-F (x))
                                                .   Let us prove that          f (x)
                                                                                            is increasing in x. Since
                                                                        x(1-F (x))
F (x) is increasing, it suffices to prove that 3 (x) =                     f (x)
                                                                                     is increasing. Differentiating,
we get

                   d3 (x)   (1 - F (x) - xf (x)) f (x) + xf (x) x (1 - F (x))
                          =
                    dx                            (f (x))2
                            (1 + x2 ) (1 - F (x)) - xf (x)
                          =                                .
                                         f (x)

To prove that it is positive, consider 4 (x) = 1 - F (x) - xf (x)
                                                           1+x2
                                                                  . We have limx+ 4 (x) = 0




                                                              A-3
and

                   d3 (x)             (1 - x2 ) (1 + x2 ) f (x) - 2x2 f (x)
                          = -f (x) -
                    dx                              (1 + x2 )2
                               2f (x)
                          = -           < 0,
                              (x2 + 1)2

which implies that 4 (x) > 0, and therefore 3 (x) is increasing. This, in turn, implies the
stated property.
   (iii) We have

             d (x)   (1 - x2 ) f (x) F (x) (1 - F (x)) + x (f (x))2 (2F (x) - 1)
                   =                                                             ,
              dx                         (F (x) (1 - F (x)))2

which is positive, as we proved in (i). Then

          d (x) x       (1 - x2 ) F (x) (1 - F (x)) + xf (x) (2F (x) - 1)
                   -2 =                                                   -2
           dx  (x)                       F (x) (1 - F (x))
                        xf (x) (2F (x) - 1)
                      =                      - x2 - 1.
                         F (x) (1 - F (x))

                                                                         2F (x)-1          1
We need to prove that the last expression is negative. Notice that         F (x)
                                                                                    = 2 - F( x)
                                                                                                 (0, 1)
                                             xf (x)
for x > 0. It thus suffices to prove that   1-F (x)
                                                      - x2 - 1 < 0, which is equivalent to


                              ^ (x) = xf (x) - (1 - F (x)) < 0.
                              
                                      x2 + 1

Notice that limx+ ^ (x) = 0 and that


                       d^ (x)       1 - x2        x2
                              =               -                 f (x) + f (x)
                        dx         (x2 + 1)2 x2 + 1
                                     2
                               =           f (x) > 0.
                                 (x2 + 1)2



                                                A-4
These two facts combined imply that ^ (x) < 0 for x > 0, which implies the required

inequality.
                                                                   
   (iv) The statement is obviously true for x <     2 (it suffices to compute the expressions
                                                                        
in a finite number of points). In what follows, we prove that for x > 2, d   (x)
                                                                            dx
                                                                                        1
                                                                                 < 2x + x and
       1
2x +   x
           < 2 (x) + 1.
   Step 1. Let us prove that

                                                                   1
                                        1 - F (x) <                       .                           (A1)
                                                               (1 + x2 )2

   This inequality obviously holds for small x, and one can easily check that it holds for
x < 4. Let us show that it also holds for all x  4. It suffices to prove that

                                                                       
                             1                 1                             4t
                                                   t2
                                                        dt <                         dt.
                              2         x      e    2              x      (1 + t2 )3

   From the fact that
                                        t2                t2 t4 t6
                                        e2 >1+              + +
                                                          2  8  48

it follows that
                                                                   
                        1           1        48                                 1
                                     t2
                                        dt <                                                .
                         2   x      e2        2                x       48 + 24t2 + 6t4 + t6

It therefore remains to show that for x  4,

                                                                                   
                        48                    1                                          4t
                                                        <                                        dt
                         2   x      48 + 24t + 6t4 + t6
                                            2
                                                                               x      (1 + t2 )3

which will be true if
                                    12   3t5 + 21t3 + 47t
                                     <t+                  .
                                     2       (1 + t2 )3

As one can see, the first term increases to infinity as t increases, hence there exists t such



                                                         A-5
that for t > t the inequality holds. In particular, this is true for t  4, which proves Step 1.
   Step 2. Let us show that for x > 0, (x) < 1 + x2 . This equivalent to

                                                              f (x)x
                                       F (x)(1 - F (x)) >
                                                              1 + x2

                                          f (x)x                      1
   Define  (x) = F (x)(1 - F (x)) -       1+x2
                                                 ,   clearly  (0) =   4
                                                                          > 0. Moreover,

       d (x)                         (1 - x2 )f (x)    2x2 f (x)
             = f (x) - 2F (x)f (x) -                +            =
        dx                               1 + x2       (1 + x2 )2
                        x4 + 2 x2 - 1                                  1
       = 1 - 2F (x) +            2 2
                                        f (x) = 2f (x) 1 - F (x) -                         < 0,
                          (1 + x )                                 (1 + x2 )2              (A1)



which means that  (x) is decreasing. Finally, from the fact limx  (x) = 0, we can
conclude that  (x) > 0,  x > 0, which, in turn, implies that (x) < 1 + x2 .
                                    
   Step 3. Let us prove that for x > 2

                                                                 1
                                      (x)F (x) < 1 + x2 -             ,                           (A2)
                                                               1 + x2

which is equivalent to

                                       f (x)      1     1
                                               <x+ -           .
                                     1 - F (x)    x x(1 + x2 )

   We have

                        d           1 + x2                  1 + x2 x4 + x2 + 2
                   -         f (x)             = f ( x )           +                =
                       dx         x(2 + x2 )                2 + x2 x2 (2 + x2 )2
                            x6 + 4 x4 + 3 x2 + 2                       x2 - 2
               = f (x)                            =   f  ( x ) 1 -                   .
                              x6 + 4 x4 + 4 x2                     x6 + 4 x4 + 4 x2

                                                                                                  
   The second term from the expression in the parentheses becomes positive for x >                2,



                                                      A-6
                                                                                                        
hence the whole expression in the parentheses becomes less than 1. Therefore, for x >                      2,

                                 +                                           +
               1 + x2                                t2 - 2
      f (x)              =           f (t) 1 -                    dt <           f (t)dt = 1 - F (x),
              x(2 + x2 )     x                   t6 + 4t4 + 4t2          x



which implies
                         f (x)      x(2 + x2 )    1     1
                                 <         2
                                               =x+ -           .
                       1 - F (x)     1+x          x x(1 + x2 )
                                     
   Step 4. Let us prove that for x > 2,

                                            d(x)       1
                                                 < 2x + ,                                               (A3)
                                             dx        x

which is equivalent to

                      d(x)   (x)                                1
                           =     (2F (x) - 1)(x) + 1 - x2 < 2x + .
                       dx    x                                  x

   Using the fact that (x) < 1 + x2 , which we proved in Step 2, we have

           (x)                            1 + x2
               (2F (x) - 1)(x) + 1 - x2 <        ((2F (x) - 1)(x) + 1 - x2 ).
           x                                x

It remains to show that

                                                                      1
                             (2F (x) - 1)(x) + 1 - x2 < 2 -                ,
                                                                    1 + x2

and this follows from

                                                                               1
                       (2F (x) - 1)(x) < F (x)(x) < 1 + x2 -                        .
                                                           (A2)              1 + x2




                                                     A-7
                                       
   Step 5. Let us prove that for x >      2

                                          1
                                  2x +      <2      (x) + 1,                         (A4)
                                          x

which is equivalent to

                                                      1
                                       (x) > x2 +        .                           (A5)
                                                     4x2

   Consider the function (x) = (x) - x2 . Clearly, (0) = 0, moreover, the this function
tends to 1 as x   is 1. The last property follows from the following consideration. Take
the Laurent expansion of 1 - F (x) at x = :

                                          1   1              1
                     1 - F (x) = f (x)      - 3 +O                , x  .
                                          x x                x5

From this we have
                                     lim (x) - x2 = 1.
                                    x


   Going back to (A5), we can rewrite it as follows:

                                                   1
                                          (x) >       .
                                                  4x2

We showed that (0) = 0 and the limit of (x) as x   is 1, whereas the right-hand
side is a positive and monotonically decreasing function that tends to 0 as x  . This
means that there exists x such that for x  x , the inequality (A5) holds, and one can take
        
x = 1 < 2. This proves Step 5.
   Taken together, these steps establish the required inequality.




                                              A-8
   Proof of Proposition 2. First of all, define
                                              
                                                  h (y )   if y  0;
                                              
                                   H (y ) =
                                               -h (-y ) if y < 0;
                                              


then H (y ) is a strictly increasing odd function. It is easy to see that the difference in direct
costs of an individual with position xi to give answer Y as compared to N to the question
whether xi exceeds q equals Ci (Y ) - Ci (N ) = H (q - xi ). Indeed, if xi < q then saying N
is costless whereas the cost of saying Y is h (q - xi ); if xi > q then saying Y is costless while
                                                                         ~ (q - xi ) in this case
the cost of saying N is h (xi - q ) = -H (q - xi ), so the difference is h
as well.
   Let us show that if in an equilibrium individual i with type xi weakly prefers di = Y , then
any individual k with type xk > xi strictly prefers di = Y . This follows immediately from
that the social cost of the individuals does not depend on their type, and the differences in the
direct costs equal H (q - xi ) and H (q - xk ), respectively. Since H (·) is strictly increasing,
the difference for agent k is smaller, so the decision di = Y involves less cost and the resut
follows. This implies, in particular, that every equilibrium must take the form of a cutoff z ,
with individuals with type xi > z choosing di = Y in equilibrium, wherease those with type
xi < z choosing di = N .
   Let us take a closer look at the social costs Si (N ) and Si (Y ) given the cutoff z . We have

                      
                                                1       (y - µ)2
     Si (N ) =       E-i (g (x - y ) | x < z )    exp -                       dy
                   -                            2          2 2
                          z                                 2
                                                          -µ)
                      
                          -
                               (x - y )2    1 exp
                                            2
                                                      - (x2 2
                                                                dx      1       (y - µ)2
              =                                                           exp -            dy
                   -                       F z-
                                              
                                                µ
                                                                        2          2 2
                      1        z
                                      1       (x - µ)2
              =       z -µ              exp -                   K (x) dx,
                  F           -       2         2 2



                                                  A-9
where the term
                                                  
                                                                     1       (y - µ)2
                        K (x) =                      (x - y )2         exp -                           dy
                                                -                    2          2 2

captures the social cost an individual whose type is known to be x from interacting with
a random individual y . Our assumption that g (·) is quadratic allows us to compute this
integral explicitly:

                     
                                       2                    2      1       (y - µ)2
  K (x) =                   (x - µ) + (y - µ) - 2 (x - µ) (y - µ)    exp -                                                     dy
                  -                                                2          2 2
           =  (x - µ)2 +  2 .


Thus,

                                            z
                                                    (x - µ)2 +  2       (x - µ)2
        Si (N ) =               z -µ                              exp -                           dx
                        F                  -             2                2 2
                                                z
                                                     (x - µ)2       (x - µ)2                                    z-µ
                 =              z -µ                          exp -                           dx +  2 F
                        F                       -       2             2 2                                        
                                                         z -µ
                            2           2                       t2     t2
                 =  +                      z -µ                  exp -                   dt
                                   F                  -          2     2
                                                  z -µ
                                           F              - z- µ
                                                                 f      z -µ                        z -µ
                                                                                                         f      z -µ
                 =  2              1+                         
                                                           z -µ
                                                                          
                                                                                   =  2 2 -           
                                                                                                             z -µ
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                           ,
                                                         F                                             F       


                                        d
where we used the fact that            dx
                                               (F (x) - xf (x)) = x2 f (x). We can similarly find

                                                                         z -µ       z -µ
                                                                              f
                                       Si (Y ) =  2              2+                   
                                                                                     z -µ     ,
                                                                        1-F            


and therefore

                                                               z -µ      z -µ
                                                                    f                                  z-µ
                Si (Y ) - Si (N ) =  2                      z -µ
                                                                           
                                                                                  z -µ      =  2                       ,
                                                      F       
                                                                    1   -F          
                                                                                                        



                                                                 A-10
where (·) is defined in Lemma A1.
   In equilibrium, type z is indifferent between choosing Y and N . For this type,


                 Ui (Y ) - Ui (N ) = - (Ci (Y ) - Ci (N )) - (Si (Y ) - Si (N ))
                                                                   z-µ
                                            = H (z - q ) -  2             .
                                                                    

Under Assumption 1, this function Ui (Y ) - Ui (N ) is increasing in z and has a unique root;
this follows from property (iv) of Lemma A1. It is straightforward to check that if q = µ,
then this root is z = q . Now, since Ui (Y ) - Ui (N ) is decreasing in q , it must be that for
q > µ we have z > q and for q < µ we have z < q .
   Assume now that q > µ. Since  (·) is an increasing functions, Ui (Y )-Ui (N ) is increasing
in µ, and as noted above it is decreasing in q . Furthermore, the latter term may be rewritten
as  (z - µ)2   1
               y2
                   (y ),   and by property (ii) of Lemma A1, this term is decreasing in y and
therefore increasing in  , which implies that Ui (Y ) - Ui (N ) is decreasing in  . Consequently,
the equilibrium cutoff z is increasing in q and  and decreasing in µ.
   These results imply the following about the equilibrium share of types above z , which
                                  z -µ
is equal to  = 1 - F                
                                         . If q increases, then  decreases, because z is increasing in
q . Similarly, if µ increases, then  increases. The comparative statics with respect to  is
                           z -µ
ambiguous, because           
                                  may increase or decrease (since z is increasing in  ), and one can
easily construct examples with with positive and negative effects.




                                                      A-11
                                                    Table A1. Summary statistics. City level sample.
      Variable                                                                    Obs          Mean    Std. Dev.   Min    Max

      Log (1+hate crime victims)                                                   625         0.51      0.96       0      4.76
      Log (1+hate crime victims, conducted by single perpetrator)                  625         0.15      0.42       0      2.56
      Log (1+hate crime victims, conducted by multiple perpetrators)               625         0.44      0.92       0      4.74
      Log (1+ethnic hate crime victims)                                            625         0.4       0.84       0      4.36
      Log (1+ ethnic hate crime victims, conducted by single perpetrator)          625         0.09      0.32       0      2.56
      Log (1+ ethnic hate crime victims, conducted by multiple perpetrators)       625         0.36      0.81       0      4.34
      Log (1+non-ethnic hate crime victims)                                        625         0.23      0.65       0      3.69
                                                                                                                                  Appendix B



      Log (1+ non-ethnic hate crime victims, conducted by single perpetrator)      625         0.08      0.29       0      2.2
      Log (1+ non-ethnic hate crime victims, conducted by multiple perpetrators)   625         0.18      0.6        0      3.64
      Log(1+VK users in a city)                                                    625         9.54      1.33      6.61   13.84
      Share of the number of nationalistic voters in 2003 in a population          625         0.05      0.02       0      0.26




B-1
             Table A2. Social Media and Hate Crime. First stage and Placebo Checks.
                                                                     Log(Number of VK        Nationalistic party
                                                                       users, 2011)           support in 2003
                                                                             (1)                     (2)
      Log (SPbSU students), same 5-year cohort as VK founder              0.142***
                                                                           [0.039]
      Log (SPbSU students), one cohort younger than VK founder             -0.024                 -0.002
                                                                           [0.042]                [0.002]
      Log (SPbSU students), one cohort older than VK founder                0.051                 -0.002
                                                                           [0.044]                [0.002]
      Nationalistic party support in 2003                                 4.602***
                                                                           [1.178]
      Log(Number of VK users, 2011)                                                                   -0.016
                                                                                                     [0.011]
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                                         Yes                    Yes
      Observations                                                              625                    625
      Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city.
      Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls
      includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of
      people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian




B-2
      Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian
      Census, dummy for regional center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university
      in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.
                              Table A3. Social Media and Hate Crime, Number of Crimes. IV Specification with Interaction. Period: 2007-2015.
                                                                             Log (# of hate crimes)                  Log (# of ethnic hate crimes)            Log (# of non-ethninc hate crimes)
                                                                     total           single        multiple       total         single        multiple        total        single        multiple
                                                                                  perpetrator perpetrators                   perpetrator perpetrators                    perpetrator perpetrators
                                                                      (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)
      Log (number of VK users), 2011
                                                                  11.379***        5.516***      10.971***     10.567***      4.605***       10.188***       6.388**        1.289         5.369**
      x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets ( 5.129; 20.755)  [(1.445; 11.624)( 4.890; 20.092)               ( 1.215; 9.690)
                                                                                                             [(4.600; 19.516)             ( 4.315; 18.999)
                                                                                                                                                         ( 1.395; 13.878)
                                                                                                                                                                        (-1.598; 5.620)( .839; 12.163)
                                                                     [3.827]      [2.493]         [3.723]         [3.653]        [2.076]       [3.596]        [3.057]       [1.767]         [2.773]
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                  0.081        0.286           0.025          0.005*          0.308         -0.120         0.391         0.101          0.438*
                Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.781; .655) (-.112; .884) (-.817; .586) ( -.812; .550) (-.027; .811) (-.930; .420) (-.101; 1.129) (-.155; .358) (-.002; 1.097)
                                                                     [0.352]      [0.244]         [0.344]         [0.334]        [0.205]       [0.331]        [0.301]       [0.157]         [0.269]
      Nationalist Party Support in 2003                              4.754*        1.182          4.707*          4.761*          0.550        5.038**         0.863         0.177           0.170
                                                                     [2.657]      [1.359]         [2.562]         [2.475]        [1.133]       [2.471]        [1.759]       [0.988]         [1.611]
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                                Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
      Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger and their           Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
      interaction with Nationalistic Party Support, 2003
      Observations                                                     625          625             625             625            625           625            625           625             625
      Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                    6.351        6.351           6.351           6.351          6.351         6.351          6.351         6.351           6.351
      Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest 7.537         5.425           7.598           7.581          5.685         8.695          5.441         0.976           5.667
      Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest 0.023        0.066           0.022           0.023          0.058         0.013          0.066         0.614           0.059
      Endogeneity test p-value                                        0.147        0.213           0.135           0.144          0.215         0.102          0.130         0.697           0.085
      Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support      -0.465        0.022          -0.501          -0.501          0.087        -0.609*         0.084         0.040           0.181
      p-value for the effect at minimum                                .201         .926            .152            .133           .645          .064           .776         0.825            .497
      Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support           2.480***      1.449**         2.338**         2.234**       1.279**        2.028**        1.738**        0.373         1.570**
      p-value for the effect at maximum                                .008         .026            .012            .015            .02          .025           .026          .354            .026




B-3
      Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city.
      Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the
      number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age
      cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014),
      ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.
                                                     Table A4. Social Media and Hate Crime. IV Specification with Interaction. Different Periods.
                                                                             Log (# of victims of hate crime)              Log (# of victims of ethnic hate crime)         Log (# of victims of non-ethninc hate crime)
                                                                         total            single          multiple         total           single           multiple         total            single          multiple
                                                                                       perpetrator      perpetrators                     perpetrator     perpetrators                      perpetrator      perpetrators
                                 2007-2009                                (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)            (7)               (8)              (9)
      Log (number of VK users), 2011
                                                                        8.226**            2.553*          8.071**         9.202***          3.146**          8.311***          4.538           -0.330           4.743
      x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                     Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (1.443; 15.008) (-.165; 6.631) (1.331; 14.810) (2.957; 15.447) (.644; 6.899)] (2.273; 14.348) (-1.605; 13.754) (-2.424, 1.066) (-1.382; 13.931)
                                                                        [4.152]            [1.664]          [4.126]         [3.824]          [1.532]           [3.696]         [3.761]         [0.855]          [3.750]
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                     0.133              0.171            0.202          -0.089            0.102             -0.054        0.778***         0.111*           0.740**
                     Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.551; 1.158)          (-.117; .604)  (-.487; 1.234)    (-.736; .557)    (-.169; .508)    ( -.690; .583)  ( .201; 1.644) (-.013; .296)   ( .166; 1.600)
                                                                        [0.418]            [0.177]          [0.421]         [0.396]          [0.166]           [0.390]         [0.354]         [0.076]          [0.351]
      Nationalist Party Support in 2003                                  0.854              -0.016           0.593           2.540            0.543             2.080          -2.280          -0.685           -0.685
                                                                        [1.976]            [0.908]          [1.990]         [1.958]          [0.888]           [1.851]         [2.012]         [0.453]          [1.958]
      Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest     3.919              2.984            3.509           8.563            5.577             6.812           6.168           3.183            5.800
      Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest    0.141              0.225            0.173           0.014            0.061             0.033           0.046           0.204            0.055
      Endogeneity test p-value                                           0.449              0.371            0.492           0.107            0.157             0.205           0.062           0.223            0.068
      Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support         -0.262              0.049           -0.185          -0.530            -0.049            -0.452         0.561*           0.126            0.512
      p-value for the effect at minimum                                   .462                .767            .609            .108             .755              .161            .098            .108             .122
      Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support                1.867              0.710           1.904*          1.851*           0.765*             1.699          1.735*           0.041           1.740*
      p-value for the effect at maximum                                   .105                .112            .096            .086             .061              .107            .074            .844             .074
                                 2010-2012
      Log (number of VK users), 2011
                                                                       10.671***           3.394*          9.319***         7.002**          3.490**             4.249         5.775**         -0.250           6.135**
      x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                     Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (4.360; 20.136) (-.085; 6.873) [(3.195; 18.504) [(1.251; 12.753) ( .391; 8.138) ( -1.564; 10.063) ( .563; 13.593) (-2.603; 2.103) ( 1.248; 13.466)
                                                                        [3.864]            [2.130]          [3.749]         [3.521]          [1.897]           [3.559]         [3.191]         [1.441]          [2.992]
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                     0.167              0.199            0.111           0.286           0.263*             0.060          -0.132          -0.031           -0.053
                     Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.766; .789)           (-.133; .696)   (-.795; .715)   (-.276; 1.128)    (-.028; .700)     (-.483; .602)   (-.940; .407)   (-.333; .170)    (-.808; .451)
                                                                        [0.381]            [0.203]          [0.370]         [0.344]          [0.178]           [0.332]         [0.330]         [0.123]          [0.308]
      Nationalist Party Support in 2003                                 5.365*              1.312            4.320           2.592            0.947             1.743          4.014*           0.190           3.685*
                                                                        [2.884]            [1.125]          [2.715]         [2.200]          [0.938]           [2.074]         [2.136]         [0.694]          [2.053]




B-4
      Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest     6.908              2.792            5.473           3.599            4.109             1.370           4.390           0.093            4.918
      Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest    0.032              0.248            0.065           0.165            0.128             0.504           0.111           0.955            0.086
      Endogeneity test p-value                                           0.224              0.508            0.353           0.601            0.194             0.910           0.183           0.870            0.102
      Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support         -0.344              0.036           -0.336          -0.050            0.096             -0.144         -0.409          -0.019           -0.347
      p-value for the effect at minimum                                   .387                .857            .388             .88             .537              .658            .211            .892             .257
      Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support               2.418**             0.914*         2.076**          1.762*            0.999*             0.956          1.086           -0.084           1.241
      p-value for the effect at maximum                                   .011                .093            .023            .053             .051              .292            .185           0.800             .106
                                 2013-2015                                                                                                                                                         \
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                     3.476               1.733           2.677           1.954            -0.077             2.720          2.876           1.937            1.200
      x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                     Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-3.944; 8.423) (-1.073; 5.942) (-4.320; 7.341) (-4.861; 6.498) (-2.826; 1.756) (-3.824; 7.082) (-.252; 7.568) (-.369; 5.397) (-.975; 4.463)
                                                                        [3.029]            [1.718]          [2.856]         [2.782]          [1.122]           [2.671]         [1.915]         [1.412]          [1.332]
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                    -0.066              0.195           -0.215          -0.075           0.210**            -0.205          0.057           0.018           -0.006
                     Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.710; .363)           (-.062; .581)   (-.824; .191)    (-.634; .297)    ( .064; .427)     (-.752; .160)   (-.406; .366)   (-.302; .232)    (-.343; .219)
                                                                        [0.263]            [0.158]          [0.249]         [0.228]          [0.089]           [0.223]         [0.189]         [0.131]          [0.138]
      Nationalist Party Support in 2003                                  1.920              -0.489           2.456           1.380            -1.263           2.500*           0.805           0.663            0.446
                                                                        [1.697]            [1.105]          [1.552]         [1.385]          [0.819]           [1.338]         [1.178]         [0.860]          [0.898]
      Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest     1.477              3.166            2.695           0.902            5.933             4.011           2.574           2.482            0.801
      Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest    0.478              0.205            0.260           0.637            0.051             0.135           0.276           0.289            0.670
      Endogeneity test p-value                                           0.711              0.298            0.406           0.730            0.093             0.315           0.211           0.191            0.643
      Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support         -0.233              0.112           -0.343          -0.169           0.213*            -0.335*         -0.081          -0.075           -0.064
      p-value for the effect at minimum                                   .396                .556            .158            .438             .066              .095            .704            .635            0.683
      Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support                0.667               0.561           0.349           0.337             0.193             0.369          0.664            0.427           0.247
      p-value for the effect at maximum                                   .365                .129            .627            .632             .397               .595           .132           0.160             .417
      Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city. Logarithm of any
      variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-
      39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional
      center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.
                                 Table A5. Social Media and Hate Crime. Specification with Interaction. Period: 2007-2015. Cities with population above 50,000.
                                                                               Log (# of victims of hate crime)               Log (# of victims of ethnic hate crime)         Log (# of victims of non-ethninc hate crime)
                                                                          total             single           multiple        total            single           multiple         total            single          multiple
                                                                                         perpetrator      perpetrators                      perpetrator      perpetrators                     perpetrator      perpetrators
                                                                           (1)                (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)               (6)            (7)               (8)              (9)
      Log (number of VK users), 2011
                                                                            30.821**         17.622*          26.674**           29.040**          11.554        28.426**        19.431            4.586           12.581
      x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                       Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (6.061; 129.863) (-6.670, 66.205) ( 3.112; 109.140)( 6.639; 141.043)(-18.832; 41.940)( 5.303; 144.040)(-61.585; 73.442)(-22.193; 31.366)(-98.791; 68.268)
                                                                            [15.160]         [9.915]          [14.426]           [13.715]          [7.442]       [14.157]       [16.534]          [8.198]         [17.047]
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                          0.378           0.853             0.325              0.106            0.888         -0.134          1.651            0.193           1.839*
                       Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-2.130; 3.721) ( -.325; 3.798) (-2.086; 3.540) (-2.248; 3.245) (-.051; 3.707) (-3.200; 2.932) (-.0505; 6.754) (-.8220; 1.207) ( .210; 6.724)
                                                                             [1.024]         [0.721]           [0.984]            [0.961]          [0.575]        [0.939]        [1.041]          [0.414]          [0.997]
      Nationalist Party Support in 2003                                      -0.648           -3.067           -0.882              0.406           -3.024          0.614         -6.937           -1.014           -7.245
                                                                             [5.006]         [3.368]           [4.787]            [4.585]          [2.581]        [4.444]        [5.476]          [1.957]          [5.341]
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                                        Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
      Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger and their                   Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
      interaction with Nationalistic Party Support, 2003
      Observations                                                             323              323              323                323              323            323            323              323              323
      Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                            3.134           3.134             3.134              3.134            3.134          3.134          3.134            3.134            3.134
      Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest          4.529           5.542             3.317              5.325            5.954          5.181          5.105            0.511            5.497
      Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest         0.104           0.063             0.190              0.070            0.051          0.075          0.078            0.775            0.064
      Endogeneity test p-value                                                0.221           0.118             0.381              0.146            0.134          0.157          0.102            0.816            0.067
      Full Effect at minimal level of Nationalist Party Support              -1.097            0.010           -0.951             -1.283            0.335         -1.494          0.721           -0.027            1.237
      p-value for the effect at minimum                                       0.330           0.990             0.390              0.207            0.593          0.145          0.555            0.960            0.313
      Full Effect at maximum of Nationalist Party Support                    6.877*           4.569*           5.950*             6.230*           3.325*         5.860*          5.748            1.160            4.492
      p-value for the effect at maximum                                       0.053           0.054             0.076              0.057            0.058          0.078          0.127            0.527            0.240
      Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city. Logarithm of any variable
      is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-
      49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average
      wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census.




B-5
                                           Table A6. Social Media and Self-reported Ethnic Hostility. IV Specification. City Level.
      Subsample:
                                                               All             Male           Female       Low Education High Education          Young              Old
                                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)
      Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                            -0.134          -0.270            -0.146           -0.349           0.110           -0.205           -0.207
        Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-.002; 2.733) (-1.845; .954) (-.019; 2.650) ( .005; 3.935) ( -.883; 1.028) ( .264; 3.250) (-.884; 2.048)
                                                               [0.181]          [0.227]           [0.208]          [0.225]         [0.212]         [0.212]           [0.208]
      Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                         -0.339           1.110             0.218            0.627          -1.450           0.892             0.040
                                                               [1.093]          [1.459]           [1.199]          [1.207]         [1.243]         [1.333]           [1.172]
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                          Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
      Observations                                               125              125               114              122             118             122               117
      Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                              8.390            7.340             6.840            7.084           7.408           7.220             7.054
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, ***
      p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls include
      logarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each
      city according to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for
      regional center, log (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to
      2010 Russian Census, and SPbSU older and younger student cohorts.




B-6
                         Table A7. Social Media, Nationalistic Party Support, and Ethnic Hostility, inferred from List Experiment
                                                                                                Number of options in List Experiment
      Subsample:                                                               All        Male       Female        Low        High      Young         Old
                                                                                                               Education Education
                                                                               (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)
      Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in List Experiment                    -4.18       -7.691      -0.986      -4.436      -2.960      -1.870     -6.318
      x Log (Number of VK users, 2011)xNationalistic Party Support in
                        Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid
                                                                            [1.434]      [2.894]     [1.761]     [2.027]     [1.973]    [1.947]     [2.546]
      Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in List Experiment                    0.083         0.12       0.046       0.172       0.005      0.105       0.062
      x Log (Number of VK users, 2011)
                        Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid
                                                                            [0.040]      [0.066]     [0.051]     [0.057]     [0.055]    [0.048]     [0.063]
      Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                                        -1.477        0.539      -4.277      -5.427       1.100      5.968     -11.571
      x Nationalistic Party Support, 2003
                        Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid
                                                                            [4.635]      [6.573]     [5.512]     [6.758]     [4.795]    [5.910]    [12.810]
      Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                                        -0.131       -0.078      -0.159      -0.217      -0.060       0.097     -0.310
                        Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid entire grid
                                                                            [0.196]      [0.264]     [0.244]     [0.295]     [0.209]    [0.181]     [0.462]
      Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in List Experiment                   0.181*        0.080      0.286**     -0.037     0.387***      0.089     0.276*




B-7
                                                                            [0.099]      [0.163]     [0.127]     [0.133]     [0.142]    [0.118]     [0.156]
      Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                                     -3.180       -8.328       2.587      -1.871      -3.009      -8.582      5.143
                                                                            [4.931]      [6.911]     [6.111]     [6.489]     [5.973]    [5.792]    [11.745]
      Dislike Other Ethnicities Option in LE                               9.103***     15.819**      2.905      8.651**      6.729       3.501   14.500***
      x Vote share of nationalistic party, 2003                             [3.077]      [6.370]     [4.064]     [3.961]     [4.480]    [4.510]     [5.273]
      Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger                            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                                       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
      Observations                                                           4,447        2,118       2,329       1,954       2,493      2,164       2,283
      Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                           0.668        0.616       0.692       0.695       0.620       0.683      0.614
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a respondent. Logarithm of
      any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian Census,
      age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian Census),
      share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log (average
      wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010
      Russian Census.
                                             Table A8. Social Media and Ethnic Hostility, Elicited from List Experiment. City Level.
                                                                                                    List Experiment inferred hate
      Subsample:                                               All           Male             Female       Low Education HIgh Education               Young             Old

                                                                   (1)                (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)
      Log (Number of VK users, 2011) x Nationalistic
                                                                -8.502**           -8.130*          -5.341         -13.538**         -3.545          -10.217**           -7.058
      Party Support, 2003
          Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (-24.620; -5.278) (-22.220; 5.960) (-25.825; 2.853) (-36.944;-8.857) (-20.624; 4.994) (-27.683;-1.484) (-33.097; 3.357)
                                                                 [3.948]           [5.751]          [5.017]          [5.732]         [5.228]           [5.347]           [6.377]
      Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                             0.985**            -0.144          0.784**          1.234**          0.044            1.046**            0.238
          Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets (.476; 4.039) (-1.614; 1.326) (.351; 3.386)                 (.622; 4.904) (-1.034; 1.481) (.619; 3.612)         (-.784; 3.306)
                                                                 [0.623]           [0.600]          [0.531]          [0.749]         [0.440]           [0.524]           [0.626]
      Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                         15.319**           21.708           12.310          27.781**         10.981           22.501*            17.611
                                                                 [7.665]          [13.297]         [11.566]         [13.002]        [12.810]          [12.420]          [14.509]
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
      Observations                                                 124                122             116              124             111               121               116
      Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                3.345              2.984           3.214            3.218           2.704             3.229             2.689
      Full effect at min                                          1.444              0.294           1.072            1.963           0.235             1.597             0.618
      Full effect at max                                          0.586             -0.525           0.534            0.598          -0.119             0.567            -0.093
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets. Stars for endogenous variables are based on weak instrument robust confidence sets, *** p<0.01, **
      p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a city. Logarithm of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls include logarithm of
      population according to 2010 Russian Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according
      to 2010 Russian Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log
      (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to 2010 Russian Census,




B-8
      and SPbSU older and younger student cohorts. Basic demographic controls include gender, education categories, and age categories.
                                                Table A9. Social Media and Self-Reported Ethnic Hostility.
                                                                                         Self-reported hate to other ethnicities
      Subsample:                                                          All       Male      Female       Low        High       Young                Old
                                                                                                        Education Education

                                                                        (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
      Log (number of VK users), 2011                                   1.548           0.959       1.697       -0.072       1.907       1.692        4.488
      x Nationalist Party Support in 2003
                        Weak Instrument Robust Confidence 95% Sets entire grid       entire grid entire grid (.058, ... ) entire grid (.074, ... ) entire grid
                                                                      [2.854]         [3.819]     [3.927]      [5.160]     [3.560]      [3.325]     [8.106]
      Log (Number of VK users, 2011)                                  -0.025          -0.137       0.060       -0.244       0.060       -0.248       0.323
                                                                      [0.145]         [0.162]     [0.192]      [0.224]     [0.203]      [0.156]     [0.394]
      Nationalistic Party Support, 2003                               -1.414          -2.088       0.017       -1.842       0.619       -1.703      -3.765
                                                                      [3.298]         [4.169]     [5.079]      [5.391]     [4.297]      [4.188]     [7.476]
      Cohorts of SPbSU students, older and younger                      Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
      Socioeconomic city-level controls                                 Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
      Observations                                                     1,927            927        1,000         853        1,074         943         984
      Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics                                     1.402           1.497       1.389        1.217       1.381        1.586       0.877
      Weak-instrument-robust F-stat for the coefficients of interest   0.438           0.817       0.321        1.642       0.355        3.240       1.229
      Weak-instrument-robust p-value for the coefficients of interest  0.803           0.665       0.852        0.440       0.838        0.198       0.541




B-9
      Full Effect of VK at the minimum of Nationalistic Party Support      -.109        -.189       -.032        -.24       -.043        -.339        .081

      Full Effect of VK at the maximum of Nationalistic Party Support         .047        -.092       .138       -.247       .147        -.168     .529
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at a city level in brackets, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Unit of observation is a respondent. Logarithm
      of any variable is calculated with 1 added inside. Socioeconomic city-level controls includelogarithm of population according to 2010 Russian
      Census, age cohort controls (the number of people aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50 and older, in each city according to 2010 Russian
      Census), share of population with higher education in each of the age cohorts according to 2010 Russian Census, dummy for regional center, log
      (average wage in 2011), dummy for the existence of a university in a city, log (Odnoklassniki users in 2014), ethnic fractionalization according to
      2010 Russian Census.
Appendix C

                                        Questionnaire
 Q0. Which city have you been living in for the last 6 months?
 List of cities


 Q1. How often do you use social networks?
 One answer

  1       Not at all [skip to question 3]
  2       Once a month or less
  3       Once a week
  4       Every day or almost every day
  5       Several times a day
  6       I'm using social networks nonstop


 Q2. Which of the following social networks do you use?
 Several answers possible + rotation

  1       VKontakte
  2       Facebook
  3       Odnoklassniki.ru
  4       LiveJournal
  5       Twitter
  98      Other (please specify)


 Q3. Which websites do you visit most often?
 One answer

  1       News and analytics websites
  2       Social networks
  3       Games and entertainment websites
  4       Online stores
  5       Search engines
  98      Other
  99      Unsure


 Q4. On social networks, do you use your real name or an alias?
 One answer

                                               C-1
 1       Real name
 2       An alias, for privacy concerns
 3       An alias, but for a reason other than privacy concerns

Q5. How many friends/followers do you have in social networks?
One answer

 1       Less than 10
 2       10-100
 3       100-250
 4       250-500
 5       500-1000
 6       More than 1000


Q6. Do you agree with the statement "I get a lot of important news from social networks"?
One answer

 1       Agree
 2       Somewhat agree
 3       Somewhat disagree
 4       Disagree


Q7. Do you agree with the statement "Social networks help me find people with similar
interests"?
One answer

 1       Agree
 2       Somewhat agree
 3       Somewhat disagree
 4       Disagree


Q8. Do you agree with the statement "In social networks, people are more sincere than in real
life"?
One answer

 1       Agree
 2       Somewhat agree
 3       Somewhat disagree
 4       Disagree


Q9. To what extent do you trust information in social networks?
One answer

                                              C-2
 1       Completely trust [skip to question 10]
 2       Somewhat trust [skip to question 10]
 3       Somewhat distrust [skip to question 11]
 4       Completely distrust [skip to question 11]


Q10. Why do you trust information in social networks?
Several answers possible

 1       People are more sincere in social networks than in real life
 2       In social networks one can find a variety of opinions
 3       Certain information is only available in social networks
 98      Other reason (please specify)


Q11. Why do you distrust information in social networks?
Several answers possible

 1       Many users deliberately spread incorrect information
 2       Many users unwittingly spread incorrect information
 3       Many users play the fool and write rubbish
 98      Other reason (please specify)


Q12. In social networks, how often do you encounter:
[scale: . Very often,  Often, C Occasionally, D Rarely, E Never]
Rotation of statements, one answer

 1       Personal insults
 2       Obviously incorrect information
 3       Extremist statements
 4       Propaganda of violence
 5       Religious propaganda
 6       Pornography


Q13. Which modern technology do you use to organize gatherings with friends or acquaintances?
Several answers possible + rotation

 1       Yes, video calls (e.g., Skype)
 2       Yes, messengers embedded in social networks (VKontakte, Facebook, etc)
 3       Yes, standalone messengers (WhatsApp, Telegram, ICQ, etc)
 4       Yes, blogs or public posts in social networks
 5       Yes, SMS (short text messages sent over the phone)
 6       Yes, phone calls



                                              C-3
THERE ARE TWO RANDOMIZED CELLS.


CELL 1 [QUESTION Q14_1]

Q14_1. Please think, which of the following statements you agree with. Without telling which particular
statements you agree with, please specify the number of statements you agree with.

THE ANSWER IS A NUMBER BETWEEN 0 AND 5, ROTATION

     1       Each week I usually read at least one newspaper or magazine
     2       I want Russia to be a country with high living standard
     3       I know the name of the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Russian
             Federation
     4       I feel annoyance or dislike toward some ethnicities
     5       Retirement benefits in our country are sufficiently high


CELL 2 [QUESTIONS Q14_2, 15, 16, 17]

Q14_2. Please think, which of the following statements you agree with. Without telling which particular
statements you agree with, please specify the number of statements you agree with.

THE ANSWER IS A NUMBER BETWEEN 0 AND 4, ROTATION

     1       Each week I usually read at least one newspaper or magazine
     2       I want Russia to be a country with high living standard
     3       I know the name of the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Russian
             Federation
     4       Retirement benefits in our country are sufficiently high



Q15. Do you feel annoyance or dislike toward some ethnicities?
One answer


     1       Yes
     2       No


Q16. In your opinion, which percentage of the survey participants from your city answered "Yes" to
the previous question? If your answer is the most accurate, you will get an additional 100 rubles.
Enter a number with a percentage sign ­ restrict from 0 to 100


Q17. How certain are you in your answer to the previous question?
SLIDER FROM 0 (COMPLETELY UNCERTAIN) TO 10 (COMPLETELY SURE)



                                                 C-4
QUESTIONS ON GENDER AND AGE ARE ASKED ON THE TECHNICAL PAGE "CIRCLE", SURVEY
RESTRICTED TO PEOPLE 18 ­ 55 YEARS OF AGE

S3. Please specify your education.
One answer

     1       Incomplete secondary
     2       Secondary
     3       Vocational
     4       Incomplete higher
     5       Higher
     6       Doctorate
     99      Not sure


S4. Please specify your occupation (your position).
One answer

     1       Director, deputy director
     2       Division head (of a branch, shift, department)
     3       Specialist with a higher education (medical doctor, teacher, sales manager, engineer, etc)
     4       Mid-level employee (secretary, salesperson, security, driver, etc)
     5       Creative work (photographer, artist, actor, etc)
     6       Small business (owner of a business or individual entrepreneur)
     7       Technical or service personnel
     8       Worker
     9       Military
     10      Student
     98      Other (please specify)



S5. How would you describe your family's current financial well-being?
One answer

     1       Not enough money even for food
     2       Enough money for food, but purchasing clothes is problematic
     3       Enough money for food and clothes, but purchasing a TV, a fridge or a washer would be difficult
     4       Enough money for major appliances, but we would not be able to buy a new car
     5       Enough money for everything except expensive purchases like a country house or an apartment
     6       No material difficulties. Can afford to buy a country house or an apartment if necessary




                                                  C-5
