Factorial Designs, Model Selection, and (Incorrect) Inference in Randomized Experiments
Karthik Muralidharan, Mauricio Romero, and Kaspar Wüthrich
NBER Working Paper No. 26562
December 2019, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. C12,C18,C90,C93

                                          ABSTRACT

Factorial designs are widely used for studying multiple treatments in one experiment. While t-
tests based on the "long" model (including main and interaction effects) provide valid inferences
against "business-as-usual" counterfactuals, "short" model t-tests (that ignore interactions) yield
higher power if the interactions are zero, but incorrect inferences otherwise. Out of 27 factorial
experiments published in top-5 journals in 2007­2017, 19 use the short model. We reanalyze
these experiments, and show that over half of their published results lose significance when
interactions are included. We show that testing the interactions using the long model and
presenting the short model if the interactions are not significantly different from zero leads to
incorrect inference due to the implied data-dependent model selection. Based on recent
econometric advances, we show that local power improvements over the long model are possible.
However, if the main effects are of primary interest, leaving the interaction cells empty yields
valid inferences and global power improvements. In addition, the sample size needed to detect
interactions is substantially larger than that required to detect main effects, resulting in most
experiments being under-powered to detect interactions. Thus, using factorial designs to explore
whether interactions are meaningful can be problematic because interaction estimates are likely to
considerably overestimate the magnitude of the true effect conditional on being significant.

Karthik Muralidharan                             Kaspar Wüthrich
Department of Economics, 0508                    University of California at San Diego
University of California, San Diego              kwuthrich@ucsd.edu
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu

Mauricio Romero
Centro de Investigacion Economica
ITAM
Mexico
mtromero@itam.mx




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26555
        Factorial designs, model selection, and (incorrect)
              inference in randomized experiments

          Karthik Muralidharan                   Mauricio Romero                          ¨
                                                                                  Kaspar Wuthrich §


                                             September 4, 2020



                                                      Abstract
         Factorial designs are widely used for studying multiple treatments in one experiment. While
     t-tests based on the "long" model (including main and interaction effects) provide valid inferences
     against "business-as-usual" counterfactuals, "short" model t-tests (that ignore interactions) yield
     higher power if the interactions are zero, but incorrect inferences otherwise. Out of 27 factorial
     experiments published in top-5 journals in 2007­2017, 19 use the short model. We reanalyze these
     experiments, and show that over half of their published results lose significance when interactions
     are included. We show that testing the interactions using the long model and presenting the short
     model if the interactions are not significantly different from zero leads to incorrect inference due
     to the implied data-dependent model selection. Based on recent econometric advances, we show
     that local power improvements over the long model are possible. However, if the main effects
     are of primary interest, leaving the interaction cells empty yields valid inferences and global power
     improvements. In addition, the sample size needed to detect interactions is substantially larger than
     that required to detect main effects, resulting in most experiments being under-powered to detect
     interactions. Thus, using factorial designs to explore whether interactions are meaningful can be
     problematic because interaction estimates are likely to considerably overestimate the magnitude of
     the true effect conditional on being significant.


Keywords: randomized controlled trials; cross-cut designs; power in field experiments; data-
dependent model selection; interaction effects; type-M errors

JEL Codes: C12, C18, C21, C90, C93




   We   are grateful to Isaiah Andrews, Tim Armstrong, Prashant Bharadwaj, Arun Chandrasekhar, Clement de Chaise-
martin, Gordon Dahl, Stefano DellaVigna, Esther Duflo, Graham Elliott, Markus Goldstein, Macartan Humphreys, Hi-
roaki Kaido, Lawrence Katz, Michal Kolesar, Soonwoo Kwon, Adam McCloskey, Craig McIntosh, Rachael Meager, Paul
Niehaus, Ben Olken, Gautam Rao, Andres Santos, Jesse Shapiro, Diego Vera-Cossio, and several seminar participants
for comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to the authors of the papers we reanalyze for answering our
questions and fact-checking that their papers are characterized correctly. Sameem Siddiqui provided excellent research
assistance. All errors are our own. Financial support from the Asociacion   ´ Mexicana de Cultura, A.C. is gratefully
acknowledged by Romero.
    Department of Economics, UC San Diego; NBER; J-PAL; E-mail: kamurali@ucsd.edu
    Centro de Investigacion ´ Economica,
                                  ´      ITAM, Mexico City, Mexico; J-PAL; E-mail: mtromero@itam.mx
   § Department of Economics, UC San Diego; E-mail: kwuthrich@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction
Cross-cutting or factorial designs are widely used in field experiments. For example,
27 out of 124 field experiments published in top-5 economics journals during 2007­
2017 use cross-cutting designs. One rationale for these designs is that the power for
detecting main treatment effects against a "business-as-usual" counterfactual (where no
one is exposed to any of the treatments analyzed in the experiment) is higher if the
interactions between treatments are zero. This can make factorial designs a cost-effective
way of studying multiple treatments.1 A second rationale is to "explore" if there are
meaningful interactions across treatments. This paper is motivated by the observation
that both of these rationales can be problematic in practice.
   To fix ideas, consider a setup with two randomly-assigned binary treatments. The
researcher can estimate either a fully-saturated "long" model (with dummies for both
treatments and for their interaction) or a "short" model (only including dummies for
both treatments). The long model yields consistent estimators for the average treatment
effect of both treatments, as well as the interaction, and is always correct for inference re-
gardless of the true value of the interaction. However, if the true value of the interaction
effect is zero, the short model yields consistent estimators and also has greater power
for conducting inference on the main treatment effects.
   The power gains from the short model, however, come at the cost of an increased
likelihood of incorrect inference relative to a business-as-usual counterfactual if the in-
teraction effect is not zero. Out of 27 field experiments published in top-5 economics
journals during 2007­2017 using cross-cutting designs, 19 do not include all interaction
terms in the main specifications. We reanalyzed the data from these papers by also in-
cluding the interaction terms.2 Doing so has non-trivial implications for inference on the
main treatment effects. The median absolute value of the change in the point estimates
is 96%, about 26% of estimates change sign, and 53% (29 out of 55) of estimates reported
to be significant at the 5% level are no longer so after including interactions. Even if we
reanalyze only "policy" experiments, 32% of the estimates (6 out of 19) are no longer
significant after including all interactions.3
    1 AsKremer (2003) puts it: "Conducting a series of evaluations in the same area allows substantial cost
savings...Since data collection is the most costly element of these evaluations, cross-cutting the sample
reduces costs dramatically...This tactic can be problematic, however, if there are significant interactions
between programs".
   2 The full list of 27 papers is in Table A.1. We reanalyzed 15 out of the 19 that do not include all

interactions in the main specification. The other four papers did not have publicly-accessible data.
   3 We define a policy experiment as one which studies a program or intervention that could be scaled

up; as opposed to a conceptual experiment, which aims to test for the existence of facts or concepts such
as discrimination (e.g., resume audit experiments).


                                                    1
  In practice, researchers often try to address the issue of interactions by first estimating
the long model and testing if the interaction is significant, and then focusing on the short
model if they do not reject that the interaction is zero. However, the distributions of the
estimators obtained from this data-dependent model selection procedure are compli-
cated and highly non-normal, making the usual t-statistics misleading (Leeb & Potscher,
                                                                                      ¨
2005, 2006, 2008). Further, cross-cutting experiments are rarely adequately powered to
detect meaningful interactions (see Figure 2). Thus, this two-step procedure will almost
always fail to reject that the interaction term is zero, even when it is different from zero.
As a result, the rate of incorrect inference using this two-step model-selection procedure
will continue to be nearly as high as that from just running the short model.
   The lack of power to detect interactions combined with a focus on statistical signifi-
cance also makes it challenging to use factorial designs to "explore" whether interactions
are meaningful. We show in Section 7 that the variance of the interaction estimator is
always larger than that of the main effects estimators, which makes the sample size re-
quirements for detecting interactions much more onerous. For example, one would need
an 8 times larger sample to detect an interaction than to detect a main effect when the
interaction is half the size of the main effect. This leads to most studies being under-
powered to detect interactions. Thus, significant interactions are likely to considerably
overestimate the magnitude of the true effect, and hence be misleading. This problem
has been referred to by Gelman & Carlin (2014) as exaggeration ratio or Type-M error.
   Textbook treatments of factorial designs (Cochran & Cox, 1957; Gerber & Green, 2012)
and guides to practice (Kremer, 2003; Duflo et al., 2007) are careful to clarify that treat-
ment effects using the short model should be interpreted as either (a) being conditional
on the distribution of the other treatment arms in the experiment, or (b) as a composite
treatment effect that includes a weighted-average of the interactions with other treat-
ments. However, as we argue in Section 2.3, this weighted average is a somewhat ar-
bitrary construct, can be difficult to interpret in high-dimensional factorial designs, and
is typically neither of primary academic interest nor policy-relevant. Consistent with
this view, none of the 19 experimental papers in Table A.1 that focus on the short model
motivate their experiment as being about estimating a weighted-average treatment effect.
   The status quo of focusing on the short-model is problematic for at least three reasons.
First, ignoring interactions affects internal validity against a "business-as-usual" coun-
terfactual. If the interventions studied are new, the other programs may not even exist in
the study population. Even if they do, there is no reason to believe that the distributions
in the population mirror those in the experiment. Thus, to the extent that estimation and
inference of treatment effects depend on what other interventions are being studied in


                                             2
the same experiment, ignoring interactions is a threat to internal validity.
   Second, "absence of evidence" of significant interactions may be getting erroneously
interpreted as "evidence of absence". The view that interactions are second-order (as
implied when papers only present the short model) may have been influenced in part by
the lack of evidence of meaningful interactions in most experiments to date. However,
as we show in Section 7, this is at least partly because few experiments are adequately
powered to detect meaningful interactions. There is now both experimental (Duflo et
al., 2015a; Mbiti et al., 2019) and non-experimental (Kerwin & Thornton, 2017; Gilligan
et al., 2018) evidence that interactions matter. Indeed, a long tradition in development
economics has highlighted the importance of complementarities across programs in alle-
viating poverty traps (Ray, 1998; Banerjee & Duflo, 2005), which suggests that assuming
away interactions in empirical work may be a mistake.
   Third, there is well-documented publication bias towards significant findings (e.g.,
Abadie, 2020; I. Andrews & Kasy, 2018; Christensen & Miguel, 2018; Franco et al., 2014).
This can also affect evidence aggregation because meta-analyses and evidence reviews
often only include published studies. Thus, the sensitivity of the significance of main
effect estimates to the inclusion/exclusion of interaction terms (which we document
in this paper), is likely to have non-trivial implications for how evidence is published,
summarized, and translated into policy.
   Having documented the limitations of the short model, we consider if it is possible to
improve power relative to the long model while maintaining size control for relevant values
of the interactions. Since the two-sided t-test based on the long model is the uniformly
most powerful unbiased test (e.g., van der Vaart, 1998), any procedure more powerful
than the t-test for some values of the interactions must underperform somewhere else.
Keeping this constraint in mind, we explore four possible econometric approaches.
   The first approach, based on Elliott et al. (2015), is a nearly optimal test that targets
power towards an a priori likely value of the interaction (such as a value of zero), while
controlling size for all values of the interaction. This approach comes close to achieving
the maximal possible power gains near the likely values of the interaction, while exhibit-
ing lower power farther away from this value. The nearly optimal test can be useful in
2×2 factorial designs, but becomes computationally prohibitive in more complicated fac-
torial designs.4 Our second approach, based on Armstrong et al. (2019), is to construct
confidence intervals for the main effects under prior knowledge on the magnitude of the
interactions. Incorporating prior knowledge is computationally feasible even in compli-
  4 Our code to implement this procedure for 2×2 factorial designs is available at https://mtromero
.shinyapps.io/elliott/


                                                3
cated factorial designs but requires prior knowledge on potentially many interactions to
yield notable power improvements. When the prior knowledge is correct, this approach
controls size and yields power gains relative to the t-test based on the long model. How-
ever, it suffers from size distortions if the prior knowledge is incorrect. In the appendix,
we explore two additional econometric approaches based on work by Imbens & Manski
(2004), Stoye (2009), and McCloskey (2017).5
   Based on the analysis above, we recommend that all completed factorial experiments
report results from the long regression model. t-tests based on the long model are easy to
compute even in complicated factorial designs and have appealing optimality properties.
Further, the justification for the short model should not be that the interactions were not
significant in the long model (because of the model selection issue discussed above).
Rather, if researchers would like to focus on results from the short model, they should
clearly indicate that treatment effects should be interpreted as a composite treatment
effect that includes a weighted-average of interactions with other treatments (and specify
the estimand of interest in a pre-analysis plan). This will ensure transparency in the
interpretation of the main results and enable readers to assess the extent to which other
treatments may be typical background factors that can be ignored.
   For the design of new policy experiments, if the primary parameters of interest are
the main effects, a natural alternative is to leave the "interaction cells" empty and in-
crease the number of units assigned to the main treatment(s) or the control group. Our
simulations show that this design-based approach yields more power gains than the
econometric methods discussed above for most of the relevant values of the interaction.
   Reviewing classic texts on experimental design, we identify four cases where factorial
designs and analyses of the short model may be appropriate. The first is where the goal
is to explore several treatments efficiently to identify promising interventions for further
testing.6 However, most policy experiments are run only once, which makes factorial
designs and short model estimates less desirable in these settings.
   The second is when the goal of the experiment is not hypothesis testing but to mini-
mize mean squared error (MSE) criteria (or other loss functions), which involve a bias-
variance trade-off in estimating the main effects (e.g., Blair et al., 2019).7 However, a key
rationale for experimental evaluations of policies and programs is to generate unbiased
   5 Our   simulations show that these are unlikely to yield meaningful power improvements relative to the
first two approaches and the long model t-test.
    6 For example, Cochran & Cox (1957, p.152) recommend factorial designs for "exploratory work where

the object is to determine quickly the effects of a number of factors over a specified range".
    7 Two classes of experiments that satisfy the first and second criteria are: (a) agricultural experiments,

and (b) online A/B testing (e.g., Kohavi et al., 2020). Both feature sequential testing and aim to optimize
decision making over several factors as opposed to testing if individual factors are "significant".


                                                      4
estimates of program impact, which makes the bias in the short model unattractive.
   The third is to improve external validity. Cochran & Cox (1957, p.152) recommend
bringing in subsidiary factors in factorial designs to test main effects over a wide range of
conditions; also see Fisher (1992). Thus, factorial designs and analyses of the short model
may be fine when one dimension of the experiment is studying reasonable variants of
the main treatment, but less so when both treatments are of primary interest.8
   The fourth is the case of conceptual (as opposed to policy) experiments, such as re-
sume audit studies, where many of the characteristics that are randomized (such as age,
education, race, and gender) do exist in the population. However, when feasible, we
recommend having the treatment share of various characteristics being studied be the
same as their population proportion. Doing so will make the short-model coefficient
more likely to approximate a population relevant parameter of interest.
   Our most important contribution is to the literature on the design of field experi-
ments. Athey & Imbens (2017), Bruhn & McKenzie (2009), and List et al. (2011) provide
guidance on the design of field experiments, but do not discuss when and when not to
implement factorial designs. Duflo et al. (2007) implicitly endorse the use of factorial
designs by noting that they "[have] proved very important in allowing for the recent
wave of randomized evaluations in development economics".
   Our reanalysis of existing experiments as well as simulations suggest that there is no
free lunch. The perceived gains in power and cost-effectiveness from running experi-
ments with factorial designs come at the cost of not controlling size and an increased
rate of false positives relative to a business-as-usual counterfactual. Alternatively, they
come at the cost of a more complicated interpretation of the main results as including
a weighted-average of interactions with other treatments that may not represent a typ-
ical counterfactual. Further, using under-powered factorial designs to explore whether
interactions are significant comes at the risk of overestimating their true effect.
   We also contribute to the literature that aims to improve the analysis of field experi-
ments (e.g., List et al., 2016; Young, 2018). Our paper follows in this tradition by docu-
menting a problem with the status quo, quantifying its importance, and identifying the
most relevant recent advances in theoretical econometrics that can mitigate the problem.
Specifically, we show that the econometric analysis of nonstandard inference problems
can be brought to bear to improve inference in factorial designs which are ubiquitous in
field experiments.
   8 For example, in Alatas et al. (2012), the primary treatment effect of interest is the impact of community-
based targeting, but they also randomize different aspects of how to run the community meeting (which
are reasonable variants of the main treatment but not of primary interest).



                                                      5
2     Theoretical analysis of factorial designs
In this section, we discuss identification, estimation, and inference in experiments with
factorial (or "cross-cut") designs. For simplicity, we focus on factorial designs with two
treatments, T1 and T2 (commonly known as "2×2 designs"), where a researcher ran-
domly assigns some subjects to receive treatment T1 , some subjects to receive treatment
T2 , and some subjects to receive both treatments (see Table 1). It is straightforward to
extend the analysis to cross-cut designs with more than two treatments; we do so in
Section 6.


                                     Table 1: 2×2 factorial design

                                                           T1
                                                      No        Yes
                                                No    N1        N2
                                          T2
                                                Yes   N3        N4
                     Note: Nj is the number of individuals randomly assigned to cell j.



2.1     Potential outcomes and treatment effects
We formalize the problem using the potential outcomes framework of Rubin (1974). Our
goal is to identify and estimate the causal effect of the two treatments, T1 and T2 , on
an outcome of interest, Y . Potential outcomes {Yt1 ,t2 } are indexed by both treatments
T1 = t1 and T2 = t2 , and are related to the observed outcome as

    Y = Y0,0 · 1{T1 =0,T2 =0} + Y1,0 · 1{T1 =1,T2 =0} + Y0,1 · 1{T1 =0,T2 =1} + Y1,1 · 1{T1 =1,T2 =1} ,   (1)

where 1{ A} is an indicator function which is equal to one if the event A is true and zero
otherwise. There are different types of average treatment effects (ATEs):

              E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) :    ATE of T1 relative to a counterfactual where T2 = 0
              E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) :    ATE of T2 relative to a counterfactual where T1 = 0
              E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 ) :    ATE of T1 relative to a counterfactual where T2 = 1
              E (Y1,1 - Y1,0 ) :    ATE of T2 relative to a counterfactual where T1 = 1
              E (Y1,1 - Y0,0 ) :    ATE of T1 and T2 combined

We refer to E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) and E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) as the main treatment effects of T1 and T2 rel-
ative to a business-as-usual counterfactual, where no one is exposed to either treatment

                                                      6
analyzed in the experiment. The interaction effect -- the difference between the effect of
jointly providing both treatments and the sum of the main effects -- is

   E (Y1,1 - Y0,0 ) - [ E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) + E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 )] = E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 - Y1,0 + Y0,0 ) .   (2)

  We assume that both treatments are randomly assigned and independent of each other
such that the different ATEs are identified as

            E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0) ,
            E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) = E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0) ,
            E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 ) = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 1) ,
            E (Y1,1 - Y1,0 ) = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) ,
            E (Y1,1 - Y0,0 ) = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0) ,

and the interaction effect is identified via Equation (2).


2.2   Long and short regression models
Researchers analyzing experiments based on cross-cut designs typically consider one of
the following two population regression models:

                   Y =  0 +  1 T1 +  2 T2 +  12 T1 T2 + ,          (long model)                   (3)
                   Y = s    s       s
                       0 +  1 T1 +  2 T2 + 
                                            s
                                                       (short model)                              (4)

The fully saturated "long" model (3) includes both treatment indicators as well as their
interaction. By contrast, the "short" model (4) only includes the two treatment indicators,
but ignores the interaction term.
   We now relate the population regression coefficients in these models to the causal
effects defined in Section 2.1; see Appendix A.2 for detailed derivations.9 The coefficients
in the long regression model correspond to the main effects of T1 and T2 against a
  9 The  population regression coefficient  in the model Y = X  +  is the solution to the population
                                                  -1
least squares problem and is given by  = E ( XX ) E ( XY ).




                                                  7
business-as-usual counterfactual, and the interaction effect:

                                 1 = E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) ,                                              (5)
                                 2 = E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) ,                                              (6)
                                12 = E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 - Y1,0 + Y0,0 ) .                                (7)

By contrast, the regression coefficients in the short model are

                s
                1 = E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 ) P ( T2 = 1) + E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) P ( T2 = 0)                      (8)
                     = E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) + E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 - Y1,0 + Y0,0 ) P( T2 = 1)                  (9)
                     =  1 +  12 P( T2 = 1)

and

                s
                2 = E (Y1,1 - Y1,0 ) P ( T1 = 1) + E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) P ( T1 = 0)                     (10)
                     = E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) + E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 - Y1,0 + Y0,0 ) P( T1 = 1)                 (11)
                     =  2 +  12 P( T1 = 1)

Equation (8) shows that s   1 yields a weighted average of the ATE of T1 relative to a coun-
terfactual where T2 = 1 and the ATE of T1 relative to a business-as-usual counterfactual
where T2 = 0. The weights correspond to the fractions of individuals with T2 = 1 and
T2 = 0, which are determined by the experimental design. Alternatively, s            1 can be
written as the sum of the ATE of T1 relative to a counterfactual where T2 = 0 and the
interaction effect multiplied by the fraction of individuals with T2 = 1; see Equation (9).
Equations (10) and (11) present the corresponding expressions for s      2.
   Unless the interaction effect is zero (in which case  1 =  1 and  2 = s
                                                                 s
                                                                             2 ), the popula-
tion regression coefficients in the short regression model neither correspond to the main
effects nor to the interaction effect. Instead, the short model yields a composite treatment
effect that is a weighted average of ATEs relative to different counterfactuals.10
  10 From  a theoretical perspective, the choice between the long and the short model is related to the
problem of making inference on a single treatment effect with covariates, where one has to decide whether
to include the covariates linearly and to make inference on a weighted average of treatment effects or to
run fully saturated regressions and to make inference on the ATE (e.g., Angrist & Krueger, 1999; Angrist
& Pischke, 2009). However, the practical implications are not the same because experimental treatments
are fundamentally different in nature from standard covariates; see Section 2.3 for a discussion.




                                                   8
2.3   Long or short model: What do we care about?
Section 2.2 shows that the long model identifies the main effects relative to a business-
as-usual counterfactual, whereas the short model yields a weighted average of treatment
effects that depends on the nature and distribution of the other treatment arms in the
experiment. However, this weighted average is typically neither of primary academic
interest nor policy-relevant. This view is consistent with how papers we reanalyze
motivate their object of interest, which is usually the main treatment effect against a
business-as-usual counterfactual. Of the 19 papers in Table A.1 in Appendix A.1 that
present results from the short model without all interactions, we did not find any study
that mentioned (in the main text or in a footnote) that the presented treatment effects
should be interpreted as either (a) a composite effect that includes a weighted average of
the interaction with the other treatments or (b) as being against a counterfactual that was
not business-as-usual but one that also had the other treatments in the same experiment.
   One way to make the case for the short model is to recast the problem we identify as
one of external rather than internal validity. Specifically, all experiments are carried out
in a context with several unobserved "background" covariates. Thus, any experimental
treatment effect is a weighted average of the treatment interacted with a distribution
of unobserved covariates. If the other experimental arms are considered as analogous
to unobserved background covariates, then inference on treatment effects based on the
short model can be considered internally valid. In this view, the challenge is that the
unobserved covariates (including other treatment arms) will vary across contexts.
   However, experimental treatments are fundamentally different in nature from stan-
dard background covariates. They are determined by the experimenter based on research
interest, and rarely represent real-world counterfactuals. In some cases, the interventions
studied are new and the other treatments may not even exist in the study population.
Even if they do exist, there is no reason to believe that the distributions in the population
mirror those in the experiment. Thus, we view this issue as a challenge to internal valid-
ity because the other experimental arms are also controlled by the researcher and not just
a set of "background unobservable factors". Further, papers with factorial designs often
use the two-step procedure described in Section 4, and present results from the short
model after mentioning that the interactions are not significantly different from zero (see
for example, Banerjee et al. (2007) and Karlan & List (2007)). This suggests that our view
that interactions matter for internal validity is shared broadly.
   Further, even in settings where the coefficients in the short model are of interest, they
can always be constructed based on the coefficients in the long model, while the converse
is not true. One can also use the long model to test hypotheses about the coefficients

                                             9
in the short regression model: H0 : s   1 =  1 +  12 P ( T2 = 1) = 0. Which test is more
powerful depends on the relative sample size in the four experimental cells.11 Unlike the
short model, the long model additionally allows for testing a rich variety of hypotheses
about counterfactual effects such as H0 :  1 +  12 p = 0 for policy-relevant values of p,
which generally differ from the experimental assignment probability P( T2 = 1).12
  To summarize, the long model estimates all the underlying parameters of interest (the
main effects and the interactions). In contrast, s 1 is rarely of interest in its own right,
and even if it is, the long model allows for estimation and inference on s   1 as well.



2.4    Estimation and inference
Suppose that the researcher has access to a random sample {Yi , T1i , T2i }iN
                                                                            =1 . Consider a
factorial design with sample sizes as in Table 1. In what follows, we focus on  1 . The
analysis for  2 is symmetric and omitted.
  Under random assignment and standard regularity conditions, the OLS estimator of
 1 based on the long regression model,  ^ 1 , is consistent:

                                        p
                                     ^1 
                                           1 = E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 )

By contrast, the probability limit of the OLS estimators based on the short model is

                                     p
                                  ^s   s
                                   1   1 =  1 +  12 P ( T2 = 1).


Unless the true interaction effect is zero (i.e.,  12 = 0), ^ s is not consistent for the main
                                                              1
effect relative to a business-as-usual counterfactual. Thus, if the goal is to achieve con-
sistency for the main effects, one should always use the long model.
   The choice between the long and the short regression model is less clear cut when it
comes to inference. To illustrate, suppose that the data generating process is given by

                              Yi =  0 +  1 T1i +  2 T2i +  12 T1i T2i +  i ,
  11 For example,   when N1 = N2 = N3 = N4 = N /4, the tests based on the long model and the short model
exhibit the same power. In practice, we recommend comparing both tests when doing power calculations.
If both tests have the same power, implementation based on the short model is more straightforward.
   12 For instance, resume audit experiments may vary characteristics such as age, gender, race, education,

and experience with the sample size allocated to various combinations of these characteristics being differ-
ent from their proportion in the population. In such a case, short model estimates are difficult to interpret;
whereas, estimating the long model and calculating a weighted average of main and interaction effects
with weights equal to their population proportions may yield a more policy-relevant treatment effect.




                                                     10
where  i  N (0, 2 ) is independent of ( T1i , T2i ) and 2 is known. Normality allows us to
formally compute and compare the finite sample power of the t-tests based on the short
and the long regression model.
  If the interaction effect is zero (i.e.,  12 = 0), it follows from standard results that,
conditional on ( T11 , . . . , T1 N , T21 , . . . , T2 N ),

                       ^ 1  N  1 , Var 
                                       ^1         and ^ s  N  1 , Var ^s           ,
                                                        1              1


where
                                        Var ^ s  Var ^1 .
                                              1

As a consequence, the t-test based on the short model exhibits higher finite sample
power than the t-test based on the long model. Appendix A.3 gives explicit formulas of
Var (  ^ 1 ) and Var ( ^ s ) in terms of ( N1 , N2 , N3 , N4 ), provides a formal comparison between
                         1
the power of the long and the short model, and discusses the role of the "size" of the
interaction cell, N4 .
   If, on the other hand, the interaction effect is not zero (i.e.,  12 = 0), ignoring the
interaction can lead to substantial size distortions as we demonstrate in Section 3.1.
Depending on the true value of the interaction effect, the finite sample power of the
t-test based on the short model can be higher or lower than the power of the t-test based
on the long model.


3      Factorial designs in practice
In this section we document common practices among researchers studying field exper-
iments with factorial designs. We analyze all articles published between 2007 and 2017
in the top five journals in Economics.13 Of the 3,505 articles published in this period
124 (3.5%) are field experiments (Table A.1 provides more details). Factorial designs
are widely used: Among 124 field experiments 27 (22%) had a factorial design.14 Only
    13 These
           journals are The American Economic Review, Econometrica, The Journal of Political Economy, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, and The Review of Economic Studies. We exclude the May issue of the Ameri-
can Economic Review, known as "AER: Papers and Proceedings".
  14 We do not consider two-stage randomization designs as factorial designs. A two-stage randomization

design is where some treatment is randomly assigned in one stage. In the second stage, treatment status is
re-randomized to study behavioral changes conditional on a realization of the previous treatment. Exam-
ples of studies with two-stage randomization designs include Cohen & Dupas (2010), Karlan & Zinman
(2009), and Ashraf et al. (2010). Finally, we do not include experiments where there is no "treatment", but
rather conditions are randomized to elicit individuals preference parameters (e.g., Andersen et al., 2008;
Gneezy et al., 2009; Fisman et al., 2008).



                                                    11
8 of these 27 articles with factorial designs (30%) used the long model including all
interaction terms as their main specification (see Table 2).



      Table 2: Field experiments published in top-5 journals between 2007 and 2017


                                             AER     ECMA       JPE        QJE   ReStud   Total
             Field experiments                 43         9      14        45       13    124
             With factorial designs            11         2      4          6        4    27
             Interactions included             3          1          1      2       1      8
             Interactions not included         8          1          3      4       3      19




3.1    Ignoring the interaction: Theory
The discussion above highlights that it is common for experimental papers with factorial
designs to ignore the interaction and focus on the short regression model. This is theoret-
ically justified if the researcher is certain that all the interactions are zero, in which case
it leads to consistent estimates of the main effects and to power improvements relative
to the long model (see Section 2.4). However, if the interactions are not zero, ignoring
the interaction yields inconsistent estimates and size distortions.
   To illustrate, we introduce a running example based on a prototypical setting which
we will return to throughout the paper. We focus on the problem of testing the null
hypothesis that the main effect of T1 is equal to zero, H0 :  1 = 0. The analysis for  2 is
symmetric and omitted. We consider a 2×2 design with a total sample size of N = 1, 000,
where N1 = N2 = N3 = N4 = 250. The data are generated as

                         Yi =  1 T1i +  2 T2i +  12 T1i T2i +  i ,        i  N (0, 1),

where T1i and T2i are randomly assigned treatments with P( T1i = 1) = P( T2i = 1) = 0.5.
This experiment has power 90% to detect an effect size of 0.2 at the 5% level using
the short regression.15 We use Monte Carlo simulations to assess the rejection rates
of different inference procedures under the null (size) and the alternative hypothesis
(power).
  15 The   minimum detectable effect for the long model with power 90% and size 5% is 0.29.

                                                     12
   Figure 1 shows how power, bias, and size vary across different values of  12 in both
the long and the short model. When  12 is exactly zero, the short model controls size and
exhibits higher power than the long model. However, these power gains come at the cost
of bias and size distortions whenever  12 = 0. As seen in Figure 1, even modest values of
|  12 | lead to considerable size distortions. For instance, a |  12 | greater than 0.1 (which
occurs in over 36% of cases in the data we reanalyze) would more than double the rate
of false rejection of the null. By contrast, the long model is unbiased and exhibits correct
size for all values  12 . The main takeaway from Figure 1 is that researchers should avoid
the short model, unless there is no uncertainty that  12 = 0.

Figure 1: The perceived power gains from the short model come at the cost of biased
estimators and not controlling size, unless  12 is exactly equal to zero


                                                             (a) Power                                                                           (b) Bias                                                                                                            (c) Size

                                    1.0     q        Long                                                              0.15     q        Long                                                                                            0.5                                q    Long
                                                     Short                                                                               Short                                                                                                                                   Short

                                                                                                                       0.10
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                  Power gain


                                                                                                                       0.05
                                           q                 q    q          q          q           q          q
                                                       q                                                  q
                                    0.6          q                      q          q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N=1,000
                                                                                                                    Bias




                                                                                                                       0.00    q     q     q          q     q              q    q    q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=2=0
                                                                                                                                                 q               q    q




                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                    -0.05


                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                    -0.10
                                                                                                        N=1,000                                                                                                                                 q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q     q    q    q    q    q          q    q
                                                                                                        1=0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                         N=1,000
                                    0.0                                                                 2=0         -0.15                                                                1=2=0                                           0.0
                                          -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0        0.1         0.2        0.3             -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                             -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                            12                                                                                  12                                                                                                              12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size for figures 1c and
1a is  = 0.05.



3.2                                              Ignoring the interaction: Practice
Here, we examine the practical implications of ignoring the interactions in the papers
listed in Table A.1. We reanalyze the data from all field experiments with factorial
designs and publicly available data that do not include all the interactions in the main
specification. Of the ten most-cited papers with factorial designs listed in Table A.1 only
one includes all the interactions in the main specification. More recent papers (which are
less likely to be among the most cited) are more likely to include all interaction terms.
Out of the 27 papers with factorial designs published in top-5 journals, 19 papers do
not include all interaction terms. Of these 19, 4 papers did not have publicly-available
replication data. In an online appendix we describe the experimental design of each of

                                                                                                                                                            13
the 27 papers.16
  We downloaded the publicly-available data files and replicated the main results in
each of the remaining 15 papers. We standardized the outcome variable in each paper
to have mean zero and standard deviation of one. We then compared the original treat-
ment effects (estimated without the interaction terms) with those estimated including
the interaction terms. In other words, we compare estimates based on the short model
(Equation (4)) to those based on the long model (Equation (3)).


3.2.1   Key facts about interactions

As the discussion above highlights, the extent to which the short model will not control
size depends on the value of the interactions in practice. We therefore start by plot-
ting the distribution of estimated interaction effects (Figure 2) and documenting facts
regarding interactions from our reanalysis. We find that interactions are quantitatively
important and typically not second-order. All estimates are measured in standard devi-
ations () of the outcome variable. While the median (mean) interaction for these papers
is 0.00 (0.00), the median (mean) absolute value of the interaction is 0.07 (0.13). The
median (mean) absolute value of interactions relative to the main treatment effects is
0.37 (1.55). Thus, while it may be true that interactions are small on average across all
studies, they are often sizeable in any given study. In our data, the absolute value of the
interactions is greater than 0.1 in 36% and greater than 0.2 in 19% of the cases. These
lead to a 13% and 22% chance of rejecting the null of no effect in our running example
(as seen in Figure 1), which corresponds to more than a doubling and a quadrupling,
respectively, in the rate of false rejection at the 5% level.
   The second key finding is that despite the interactions being quantitatively important,
most experiments will rarely reject the null hypothesis that they are zero (Figure 2 shades
the fraction of the interactions that are significant in the studies that we reanalyze).
Among the 15 papers that we reanalyzed, 6.2% of interactions are significant at the 10%
level, 3.6% are significant at the 5% level, and 0.9% are significant at the 1% level.17
These findings are not surprising because factorial designs are rarely powered to detect
meaningful interactions. Section 7 provides a discussion of the issues related to using
factorial designs for making inferences on interaction effects.
   The fact that most experiments were not explicitly powered to detect interactions sug-
gests that the main reason for running experiments with factorial designs seems to be
  16 Available at http://mauricio-romero.com/pdfs/papers/Appendix crosscuts.pdf
  17 Among   the papers that originally included all interactions, 4.5% of interactions are significant at the
10% level, 1.1% are significant at the 5% level, and 0.0% are significant at the 1% level.


                                                     14
the increase in power for detecting main effects. However, as we show below, this comes
at the considerable cost of an increased rate of false positives (which is unsurprising
based on the distribution of interactions shown in Figure 2).

                      Figure 2: Distribution of the estimated interaction effects


                                         Significant - 5% level
                                         Not significant - 5% level
                           0.20




                           0.15
                    Frequency




                           0.10




                           0.05




                           0.00
                                  -0.6       -0.4      -0.2           0   0.2      0.4       0.6
                                                       Interaction coefficient


Note: This figure shows the distribution of the interactions between the main treatments. We trim the top and bottom
1% of the distribution. The median interaction for these papers is 0.00 (dashed vertical line), the median absolute
value of the interaction is 0.07 (solid vertical line), and the median relative absolute value of the interaction with
respect to the main treatment effect is 0.37. 6.2% of interactions are significant at the 10% level, 3.6% are significant
at the 5% level, and 0.9% are significant at the 1% level.


3.2.2    Implications of ignoring interactions

Figure 3a compares the original treatment effect estimates based on the short model to
the estimates based on the long model which includes the interaction terms (Figure 3b
zooms in to cases where the value of the main treatment effects in the short model is
between -1 to 1 standard deviation). The median change in the absolute value of the
point estimate of the main treatment effect is 96%. Roughly 26% of estimated treatment
effects change sign when they are estimated using the long regression.

                                                               15
   Table 3 shows how the significance of the main treatment estimates changes when
using the long instead of the short model. About 48% of treatment estimates that were
significant at the 10% level based on the short model are no longer significant based on
the long model. 53% and 57% of estimates lose significance at the 5% and 1% levels,
respectively. A much smaller fraction of treatment effects that were not significant in the
short model are significant based on the long regression (6%, 5%, and 1%, at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels respectively).
   We find similar results when we restrict our reanalysis to the ten most cited papers
with factorial designs that do not include the interaction terms (with data available for
reanalysis). When we re-estimate the treatment effects in these papers after including
all interactions, we find that out of 21 results that were significant at the 5% level in the
paper, 9 (or 43%) are no longer so after including all interactions. Corresponding figures
and tables are presented in Appendix A.1.2 (Figure A.2 and Table A.2).
   Finally, we also distinguish between policy and conceptual experiments in Table A.1
(the latter typically have more treatments and interactions) and see that the problem
of incorrect inference from ignoring interaction terms remains even when we restrict
attention to the policy experiments. Of the 12 policy experiments, 9 do not include all
interactions. When we re-estimate the treatment effects in these 9 papers after including
all interactions, we find that out of 19 results that were significant at the 5% level in the
paper, 6 (or 32%) are no longer so after including all interactions. Corresponding figures
and tables are presented in Appendix A.1.3 (Figure A.4 and Table A.3).




                                             16
                                      Figure 3: Treatment estimates based on the long and the short model
                                                     (a) All estimates                          (b) Main treatment effects between -1 and 1
                                                                                                                                                                                          q




                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                 q
                        3




                                                                                                                                                                         q       q




                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                             q
Short model estimates




                                                                                          Short model estimates
                                                                  q   q
                                                                                                                                                              q              q
                                                                                                                                                         q                       q
                        2




                                                                                                                                                q        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q qq q
                                                                                                                                                      q             qq
                                                                                                                                                                qqq   q
                                                                                                                                                                    q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                               qq  q
                                                                                                                                                       q       q
                                                                                                                                                               q qq
                                                                                                                                            q   q q  q q qqqqqqqq qqq       qq
                                                                                                                                                    q   qq  q
                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                          q       q  q    qqqqq   qqq
                                                                                                                                                    qqq qqq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           qq q q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             qq                q
                                                                                                                                        q q  q    q q  qq
                                                                                                                                                        q  qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                       qq       q
                                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                   qq q
                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                  q         q
                                                                                                                                       qq q       q       q
                                                      q                                                                                                q
                        1




                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                 q       q      q   q
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                    q

                                             q q




                                                                                                                  -0.5
                                              q
                                             qq                                                                                 q    q
                                       q q
                                  q    q     qq
                                           qq qq
                                     q q  qq
                                           qqqq q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          qq
                                   qqqq
                                      qq
                                       qqq
                                         qq
                                          q     q                                                                                                                                    q
                                q q
                                q    q
                                     qqq
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         qqq q
                                           q
                        0




                               q q
                                 q  qqq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q       q
                              qqq qq q
                                     qq
                                      qq q q
                                   q
                                   qqqq
                              qqq q q  q
                                          q
                             q
                            q qqqq   q
                                   q




                                                                                                                  -1.0
                            qq
                                                 q




                                      0               1       2       3      4       5                                   -1.0   -0.5                    0.0                  0.5         1.0
                                                      Long model estimates                                                           Long model estimates

Note: This figure shows how the main treatment estimates change between the short and the long model across
all studies. Figure 3a has all the treatment effects, while Figure 3b zooms in to cases where the value of the main
treatment effects in the short model is between -1 to 1 standard deviation. The median main treatment estimate from
the short model is 0.01, the median main treatment estimate from the long model is 0.02, the average absolute
difference between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 0.05, the median absolute difference
in percentage terms between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 96%, and 26% of treatment
estimates change sign when they are estimated using the long model instead of the short model.




                                                                                         17
    Table 3: Significance of treatment estimates based on the long and the short model


                  Panel A: Significance at the 10% level
                                        Without interaction
                  With interaction     Not significant      Significant     Total
                  Not significant             95                 34          129
                  Significant                  6                 37          43
                  Total                       101                71          172
                  Panel B: Significance at the 5% level
                                        Without interaction
                  With interaction     Not significant      Significant     Total
                  Not significant             111                29          140
                  Significant                  6                 26          32
                  Total                       117                55          172
                  Panel C: Significance at the 1% level
                                        Without interaction
                  With interaction     Not significant      Significant     Total
                  Not significant             140                17          157
                  Significant                  2                 13          15
                  Total                       142                30          172
                    This table shows the number of coefficients that are significant
                    at a given level when estimating the long regression (columns)
                    and the short regression (rows). This table includes informa-
                    tion from all papers with factorial designs and publicly avail-
                    able data that do not include the interactions in the original
                    study. Panel A uses a 10% significance level, Panel B uses 5%,
                    and Panel C uses 1%.



4     Model selection (or pre-testing) yields invalid inferences
As implied by the quote from Kremer (2003) in the introduction, researchers often recog-
nize that using the short model is only correct for inference on the main treatment effect
if the interaction is close to zero. However, the problem is that the value of the interaction
is not known ex ante. Therefore, a common practice is to employ a data-driven two-step
procedure to determine whether to estimate the full model or to ignore the interaction.
Specifically, the steps are:

 1. Estimate the long model and test the null hypothesis that  12 is zero (i.e., H0 :  12 =
    0) using a two-sided t-test.

                                                18
 2. (a) If H0 :  12 = 0 is rejected, test H0 :  1 = 0 using the two-sided t-test based on
        the long model.
     (b) If H0 :  12 = 0 is not rejected, test H0 :  1 = 0 using the two-sided t-test based
         on the short model.

It is well-known that the distributions of the estimators obtained from this data-dependent
model selection procedure are complicated and highly non-normal, rendering the usual
t-statistic-based inference invalid (e.g., Leeb & Potscher,
                                                    ¨        2005, 2006, 2008). To illustrate
this issue, we return to our running example. The size properties of the two-step model
selection approach are shown in Figure 4. For reference, we also include results for the
t-tests based on the long and the short model. The main takeaway from Figure 4 is
that model selection leads to incorrect inferences and false positives. Thus, researchers
should always avoid it.
   The performance of the model selection approach to determine whether one should
run the short or the long model is particularly poor because field experiments are rarely
powered to reject that the interactions are zero (see Section 7). Figure 2 shows that only
3.6% of interactions were significant at the 5% level in our reanalysis. Using a rejection
threshold of 5%, the model-selection approach would lead to estimating the short model
in over 96% of the cases we reanalyze. Thus, the rate of incorrect inference under model-
selection will continue to be nearly as high as just running the short model.




                                            19
                                                          Figure 4: Model selection does not control size


                                                              0.5                         q      Long
                                                                                                 Short
                                                                                                 Model selection

                          Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                                              0.4



                                                              0.3



                                                              0.2



                                                              0.1
                                                                           q          q                          q
                                                                     q          q          q     q     q    q         q    q     q    q
                                                                                                                               N=1,000
                                                              0.0                                                              1=2=0

                                                                    -0.3       -0.2       -0.1        0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                                                      12


Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size is  = 0.05. For
the model selection, the short model is estimated if one fails to reject  12 = 0 at the 5% level.



5      Can we improve power for detecting main effects while
       achieving size control?
We now examine whether it is possible to improve power for detecting main effects
relative to t-tests based on the long model, while maintaining size control for relevant
values of the interactions. We first consider 2×2 factorial designs, and discuss factorial
designs with more than two treatments in Section 6.
  To simplify the exposition, we focus on  1 and partial out T2 and the constant, keeping
the partialling-out implicit. The analysis for  2 is symmetric and omitted. Defining
T12  T1 T2 , the regression model of interest is18

                                                                               Y =  1 T1 +  12 T12 + .                                     (12)
    18 We   omit the intercept because all variables have mean zero after partialling-out T2 and the constant.




                                                                                                 20
Our goal is to test hypotheses about the main effect  1 .


5.1      Optimality properties of the t-test based on the long model
The two-sided t-test based on the long regression model is the uniformly most powerful
test among tests that are unbiased for all values of the interaction effect (e.g., van der
Vaart, 1998).19 The practical implication of this classical result is that any procedure that
is more powerful than the t-test for some values of the interaction must underperform
somewhere else. As a consequence, to achieve higher power than the t-test based on
the long model, one has to make a choice about which values of the interaction to di-
rect power to. In practice, this choice needs to be made based on some form of prior
knowledge.
   The scope for power improvements relative to the two-sided t-test based on the long
regression model is theoretically limited if one insists on uniform size control. The
reason is that for the corresponding one-sided testing problem, the usual one-sided t-
test based on the long model is the uniformly most powerful test among all tests (e.g.,
Proposition 15.2 in van der Vaart, 1998). Thus, at any parameter value, the uniformly
most powerful test is a one-sided t-test and the best one can hope for is to improve
the power from the two-sided to a one-sided test (see, e.g., Armstrong et al. (2019) and
Armstrong & Kolesar (2019) for a further discussion of this point). At the 5%-level, this
power improvement is never larger than 12.5 percentage points. It can also be shown that
the scope for improving the average length of the usual confidence intervals based on
the long regression model is limited (e.g., Armstrong & Kolesar, 2018, 2019; Armstrong
et al., 2019).20
   Section 5.2 proposes a nearly optimal test which comes close to achieving the maximal
power gain at a priori likely values of the interaction, while controlling size for all values
of the interaction. In Section 5.3, we explore an approach based on prior knowledge on
the magnitude of the interaction. When the prior knowledge is correct, this approach
controls size and yields power gains relative to the t-test based on the long model.
However, unlike the t-test based on the long model and the nearly optimal test, it suffers
from size distortions if the prior knowledge is incorrect. Appendix A.5 explores two
additional econometric approaches based on work by Imbens & Manski (2004), Stoye
(2009), and McCloskey (2017).
  19 Atest is unbiased if its power is larger than its size.
  20 Moreover, the results in Joshi (1969) imply the usual two-sided confidence interval based on the long
regression model achieves minimax expected length (Armstrong & Kolesar, 2019).



                                                   21
5.2    Nearly optimal tests targeting power towards a likely value ¯ 12

Consider a scenario where a particular value  12 =    ¯ 12 seems a priori likely and suppose
that we want to find a test that controls size and is as powerful as possible when  12 =
 ¯ 12 . For concreteness, we focus on the case where    ¯ 12 = 0 and consider the following
testing problem

                 H0 :  1 = 0,  12  R                  against         H1 :  1 = 0,  12 = 0.        (13)

We use the numerical algorithm developed by Elliott et al. (2015) to construct a nearly
optimal test for the testing problem (13).
  To describe their procedure, note that under standard conditions, the t-statistics are
approximately normally distributed in large samples

                                      ^1
                                      t                     t1         1 
                                               N                  ,            ,                   (14)
                                     ^12
                                     t                     t12          1

                 ^1                  ^ 12
      ^1 =
where t
                 
                   ^1) ,
                           ^12 =
                           t
                                     
                                        ^ 12 ) ,   t1 =
                                                            1
                                                       t12 = SE(12
                                                                  
                                                              ^1) ,
                                                                                             ^ ^
                                                                    ^ 12 ) , and  = Cov ( t1 , t12 ). We
               SE(                 SE(                    SE(       
also define t     ^1 , t
             ^ = (t    ^12 ) and t = (t1 , t12 ). SE( ^ 1 ), SE( ^ 12 ) and Cov(t ^1 , t
                                                                                       ^12 ) can be con-
sistently estimated under weak conditions (here we use a standard heteroskedasticity
robust estimator).
   Consider the problem of maximizing power in the following hypothesis testing prob-
lem:

                  H0 : t1 = 0, t12  R                 against         H1 : t1 = 0, t12 = 0.        (15)

A common approach to construct powerful tests for problems with composite hypothe-
ses is to choose tests based on their weighted average power. In particular, we seek a
powerful test for " H0 : the density of t ^ is f t , t1 = 0, t12  R" against the simple alter-
                               ^ is f t dF (t)", where the weighting function F is chosen
native " H1,F : the density of t
by the researcher. Now suppose that the null is replaced by " H0, : the density of t      ^ is
  f t d(t)". To obtain the best test, one needs to find a least favorable distribution (LFD),
 LF , with the property that the size  Neyman-Pearson test of the simple hypothesis
H0, LF against H1,F also yields a size  test of the composite null hypothesis H0 against
H1,F (e.g., Lehmann & Romano, 2005).
  Since it is generally difficult to analytically determine and computationally approxi-
mate  LF , Elliott et al. (2015) suggest to instead focus on an approximate LFD,  ALF ,


                                                             22
which yields a nearly optimal test for H0 against H1,F . The resulting test is then just a
Neyman-Pearson test based on  ALF .

Figure 5: Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test controls for size and yields power gains
over running the full model for "intermediate" values of  12
                                                                   (a) Size                                                                                                        (b) Power


                                      0.5                                q    Long                                                                    1.0     q        Full
                                                                              Short                                                                                    Short
                                                                              EMW                                                                                      EMW
  Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                  Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                      0.4                                                                                                             0.8


                                                                                                                                                             q                 q    q          q          q         q          q
                                                                                                                                                                         q                                               q
                                      0.3                                                                                                             0.6          q                      q         q          q




                                      0.2                                                                                                             0.4



                                      0.1                                                                                                             0.2
                                                   q          q                         q
                                             q          q          q     q    q    q         q          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2=0
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                      N=1,000                                                                                           N=1,000
                                      0.0                                                             1=2=0                                           0.0                                               1=0.2

                                            -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                             -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0        0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                             12                                                                                                               12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size for figures 5a and
5b is  = 0.05. EMW refers to Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test.


   Figure 5 displays the results of applying the nearly optimal test in the context of our
running example.21 The test controls size for all values of  12 and, by construction, is
nearly optimal when  12 = 0. A comparison with the t-test based on the long model
shows that the nearly optimal test is more powerful when  12 is close to zero. The nearly
optimal test comes close to achieving the maximal possible power. For example, when
 1 = 0.2 the power of the nearly optimal test is 98.5% of the power of the one-sided
t-test.
   However, as expected given the discussion in Section 5.1, these power gains come at a
cost. For certain values of  12 , the power can be much lower than that of the t-test based
on the long model. Appendix A.6.3 provides a more comprehensive assessment of the
performance of the nearly optimal tests by plotting power curves for different values of
1.
      21 To
       improve the performance of their procedure, Elliott et al. (2015) suggest a switching rule that
depends on |t^12 | such that for large enough values of |t
                                                         ^12 |, one switches to regular hypothesis testing.
Following their suggestion, we use 6 as the switching value.

                                                                                                             23
5.3    Inference under a priori restrictions on the magnitude of  12
Suppose that the researcher is certain that  12 =     ¯ 12 . In this case, she can obtain powerful
tests based on a regression of Y -  ¯ 12 T12 on T1 . If  ¯ 12 = 0, this corresponds to estimating
the short model. As shown in Section 2.4, the t-test based on the short model is more
powerful than the t-test based on the long model when the prior knowledge that  12 = 0
is correct, but does not control size when it is not.
   Of course, exact knowledge of  12 may be too strong of an assumption. Suppose
instead that the researcher imposes prior knowledge in the form of a restriction on the
magnitude of the interaction effect  12 .
Assumption 1. |  12 |  C for some finite constant C.
  Assumption 1 restricts the parameter space for  12 and implies that

                                     12  {b12 : |b12 |  C }  B12 .

   Here we use the approach developed in Armstrong & Kolesar (2018) and Armstrong
et al. (2019) to construct optimal confidence intervals under Assumption 1.22 To describe
their procedure, we write model (12) in matrix form as

                                        Y =  1 T1 +  12 T12 +                                           (16)

and assume that   N (0, 2 I N ) and 2 is known. The implementation with het-
eroskedastic and non-Gaussian errors is discussed in Appendix A.4. An affine estimator
of  1 can be written as ^ 1 = a + b Y, for some a and b that can depend on X  (T1 , T12 ).
For example, for the long OLS regression model, a = 0 and b is the first row of (X X)-1 X .
  Define the "worst case" biases as

                          Bias ^1       =        sup        E( 1 ,12 ) ^ 1 - 1 ,
                                             1 R,  12 B12

                          Bias ^1       =        inf        E( 1 ,12 ) ^ 1 - 1 ,
                                             1 R,  12 B12


where E( 1 ,12 ) denotes the expectation under model (16) with (  1 ,  12 ). Assuming that
(T1 , T12 ) are fixed, ^ 1 is normally distributed with mean a + b (  1 T1 +  12 T12 ) and vari-
                                                                                         ^ 1 - 1 )
ance SE(    ^ 1 )2 = b 2 2 . Thus, as (  1 ,  12 ) varies over R × B12 , the t-ratio, ( 
                          2                                                              SE(  ^ ) ,      1

  22 Optimality here refers to minimizing the width of the confidence intervals. We focus on the width
of the confidence intervals because of the intuitive appeal and practical relevance of this criterion. If one
were to optimize the power of the test that the confidence interval inverts, the resulting procedure can be
different.

                                                     24
                                                                                      Bias( ^1)        Bias( ^1)
is normally distributed with variance one and mean varying from                            ^
                                                                                       SE(  1 )
                                                                                                  to        ^
                                                                                                        SE(  1 )
                                                                                                                 .
To construct a two-sided confidence interval, note that testing H0 :  1 = 0           1 based on
                                     max{|Bias( ^ 1 )|,|Bias( ^ 1 )|}
a t-statistic with critical value cv          SE(    ^ )              yields a level  test, where
                                                          1

cv (t) denotes the 1 -  quantile of a folded normal distribution with location parameter
t and scale parameter 1. Inverting this test yields the following confidence interval:

                                    max |Bias ^ 1 |, |Bias ^1 |
                       ^ 1 ± cv
                                                                           SE( ^ 1)                         (17)
                                             SE(  ^ 1)

The length of the confidence interval (17) is determined by the bias and the variance
of the estimator   ^ 1 , and to obtain optimal confidence intervals one has to solve a bias-
variance trade-off. This problem is amenable to convex optimization and we describe
how to solve it in Appendix A.4.
   Figure 6 reports the rejection probabilities of a test that rejects if zero is not in the
confidence interval. For the purpose of illustration, we consider C = 0.1 such that
B12 = [-0.1, 0.1]. Our results suggest that imposing prior knowledge in the form of
an upper bound on the absolute value of the interaction effect can yield substantial
power improvements relative to the t-tests based on the long regression model, while
controlling size when this prior knowledge is in fact correct. Appendix A.6.4 presents
the corresponding power curves for different values of  1 .
   When researchers are primarily interested in the main effects, and feel confident that
the interactions are second-order, Armstrong et al. (2019)'s approach should be strictly
preferred to the short model, since it is more realistic to pre-specify that the interaction
is in a range than exactly zero. However, pre-specifying the appropriate range of prior
values for the interaction is non-trivial and requires judgment, because this approach still
exhibits size distortions when the prior knowledge is incorrect (e.g., when |  12 | > 0.1 in
Figure 6).23
  23 Note that it is problematic to use Armstrong et al. (2019)'s approach based on first running the long
model and not rejecting that the interaction is in a certain range. This would result in the same data-
dependent model selection issue that arises from reporting the short model after failing to reject that
interactions are significantly different from zero in the long model. Thus, while Armstrong et al. (2019)'s
approach is an improvement over the short model, it does not solve the underlying problem of not know-
ing the true value of the interaction.




                                                    25
Figure 6: Restrictions on the magnitude of  12 yield power gains if they are correct but
lead to incorrect inferences if they are not
                                                           (a) Size                                                                                             (b) Power


                                     0.5          Long                                                                                     1.0          Long
                                                  EMW                                                                                                   EWM
                                                  AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                       AKK (|12|  0.1)
 Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                       Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                     0.4                                                                                                   0.8



                                     0.3                                                                                                   0.6



                                     0.2                                                                                                   0.4



                                     0.1                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                        N=1,000
                                                                                       N=1,000                                                                                          1=0.2
                                     0.0                                               1=2=0                                               0.0                                          2=0

                                           -0.3    -0.2   -0.1      0.0   0.1        0.2         0.3                                             -0.3    -0.2   -0.1      0.0   0.1   0.2    0.3
                                                                    12                                                                                                    12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size for figures 6a
and 6b is  = 0.05. AKK refers to Armstrong et al. (2019)'s approach for constructing optimal confidence intervals
under prior knowledge about the magnitude of  12 with B12 = [-0.1, 0.1] (dashed vertical lines). EMW refers to
Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test.



5.4                                    A design-based approach for improving power
The discussion above focused on improving power for detecting main effects in existing
experiments with factorial designs. For the design of new experiments, a design-based
alternative is to leave the "interaction cell" empty (i.e., to set N4 = 0) and to re-assign
those subjects to the other cells such that


                                                                                                                             T1
                                                                                                   No                                       Yes
                                                                                           No       
                                                                                                   N1                                       N2
                                                                                T2                  
                                                                                           Yes     N3                                        0


           Consider the following regression model

                                                                          Y =                     
                                                                              0 +  1 T1 +  2 T2 +  .                                                                                        (18)


                                                                                                  26
Let  ^  and  ^  denote the OLS estimators of  and  . We show in Appendix A.2.3 that
       1       2                                1        2
                                        ^         ^ 
if T1 and T2 are randomly assigned,  1 and  2 are consistent for the respective main
effects.
   To illustrate the power implications of leaving the interaction cell empty, consider an
experiment where the researcher cares equally about power to detect an effect of T1 and
T2 , and thus assigns the same sample size to both treatments: N2       = N  = N  . In
                                                                             3       T
what follows, we focus on    1 . The analysis for     is symmetric and omitted. Under the
                                                     2
assumptions of Section A.3.1, the (conditional) variance of  ^  is given by
                                                               1

                                                         N - NT 
                                  Var ^        = 2
                                       1                       )N .
                                                     ( N - 2 NT  T

                                                     
Var ^  is minimized when N  =              N
                                               2-       2 and we assume that the experiment is
      1                   T                2
designed in this    manner.24 A comparison to the variance of the estimator based on the
long model,    ^ 1 , shows that Var ^   Var     ^ 1 . Thus, by the same reasoning as in
                                      1
Section 2.4, leaving the interaction cell empty leads to power improvements for testing
hypotheses about the main effects relative to the long regression model.
   Figure 7 presents the results based on our running example. As expected, leaving
the interaction cell empty yields tests that control size for all values of the interaction.
Moreover, among the approaches that achieve size control for all values of  12 (the long
model and the nearly optimal test), leaving the interaction cell empty yields the highest
power.
   This design (with the interaction cells empty) yields power gains relative to running
two separate experiments, because the control group is used twice. But it avoids the
problem of interactions discussed above. An example of such a design is provided by
Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2011) who study the impact of four different interven-
tions in one experiment with one common control group, but no cross-cutting treatment
arms.
  24 This                                                            N
                                                                              
         exact sample split is impossible in any application since   2   2-      2 is not an integer. In our
simulations we therefore use NT  = 0.29 N and N  = 0.42 N .
                                                1




                                                  27
Figure 7: Leaving the interaction cell empty increases power for most values of  12
relative to alternative approaches
                                                           (a) Size                                                                                       (b) Power


                                      0.5                    Long                                                                   1.0          Long
                                                             Short                                                                               Short
                                                             EMW                                                                                 EMW
                                                             AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                     AKK (|12|  0.1)
  Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                      0.4                                                                                           0.8
                                                             No factorial design                                                                 No factorial design


                                      0.3                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                     N=1,000
                                                                                     1=2=0
                                      0.2                                                                                           0.4



                                      0.1                                                                                           0.2

                                                                                                                                                                         N=1,000     2=0
                                      0.0                                                                                           0.0                                  1=0.2

                                            -0.3   -0.2   -0.1    0.0     0.1      0.2   0.3                                              -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0    0.1      0.2     0.3
                                                                  12                                                                                               12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size for figures 7a and
7b is  = 0.05. EMW refers to Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test. AKK refers to Armstrong et al. (2019)'s
approach for constructing optimal confidence intervals under prior knowledge about the magnitude of  12 .



6                                      Factorial designs with more than two treatments
So far, our theoretical discussion has focused on 2×2 factorial designs. Here we briefly
discuss designs with more than two treatments.
   The theoretical analysis of Section 2 straightforwardly extends to more complicated
factorial designs. In particular, estimators based on the long regression model are con-
sistent for the main and interaction effects, whereas the estimators based on the short
regression model are consistent for weighted averages of treatment effects with respect
to the counterfactuals defined by the other arms of the experiment. The more treatments
there are, the more complicated the interpretation of these composite effects will be.
   Conceptually, both econometric approaches discussed in Section 5 can be extended
beyond 2×2 settings. However, the nearly optimal tests become computationally pro-
hibitive when there are many interactions (i.e., many nuisance parameters) and, thus,
cannot be recommended for complicated factorial designs. Incorporating prior knowl-
edge in the form of restrictions on the magnitude of interactions is computationally fea-


                                                                                           28
sible but can be problematic in practice because this approach requires reliable prior
knowledge on the magnitude of potentially very many interactions to yield notable
power improvements.25
  Therefore, our recommendation for inference about main effects in more complicated
factorial designs is to use t-tests based on the long model. These tests are easy to com-
pute irrespective of the dimensionality of the problem and have desirable optimality
properties. When the primary parameters of interest are the main effects, we recommend
leaving the interaction cells empty at the design stage, which yields power improvements
over the t-test based on the long model.


7      Making inferences about interaction effects
In Sections 4­5, we focused on making inferences on the main effects. Researchers may
also use factorial designs to learn about interactions and jointly explore the parameter
space of main and interaction effects. We therefore also discuss the use of factorial
designs for making inferences on interaction effects.
  An important observation is that detecting interaction effects requires much larger
sample sizes than detecting main effects. To illustrate, we compare the standard errors
of the OLS estimator of the interaction effect,    ^ 12 , to the standard errors of the OLS
estimator of the main effect,   ^ 1 . Under the assumptions in Section 2.4, the standard
errors are

   ^1 =          N1 + N2        ^ 12 =                N1 N2 N3 + N1 N3 N4 + N2 N3 N4 + N1 N2 N4
SE                       and SE                                                                 .
                  N1 N2                                              N1 N2 N3 N4

Note that SE    ^ 1 < SE   ^ 12 , irrespective of the configuration of ( N1 , N2 , N3 , N4 ). As a
consequence, the power for detecting interaction effects is always lower than the power
for detecting main effects. Therefore, the required sample size for detecting an inter-
action effect is always larger than the sample size for detecting a main effect of equal
magnitude.
  To achieve power  , the true interaction effect needs to satisfy (e.g., Duflo et al., 2007;
Athey & Imbens, 2017)

                    12 > -1 ( ) + -1 (1 - /2) SE ^ 12  MDE .
                                                          12

    25 Both
         approaches discussed in Appendix A.5 are computationally feasible in more complicated cross-
cut designs.



                                                 29
Here MDE stands for minimum detectable effect size. Similarly, to achieve power  for
detecting the main effect, it must be that

                       1 > -1 ( ) + -1 (1 - /2) SE ^ 1  MDE .
                                                           1



We can relate the MDEs to the overall sample size required for detecting interactions,
NI , and main effects, NM , respectively. To illustrate, suppose that the overall sample
size is equally distributed across all four cells (which is the optimal design to maximize
                                                                               
power for the interaction). In this case, the standard errors are SE   ^ 1 =  8/ NM and
              
SE   ^ 12 =  16/ NI , such that

                                                                 8
                                          MDE1                  NM
                                                    =
                                          MDE12                 16
                                                                NI


and
                                                        2
                                           MDE1                 NI
                                      2                     =      .
                                           MDE12                NM

   Suppose that the MDE for the interaction effect is half the MDE for the main effect.
Then the relative sample size needed to be adequately powered ( NI / NM ) is 8. That is,
we need eight times the sample size to detect an interaction effect that is half the size
of the main effect.26 Even if the MDE for the interaction is the same as the MDE for the
main effect, one would need twice the sample size to detect the interaction effect than
to detect the main effect. Figure 8a illustrates the general relationship between NI / NM
and MDE12 / MDE1 . Given the more onerous sample size requirements to detect inter-
actions relative to main effects, it is not surprising that only few of the interaction effects
are significant in the reanalysis in Section 3.2.1.
   Further, even when interactions estimates are significant, they can be misleading. This
is because significant results in under-powered studies are much more likely to reflect
an outlier estimate of the interaction. In particular, as shown by Gelman & Carlin (2014),
low power is associated with a high Type-M error (or exaggeration ratio). The Type-M error
is the expectation of the absolute value of the estimator in a hypothetical replication
study based on the same design as the original study conditional on being significant,
  26 Alternatively,
                  one can compare MDE12 to the MDE based on the short model, MDEs           , as in Gelman
                                                                                          1
(2018). Because SE( ^ ) =  4/ N , the required sample size for detecting an interaction is 16 times larger
                     s
                     1
than for detecting main effects based on the short model.


                                                   30
divided by the true effect size (see p.643 and Figure 1 in Gelman & Carlin, 2014).27 For
example, if the experiment has 80% power to detect treatment effects of 0.2 or larger at
the 5% level using the long regression (i.e., a sample of 1,570 equally divided among the
four cells) and the true value of the interaction is 0.1, then the Type-M error for ^ 12 is
 251%.28 That is, the estimator of the interaction would, on average, be over two times
larger than the true value, conditional on being significant. Figure 8b shows the general
relationship between the Type-M error and  12 / MDE1 .

                                            Figure 8: Relative sample size and Type-M error
                                   (a) Relative sample size                                              (b) Type-M error


                                                                                          600

                       45
                                                                                          500


                       35
                                                                      Type-M error rate (%)
Relative sample size




                                                                                          400


                       25                                                                 300
                                                                                          251
                                                                                          200
                       15


                        8                                                                 100
                        5

                        0                                                                     0

                            0.25           0.5           0.75    1                                0.25       0.5            0.75   1
                                                 MDE12                                                              12
                                                 MDE1                                                              MDE1
Note: For both panels, we assume the sample is divided equally among the four cells in Table 1. Figure 8a plots
                            NI                                                                    MDE
the relative sample size N   M
                                  as a function of the relative MDEs MDE 12 . Figure 8b plots the Type-M error for
                                                                             1
different values of the interaction (relative to the MDE of the main effect, which determines the sample size). We use
the closed form formula provided by Lu et al. (2019). We assume that the size is  = 0.05, that the power is  = 0.8,
and that the MDE for the main effect is 0.2 (i.e., a sample of 1,570 equally divided among the four cells).


  Note that using the long model to estimate and learn about interactions is fine since
the OLS estimator of the long model is always unbiased, even if noisy. The problem we
document in this section arises because of the focus on statistical significance to assess
whether a result is meaningful. Combined with the well-documented publication bias
  27 A related problem with under-powered studies is the Type S error rate, which is the probability that

conditional on being significant, the estimate of the interaction in a hypothetical replication study based
on the same design as the original study has an incorrect sign (see p.643 in Gelman & Carlin, 2014).
  28 If the experiment has power 80% to detect treatment effects of 0.2 or larger at the 5% level using the

short regression and the true value of the interaction is 0.1 then the Type-M error for   ^ 12 is  347%.


                                                                     31
towards significant results (e.g., Abadie, 2020; I. Andrews & Kasy, 2018; Christensen &
Miguel, 2018; Franco et al., 2014), the discussion above suggests that published results
from under-powered studies are likely to meaningfully exaggerate the true effect. Fol-
lowing Gelman & Carlin (2014), we suggest studies report power to detect interactions
(as well as Type-M errors) in their pre-analysis plan.


8   Discussion and conclusion
In this paper we study the theory and practice of inference in factorial designs. We show
that the common approaches of directly estimating the short model or doing a two-
step model selection procedure yield invalid inferences about the main effects against
a "business-as-usual" counterfactual. In contrast, the long model yields consistent esti-
mates, always controls size, and exhibits optimality properties.
   We explore if it is possible to increase power to detect main effects in factorial ex-
periments relative to the long model, while controlling size for relevant values of the
interaction. The nearly optimal test by Elliott et al. (2015) achieves local power im-
provements near likely values of the interaction, but can exhibit lower power farther
away from such values. Moreover, this approach becomes computationally prohibitive
in more complicated factorial designs. Prior knowledge can be explicitly incorporated
using the Armstrong et al. (2019) approach. This approach yields power improvements
when the prior knowledge is correct, at the cost of size distortions when it is not.
   Thus, our recommendation for the analysis of completed experiments is to always
present the long regression model. In addition, if researchers would like to focus on
results from the short model, they should clearly indicate that treatment effects should
be interpreted as a composite effect that includes a weighted-average of interactions with
other treatments. It is also important to specify the estimand of interest in advance in a
pre-analysis plan, and not justify the short model ex-post based on estimated interactions
being insignificant (due to the data-dependent model selection issues we discuss).
   For the design of new experiments, if main effects are of primary interest, we recom-
mend leaving the interaction cells empty and increasing the number of units assigned
exclusively to the treatment or the control groups. This design-based approach naturally
controls size and yields notable global power improvements relative to the long model.
   Factorial designs have been motivated by two main considerations: (i) studying more
treatments in a cost-effective way, and (ii) learning about interactions. Our discussion
and results highlight that both of these uses can be problematic in practice, driven to a
large extent by the lack of power to detect interactions.

                                           32
  This lack of power creates two distinct sets of problems. First, it results in non-
rejections of the null of zero interactions (even when they may be meaningful) and leads
to researchers incorrectly focusing on the short model assuming that interactions are
zero because they are not significant. This leads to a loss of size control and a non-trivial
increase in the likelihood of a false rejection of null hypotheses about main effects.
  Second, it leads to significant results being much more likely to be over-estimates (Gel-
man & Carlin, 2014). This is true for under-powered studies in general, but especially
true for interactions because the sample size requirements for having enough power to
detect them is much more onerous than to detect main effects. Thus, if interaction effects
are of primary interest, we recommend that experiments be explicitly powered to detect
interactions and to indicate this in the pre-analysis plan (as in Mbiti et al. (2019)).
  Factorial designs do provide an efficient way of learning about multiple treatments as
well as their interactions in the same experiment. The problems we highlight stem in
large part from using factorial designs in conjunction with a focus on statistical signif-
icance for inference on whether treatment effects or interactions are meaningful. This
approach reflects the default frequentist paradigm in experimental economics. Going
forward, Bayesian methods (that do not privilege a binary "significant or not" threshold
for inference) may constitute a promising framework for efficient learning in experiments
with cross-cutting designs (e.g., Kassler et al., 2019).




                                             33
References
Abadie, A. (2020, June). Statistical nonsignificance in empirical economics. American
 Economic Review: Insights, 2(2), 193-208.

Alatas, V., Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A., & Tobias, J. (2012, June). Targeting
  the poor: Evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia. American Economic Review,
  102(4), 1206-40. doi: 10.1257/aer.102.4.1206

Allcott, H., & Taubinsky, D. (2015, August). Evaluating behaviorally motivated policy:
  Experimental evidence from the lightbulb market. American Economic Review, 105(8),
  2501-38. doi: 10.1257/aer.20131564

                                                   ¨ E. E. (2008, may). Eliciting risk and
Andersen, S., Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I., & Rutstrom,
 time preferences. Econometrica, 76(3), 583­618. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2008.00848.x

Andreoni, J., Rao, J. M., & Trachtman, H. (2017). Avoiding the ask: A field experiment on
 altruism, empathy, and charitable giving. Journal of Political Economy, 125(3), 625­653.

Andrews, D. W. K., & Guggenberger, P. (2009). Hybrid and size-corrected subsampling
 methods. Econometrica, 77(3), 721-762.

Andrews, I., & Kasy, M. (2018). Identification of and correction for publication bias.
 forthcoming American Economic Review.

Angrist, J. D., & Krueger, A. B. (1999). Chapter 23 - empirical strategies in labor eco-
 nomics. In O. C. Ashenfelter & D. Card (Eds.), (Vol. 3, p. 1277 - 1366). Elsevier. doi:
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S1573-4463(99)03004-7

Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly harmless econometrics an empiricist's companion.
 Princeton University Press.

Armstrong, T. B., & Kolesar, M. (2018). Optimal inference in a class of regression models.
 Econometrica, 86(2), 655-683. doi: 10.3982/ECTA14434

Armstrong, T. B., & Kolesar, M. (2019). Sensitivity analysis using approximate moment
 condition models. arXiv:1808.07387.

Armstrong, T. B., Kolesar, M., & Kwon, S. (2019). Optimal inference in regularized regression
 models. Unpublished Manuscript.



                                              34
Ashraf, N., Berry, J., & Shapiro, J. M. (2010, December). Can higher prices stimulate
 product use? evidence from a field experiment in zambia. American Economic Review,
 100(5), 2383-2413. doi: 10.1257/aer.100.5.2383

Athey, S., & Imbens, G. W. (2017). The econometrics of randomized experiments. In
  Handbook of economic field experiments (Vol. 1, pp. 73­140). Elsevier.

Balafoutas, L., Beck, A., Kerschbamer, R., & Sutter, M. (2013). What drives taxi drivers?
  a field experiment on fraud in a market for credence goods. Review of Economic Studies,
  80(3), 876­891.

Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E., & Linden, L. (2007). Remedying education: Evidence
  from two randomized experiments in India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3),
  1235-1264.

Banerjee, A., & Duflo, E. (2005). Chapter 7 growth theory through the lens of develop-
  ment economics. In P. Aghion & S. N. Durlauf (Eds.), (Vol. 1, p. 473 - 552). Elsevier.

Bertrand, M., Karlan, D., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zinman, J. (2010). What's adver-
  tising content worth? evidence from a consumer credit marketing field experiment.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 263-306. doi: 10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.263

Blair, G., Cooper, J., Coppock, A., & Humphreys, M. (2019). Declaring and diagnosing
  research designs. American Political Science Review, 113(3), 838?859. doi: 10.1017/
  S0003055419000194

Blattman, C., Jamison, J. C., & Sheridan, M. (2017, April). Reducing crime and vio-
  lence: Experimental evidence from cognitive behavioral therapy in Liberia. American
  Economic Review, 107(4), 1165-1206. doi: 10.1257/aer.20150503

Brown, J., Hossain, T., & Morgan, J. (2010). Shrouded attributes and information sup-
  pression: Evidence from the field. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 859­876.

Bruhn, M., & McKenzie, D. (2009, October). In pursuit of balance: Randomization in
  practice in development field experiments. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 1(4), 200-232. doi: 10.1257/app.1.4.200

Carneiro, P., Lee, S., & Wilhelm, D. (2017). Optimal data collection for randomized control
  trials. cemmap working paper CWP15/17.




                                            35
Christensen, G., & Miguel, E. (2018, September). Transparency, reproducibility, and
 the credibility of economics research. Journal of Economic Literature, 56(3), 920-80. doi:
 10.1257/jel.20171350

Cochran, W. G., & Cox, G. M. (1957). Experimental designs. John Wiley & Sons.

Cohen, J., & Dupas, P. (2010). Free distribution or cost-sharing? evidence from a ran-
 domized malaria prevention experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1),
 1-45. doi: 10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.1

Cohen, J., Dupas, P., & Schaner, S. (2015). Price subsidies, diagnostic tests, and targeting
 of malaria treatment: evidence from a randomized controlled trial. American Economic
 Review, 105(2), 609­45.

DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., Malmendier, U., & Rao, G. (2016). Voting to tell others. The
 Review of Economic Studies, 84(1), 143­181.

Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2008, July). Peer effects, teacher incentives, and the im-
 pact of tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya. Retrieved from http://
 siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTHDOFFICE/Resources/5485726-1239047988859/
 5995659-1239051886394/5996104-1246378480717/Dupas ETP 07.21.08.pdf (Work-
 ing paper)

Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2011). Peer effects, teacher incentives, and the impact
 of tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya. American Economic
 Review, 101(5), 1739-74. doi: 10.1257/aer.101.5.1739

Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2015a, September). Education, hiv, and early fertility:
 Experimental evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review, 105(9), 2757-97.

Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2015b). School governance, teacher incentives, and
 pupil-teacher experiemental evidence from Kenyan primary schools. Journal of Public
 Economics, 123, 92-110.

Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Kremer, M. (2007). Using randomization in development
 economics research: A toolkit. Handbook of development economics, 4, 3895­3962.

              ¨
Elliott, G., Muller, U. K., & Watson, M. W. (2015). Nearly optimal tests when a nuisance
  parameter is present under the null hypothesis. Econometrica, 83(2), 771­811.




                                             36
Eriksson, S., & Rooth, D.-O. (2014, March). Do employers use unemployment as a sorting
  criterion when hiring? evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Review,
  104(3), 1014-39. doi: 10.1257/aer.104.3.1014

Fischer, G. (2013). Contract structure, risk-sharing, and investment choice. Econometrica,
  81(3), 883­939.

Fisher, R. A. (1992). The arrangement of field experiments. In S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson
  (Eds.), Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology and distribution (pp. 82­91). New York,
  NY: Springer New York. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4380
  -9 8 doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-4380-9 8

Fisman, R., Iyengar, S. S., Kamenica, E., & Simonson, I. (2008). Racial preferences in
  dating. The Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 117­132.

Flory, J. A., Leibbrandt, A., & List, J. A. (2014). Do competitive workplaces deter female
  workers? a large-scale natural field experiment on job entry decisions. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 82(1), 122­155.

Franco, A., Malhotra, N., & Simonovits, G. (2014). Publication bias in the social sciences:
  Unlocking the file drawer. Science, 345(6203), 1502­1505. doi: 10.1126/science.1255484

Gelman, A. (2018, Mar). You need 16 times the sample size to estimate an interaction than
 to estimate a main effect. Retrieved from https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/
 2018/03/15/need-16-times-sample-size-estimate-interaction-estimate-main
 -effect/

Gelman, A., & Carlin, J. (2014). Beyond power calculations: Assessing type S (sign) and
 type M (magnitude) errors. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(6), 641­651.

Gerber, A., & Green, D. (2012). Field experiments: Design, analysis, and interpretation. W.
 W. Norton.

Gilligan, D. O., Karachiwalla, N., Kasirye, I., Lucas, A., & Neal, D. (2018, May). Educator
  Incentives and Educational Triage in Rural Primary Schools (IZA Discussion Papers No.
  11516).

Gneezy, U., Leonard, K. L., & List, J. A. (2009). Gender differences in competition:
 Evidence from a matrilineal and a patriarchal society. Econometrica, 77(5), 1637­1664.




                                            37
Haushofer, J., & Shapiro, J. (2016). The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers
 to the poor: experimental evidence from Kenya. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 131(4), 1973­2042.

Imbens, G. W., & Manski, C. F. (2004). Confidence intervals for partially identified
  parameters. Econometrica, 72(6), 1845­1857. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00555.x

Jakiela, P., & Ozier, O. (2015). Does africa need a rotten kin theorem? experimental
  evidence from village economies. The Review of Economic Studies, 83(1), 231­268.

Joshi, V. M. (1969). Admissibility of the usual confidence sets for the mean of a univariate
  or bivariate normal population. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 40(3), 1042­1067.

Karlan, D., & List, J. A. (2007, December). Does price matter in charitable giving?
  evidence from a large-scale natural field experiment. American Economic Review, 97(5),
  1774-1793. doi: 10.1257/aer.97.5.1774

Karlan, D., Osei, R., Osei-Akoto, I., & Udry, C. (2014). Agricultural decisions after
  relaxing credit and risk constraints. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 597­
  652.

Karlan, D., & Zinman, J. (2008, June). Credit elasticities in less-developed economies:
  Implications for microfinance. American Economic Review, 98(3), 1040-68. doi: 10.1257/
  aer.98.3.1040

Karlan, D., & Zinman, J. (2009). Observing unobservables: Identifying information
  asymmetries with a consumer credit field experiment. Econometrica, 77(6), 1993­2008.

Kassler, D., Nichols-Barrer, I., & Finucane, M. (2019). Beyond treatment versus control:
  How bayesian analysis makes factorial experiments feasible in education research.
  Evaluation Review.

Kaur, S., Kremer, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2015). Self-control at work. Journal of Political
  Economy, 123(6), 1227­1277.

Kendall, C., Nannicini, T., & Trebbi, F. (2015, January). How do voters respond to in-
  formation? evidence from a randomized campaign. American Economic Review, 105(1),
  322-53. doi: 10.1257/aer.20131063

Kerwin, J. T., & Thornton, R. L. (2017). Making the grade: The trade-off between efficiency and
  effectiveness in improving student learning (Working Paper). University of Minnesota.


                                              38
Khan, A. Q., Khwaja, A. I., & Olken, B. A. (2015). Tax farming redux: Experimental
 evidence on performance pay for tax collectors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 131(1), 219­271.

Kleven, H. J., Knudsen, M. B., Kreiner, C. T., Pedersen, S., & Saez, E. (2011). Unwilling
  or unable to cheat? evidence from a tax audit experiment in Denmark. Econometrica,
  79(3), 651-692. doi: 10.3982/ECTA9113

Kohavi, R., Tang, D., & Xu, Y. (2020). Trustworthy online controlled experiments: A practical
 guide to a/b testing. Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/9781108653985

Kremer, M. (2003). Randomized evaluations of educational programs in developing
  countries: Some lessons. The American Economic Review, 93(2), pp. 102-106.

              ¨
Leeb, H., & Potscher,  B. M. (2005). Model selection and inference: Facts and fiction.
  Econometric Theory, 21(1), 21-59.

             ¨
Leeb, H., & Potscher, B. M. (2006). Can one estimate the conditional distribution of
  post-model-selection estimators? The Annals of Statistics, 2554­2591.

             ¨
Leeb, H., & Potscher, B. M. (2008). Can one estimate the unconditional distribution of
  post-model-selection estimators? Econometric Theory, 24(02), 338­376.

              ¨
Leeb, H., & Potscher, B. M. (2017). Testing in the presence of nuisance parameters: Some
  comments on tests post-model-selection and random critical values. In S. E. Ahmed
  (Ed.), Big and complex data analysis: Methodologies and applications (pp. 69­82). Cham:
  Springer International Publishing.

Lehmann, E. L., & Romano, J. P. (2005). Testing statistical hypotheses. Springer Science &
  Business Media.

List, J. A., Sadoff, S., & Wagner, M. (2011). So you want to run an experiment, now what?
  some simple rules of thumb for optimal experimental design. Experimental Economics,
  14(4), 439.

List, J. A., Shaikh, A. M., & Xu, Y. (2016). Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental
  economics. Experimental Economics, 1­21.

Lu, J., Qiu, Y., & Deng, A. (2019). A note on Type S/M errors in hypothesis testing.
  British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 72(1), 1-17.



                                             39
Mbiti, I., Muralidharan, K., Romero, M., Schipper, Y., Manda, C., & Rajani, R. (2019,
 04). Inputs, incentives, and complementarities in education: Experimental evidence
 from Tanzania. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3), 1627-1673. doi: 10.1093/qje/
 qjz010

McCloskey, A. (2017). Bonferroni-based size-correction for nonstandard testing prob-
 lems. Journal of Econometrics.

McCloskey, A. (2019). Asymptotically uniform tests after consistent model selection in
 the linear regression model. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 0(0), 1-35. doi:
 10.1080/07350015.2019.1592754

Muralidharan, K., & Sundararaman, V. (2011). Teacher performance pay: Experimental
 evidence from India. Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 39­77.

Olken, B. A. (2007). Monitoring corruption: Evidence from a field experiment in Indone-
  sia. Journal of Political Economy, 115(2), 200-249. doi: 10.1086/517935

Pallais, A., & Sands, E. G. (2016). Why the referential treatment? evidence from field
  experiments on referrals. Journal of Political Economy, 124(6), 1793­1828.

Ray, D. (1998). Development economics. Princeton University Press.

Rubin, D. B. (1974). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonran-
  domized studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5), 688.

Stoye, J. (2009). More on confidence intervals for partially identified parameters. Econo-
  metrica, 77(4), 1299­1315. doi: 10.3982/ECTA7347

Thornton, R. L. (2008, December). The demand for, and impact of, learning HIV status.
  American Economic Review, 98(5), 1829-63. doi: 10.1257/aer.98.5.1829

van der Vaart, A. (1998). Asymptotic statistics. Cambridge University Press.

Young, A. (2018, 11). Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical In-
  significance of Seemingly Significant Experimental Results. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 134(2), 557-598. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjy029




                                           40
     A     Appendix

     A.1    Papers with factorial designs published in Top-5 economics journals

           Table A.1: Papers with factorial designs published between 2007 and 2017 in top-5 economics journals sorted by citation
           count (as of July 4, 2019)

     Authors                  Title                             Journal   Year    Citations   Treatments   Interactions   Interactions     Data        Policy
                                                                                                            In Design       Included     Available   Evaluation

     Olken (2007)             Monitoring Corruption: Evi-        JPE      2007      1529          3             2              0           Yes          Yes
                              dence from a Field Experiment
                              in Indonesia
     Banerjee et al. (2007)   Remedying Education: Evi-          QJE      2007      1213          2             1              0           Yes          Yes
                              dence from Two Randomized
41




                              Experiments in India
     Duflo et al. (2011)      Peer Effects, Teacher Incen-       AER      2011      787           3             4              0           Yes          Yes
                              tives, and the Impact of Track-
                              ing: Evidence from a Random-
                              ized Evaluation in Kenya
     Kleven et al. (2011)     Unwilling or Unable to Cheat?     ECMA      2011      776           2             1              0           No           Yes
                              Evidence From a Tax Audit Ex-
                              periment in Denmark
     Karlan et al. (2014)     Agricultural Decisions after       QJE      2014      612           2             1              1           No           Yes
                              Relaxing Credit and Risk Con-
                              straints
     Bertrand et al. (2010)   What's Advertising Content         QJE      2010      522          14            85              0           Yes          No
                              Worth? Evidence from a Con-
                              sumer Credit Marketing Field
                              Experiment
                                                                                 Continued on next page
     Table A.1 ­ continued from previous page
     Authors                   Title                               Journal   Year    Citations   Treatments   Interactions   Interactions     Data        Policy
                                                                                                               In Design       Included     Available   Evaluation

     Karlan & List (2007)         Does Price Matter in Charita-     AER      2007      506           7            28              0           Yes          No
                                  ble Giving? Evidence from a
                                  Large-Scale Natural Field Ex-
                                  periment
     Thornton (2008)              The Demand for, and Impact        AER      2008      453           2             1              0           Yes          Yes
                                  of, Learning HIV Status
     Haushofer     &    Shapiro   The Short-term Impact of Un-      QJE      2016      393           6             8              3           Yes          Yes
     (2016)                       conditional Cash Transfers to
                                  the Poor: Experimental Evi-
                                  dence from Kenya
     Alatas et al. (2012)         Targeting the Poor: Evidence      AER      2012      330           4            16              0           Yes          Yes
                                  from a Field Experiment in In-
42




                                  donesia
     Karlan & Zinman (2008)       Credit Elasticities in Less-      AER      2008      311           3             2              0           Yes          No
                                  Developed Economies: Impli-
                                  cations for Microfinance
     Duflo et al. (2015a)         Education, HIV, and Early Fer-    AER      2015      282           3             3              1           Yes          Yes
                                  tility: Experimental Evidence
                                  from Kenya
     Andreoni et al. (2017)       Avoiding the Ask: A Field Ex-     JPE      2017      270           2             1              1           Yes          No
                                  periment on Altruism, Empa-
                                  thy, and Charitable Giving
     Jakiela & Ozier (2015)       Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin    ReStud    2016      245           3             6              6           Yes          No
                                  Theorem? Experimental Evi-
                                  dence from Village Economies
                                                                                    Continued on next page
     Table A.1 ­ continued from previous page
     Authors                   Title                               Journal   Year    Citations   Treatments   Interactions   Interactions     Data        Policy
                                                                                                               In Design       Included     Available   Evaluation

     Eriksson & Rooth (2014)     Do Employers Use Unemploy-         AER      2014      238          34           71680            0           Yes          No
                                 ment as a Sorting Criterion
                                 When Hiring? Evidence from
                                 a Field Experiment
     Allcott    &    Taubinsky   Evaluating Behaviorally Mo-        AER      2015      237           2             1              0           No           No
     (2015)                      tivated Policy: Experimental
                                 Evidence from the Lightbulb
                                 Market
     Flory et al. (2014)         Do Competitive Workplaces         ReStud    2015      204          10            24             12           Yes          No
                                 Deter Female Workers?        A
                                 Large-Scale Natural Field Ex-
                                 periment on Job Entry Deci-
43




                                 sions
     Brown et al. (2010)         Shrouded Attributes and In-        QJE      2010      189           3             6              6           No           No
                                 formation Suppression: Evi-
                                 dence from the Field
     DellaVigna et al. (2016)    Voting to Tell Others             ReStud    2017      169           4            15              0           Yes          No
     Fischer (2013)              Contract Structure,       Risk-   ECMA      2013      162           7             9              9           Yes          No
                                 Sharing,     and    Investment
                                 Choice
     Kaur et al. (2015)          Self-Control at Work               JPE      2015      154           8            16              0           Yes          No
     Cohen et al. (2015)         Price Subsidies, Diagnostic        AER      2015      151           3            7               7           Yes          Yes
                                 Tests, and Targeting of Malaria
                                 Treatment: Evidence from a
                                 Randomized Controlled Trial
                                                                                    Continued on next page
      Table A.1 ­ continued from previous page
      Authors                   Title                                      Journal     Year    Citations    Treatments     Interactions    Interactions       Data        Policy
                                                                                                                            In Design        Included       Available   Evaluation

      Blattman et al. (2017)          Reducing Crime and Violence:           AER       2017       135            2               1               1             Yes         Yes
                                      Experimental Evidence from
                                      Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
                                      in Liberia
      Khan et al. (2015)              Tax Farming Redux: Exper-              QJE       2016       133            6               8               0             Yes         Yes
                                      imental Evidence on Perfor-
                                      mance Pay for Tax Collectors
      Balafoutas et al. (2013)        What Drives Taxi Drivers? A          ReStud      2013       126            5               6               0             Yes         No
                                      Field Experiment on Fraud in
                                      a Market for Credence Goods
      Kendall et al. (2015)           How Do Voters Respond to In-           AER       2015       116            5               5               5             Yes         No
                                      formation? Evidence from a
44




                                      Randomized Campaign
      Pallais & Sands (2016)          Why the Referential Treat-             JPE       2016       85             3               12              0             No          No
                                      ment? Evidence from Field Ex-
                                      periments on Referrals

     Note: This table provides relevant information from all articles with factorial designs published in top-5 journals. Citation counts are from Google Scholar
     on July 4th of 2019. Treatments is the number of different treatments in the paper. "Interactions in Design" is the number of interactions in the experimental
     design. "Interactions Included" is the number of interactions included in the main specification of the paper. Data available, refers to whether the data
     is publicly available or not. Allcott & Taubinsky (2015) has two field experiments. The table refers to the second one. Section B.1.16 provides for more
     details. One of the three dimensions of randomization in Flory et al. (2014) does not appear in the publicly available data. Online Appendix B.1 (in
     http: / / mauricio -romero .com/ pdfs/ papers/ Appendix crosscuts .pdf ) describes the experimental design of each of the 27 papers.
A.1.1    All papers


         Figure A.1: Distribution of the t-value of interaction terms across studies




                                          0.30
                                          0.25
                                          0.20
                                Density

                                          0.15
                                          0.10
                                          0.05
                                          0.00




                                                 -4   -2       0                 2   4

                                                           Interaction t-value




Note: If studies have factorial designs that cross-randomize more than two treatments only two-way interactions are
included in this calculation. The vertical lines are at ±1.96.




                                                              45
A.1.2                                Ten most cited papers


                                         Figure A.2: Treatment estimates based on the long and the short model
                                    (a) Main treatment estimates                                                                                                                                 (b) Interaction
                        0.6




                                                                                                                                q                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                      Significant - 5% level
                                                                                                                                                                        0.25          Not significant - 5% level
                                                                                                                                            q
                        0.4




                                                                                                                                                                        0.20
Short model estimates




                                                                                                                                                    q



                                                                q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                    q
                        0.2




                                                                                                                q




                                                                                                                                                                 Frequency
                                                                                            q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                            q                                           q               0.15
                                                                                                        q           q       q

                                                                                                    q

                                                                          q                     q                                       q
                                                    q                               q               q                           q
                                                                          q                      q q q
                                            q                                        q q q
                                                                               q    qqq     q                                                                           0.10
                        0.0




                                                                               q    q
                                                                                  q qq
                                                                              q q q
                                                                                  q qq  qq
                                                                                          q
                                                                              qq  q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  qqq q q                                                       q
                                     q                  q                                    q
                                     q                                                      q           q
                                                                    q    qq
                                                            q       qq
                                                                              q
                                                                                        q
                                                                     q              q
                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                        0.05
                        -0.2




                                                                                                q

                                q
                                        q                       q
                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                               -0.4                         -0.2                  0.0                   0.2                     0.4                                            -0.6       -0.4        -0.2         0     0.2    0.4   0.6
                                                                    Long model estimates                                                                                                              Interaction coefficient

Note: Both figures show treatment estimates from the ten most cited papers with factorial designs and publicly
available data that do not include the interactions in the original study. Figure A.2a shows how the main treatment
estimates change across the short and the long model across studies. The median main treatment estimate from
the short model is 0.01, the median main treatment estimate from the long model is 0.01, the average absolute
difference between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 0.05, the median absolute difference
in percentage terms between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 131%, and 28% of treatment
estimates change sign when they are estimated using the long instead of the short model. Figure A.2b shows the
distribution of the interactions between the main treatments. We trim the top and bottom 1% of the distribution.
The median interaction is -0.00 (dashed vertical line), the median absolute value of the interactions is 0.05 (dashed
vertical line), 5.6% of interactions are significant at the 10% level, 2.6% are significant at the 5% level, and 0.0%
are significant at the 1% level, and the median relative absolute value of the interaction with respect to the main
treatment effect is 0.37.




                                                                                                                                                            46
Table A.2: Significance of treatment estimates based on the long and the short model


               Panel A: Significance at the 10% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction      Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant               49                13           62
               Significant                   6                 17           23
               Total                         55                30           85
               Panel B: Significance at the 5% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction      Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant               60                 9           69
               Significant                   4                 12           16
               Total                         64                21           85
               Panel C: Significance at the 1% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction      Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant               73                3            76
               Significant                   1                 8            9
               Total                         74                11           85
                 This table shows the number of coefficients that are significant
                 at a given level when estimating the long regression (columns)
                 and the short regression (rows). This table only includes infor-
                 mation from the ten most cited papers with factorial designs
                 and publicly available data that do not include the interactions
                 in the original study. Table 3 has data for all papers with fac-
                 torial designs and publicly available data that do not include
                 the interaction in the original study. Panel A uses a 10% signif-
                 icance level, Panel B uses 5%, and Panel C uses 1%.




                                             47
         Figure A.3: Distribution of the t-value of interaction terms across studies




                                          0.3
                                          0.2
                                Density

                                          0.1
                                          0.0




                                                -3   -2   -1           0             1   2   3

                                                               Interaction t-value




Note: If studies have factorial designs that cross-randomize more than two treatments only two-way interactions are
included in this calculation. The vertical lines are at ±1.96.




                                                                  48
A.1.3                                Policy experiments


                                            Figure A.4: Treatment estimates from the long and the short regression
                                    (a) Main treatment estimates                                                                                                                                           (b) Interaction
                        0.6




                                                                                                                                              q               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                Significant - 5% level
                                                                                                                                                                                                Not significant - 5% level
                                                                                                                                                          q                       0.15
                        0.4
Short model estimates




                                                                                                                                                              q



                                                                q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q q       q
                        0.2




                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.10




                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                q       q                                         q
                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                q               q       q
                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                      q
                                                                         q            q q q               q                                           q
                                                    q                    q        q    q                     q q                              q
                                                                           q                               q
                                            q
                        0.0




                                                                                  q       q
                                                                                      q           q
                                     q                  q                         q
                                     q
                                                                    q
                                                                         qq
                                                                         q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                            q       qq
                                                                    q         q
                                                                                              q
                                                                     q                    q
                                    q
                        -0.2




                                                                                                          q

                                q
                                        q                       q
                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                               -0.4                         -0.2                  0.0                           0.2                         0.4                                          -0.6       -0.4        -0.2         0     0.2    0.4   0.6
                                                                    Long model estimates                                                                                                                        Interaction coefficient

Note: Both figures show treatment estimates from the papers with factorial designs and publicly available data that
do not include the interactions in the original study and do policy evaluation. Figure A.4a shows how the main
treatment estimates change across the short and the long model across studies. The median main treatment estimate
from the short model is 0.06, the median main treatment estimate from the long model is 0.05, the average absolute
difference between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 0.07, the median absolute difference
in percentage terms between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 69%, and 21% of treatment
estimates change sign when they are estimated using the long model instead of the short model. Figure A.4b shows
the distribution of the interactions between the main treatments. We trim the top and bottom 1% of the distribution.
The median interaction is -0.01 (dashed vertical line), the median absolute value of interactions is 0.23 (solid
vertical line), 6.3% of interactions are significant at the 10% level, 3.2% are significant at the 5% level, and 0.0%
are significant at the 1% level, and the median relative absolute value of the interaction with respect to the main
treatment effect is 1.01.




                                                                                                                                                                      49
Table A.3: Significance of treatment estimates from the long and the short regression


               Panel A: Significance at the 10% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction      Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant               31                10           41
               Significant                   5                 21           26
               Total                         36                31           67
               Panel B: Significance at the 5% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction      Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant               43                 6           49
               Significant                   5                 13           18
               Total                         48                19           67
               Panel C: Significance at the 1% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction      Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant               56                3            59
               Significant                   1                 7            8
               Total                         57                10           67
                  This table shows the number of coefficients that are significant
                  at a given level when estimating the long regression (columns)
                  and the short regression (rows). This table only includes infor-
                  mation from papers with factorial designs and publicly avail-
                  able data that do not include the interactions in the original
                  study and do policy evaluation. Table 3 has data for all papers
                  with factorial designs and publicly available data that do not
                  include the interaction in the original study. Panel A uses a
                  10% significance level, Panel B uses 5%, and Panel C uses 1%.




                                              50
         Figure A.5: Distribution of the t-value of interaction terms across studies




                                          0.3
                                Density

                                          0.2
                                          0.1
                                          0.0




                                                -3   -2   -1           0             1   2   3

                                                               Interaction t-value




Note: If studies have factorial designs that cross-randomize more than two treatments only two-way interactions are
included in this calculation. The vertical lines are at ±1.96.




                                                                  51
A.1.4                               Studies with all interactions included

                                     Figure A.6: Treatment estimates based on the long and the short model
                                   (a) Main treatment estimates                                                                                           (b) Interaction
                        1.5




                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                 Significant - 5% level
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                 Not significant - 5% level
                                                                                                       q
                        1.0




                                                                                                   q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                   0.15
Short model estimates




                                                                                       q
                        0.5




                                                                                 q q
                                                                               qq
                                                                              q




                                                                                                                            Frequency
                                                                             q
                                                                            qq
                                                                 q   q      q q


                                                            qq    q
                                                                  qqq
                                                                      q
                                                                     q qq
                                                                                                                                   0.10
                        0.0




                                                          qq q qq q
                                                                  q
                                                              qqq
                                                                qq qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                           q
                                                           qqqq
                                                              qq
                                                               qq   q
                                                   q qq
                                                          q
                                                         qqqq q
                                                              qqq qq
                                                        qq   q
                                                           q q
                                                           q
                                                       q  q
                                                          q
                                                   q q qq
                                                       q  q q
                                                  qq
                                                   qq    q
                                                 qq
                                                   qq
                                                    qqq
                                                      qqq qq
                                                 q
                        -0.5




                                                                                                                                   0.05
                        -1.0




                               q
                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                   -1.0   -0.5             0.0                 0.5                     1.0       1.5                      -0.3                 -0.1               0.1    0.3
                                           Long model estimates                                                                                                Interaction coefficient

Note: Both figures show treatment estimates from the papers with factorial designs and publicly available data that do
not include the interaction in the original study and do policy evaluation. Figure A.6a shows how the main treatment
estimates change across the short and the long model across studies. The median main treatment estimate from the
short model is -0.03, the median main treatment estimate from the long model is -0.02, the average absolute
difference between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 0.05, the median absolute difference
in percentage terms between the treatment estimates of the short and the long model is 37%, and 15% of treatment
estimates change sign when they are estimated using the long or the short model. Figure A.6b shows the distribution
of the interactions between the main treatments. We trim the top and bottom 1% of the distribution. The median
interaction is -0.01 (dashed vertical line), the median absolute value of interactions is 0.08 (solid vertical line),
4.5% of interactions are significant at the 10% level, 1.1% are significant at the 5% level, and 0.0% are significant
at the 1% level, and the median relative absolute value of the interaction with respect to the main treatment effect is
0.52.




                                                                                                                       52
Table A.4: Significance of treatment estimates based on the long and the short model


               Panel A: Significance at the 10% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction     Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant              61                13          74
               Significant                  4                 39          43
               Total                        65                52          117
               Panel B: Significance at the 5% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction     Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant              68                10          78
               Significant                  6                 33          39
               Total                        74                43          117
               Panel C: Significance at the 1% level
                                     Without interaction
               With interaction     Not significant      Significant     Total
               Not significant              77                12          89
               Significant                  2                 26          28
               Total                        79                38          117
                 This table shows the number of coefficients that are significant
                 at a given level when estimating the long regression (columns)
                 and the short regression (rows). This table only includes infor-
                 mation from papers with factorial designs and publicly avail-
                 able data that do include the interaction in the original study.
                 Table 3 has data for all papers with factorial designs and pub-
                 licly available data that do not include the interaction in the
                 original study. Panel A uses a 10% significance level, Panel B
                 uses 5%, and Panel C uses 1%.




                                             53
         Figure A.7: Distribution of the t-value of interaction terms across studies




                                          0.5
                                          0.4
                                Density

                                          0.3
                                          0.2
                                          0.1
                                          0.0




                                                -3   -2    -1            0      1   2

                                                          Interaction t-value




Note: If studies have factorial designs that cross-randomize more than two treatments only two-way interactions are
included in this calculation. The vertical lines are at ±1.96.


A.2     Derivation of expressions for the regression coefficients
A.2.1    Derivation of the expressions for  1 ,  2 , and  12

Because the long regression model (3) is fully saturated, we have



                     1 = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0) ,
                     2 = E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0) ,
                    12 = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 1)
                              - [ E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0)] .

  Random assignment and the definition of potential outcomes in Equation (1) imply
that, for (t1 , t2 )  {0, 1} × {0, 1},

                      E (Y | T1 = t1 , T2 = t2 ) = E (Yt1 ,t2 | T1 = t1 , T2 = t2 )
                                                          = E (Yt1 ,t2 ) .




                                                             54
Thus, it follows that

                             1 = E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) ,
                             2 = E (Y0,1 - Y0,0 ) ,
                            12 = E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 - Y1,0 + Y0,0 ) .


A.2.2   Derivation of the expressions for s      s
                                          1 and  2

Here we derive (8). Equation (9) then follows from rearranging terms. The derivations
of Equations (10) and (11) are similar and thus omitted.

  For the short regression model (4), independence of T1 and T2 implies that

                          s
                          1 = E (Y | T1 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0) .


Consider

              E (Y | T1 = 1) = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 1) P( T2 = 1 | T1 = 1)
                                   + E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) P( T2 = 0 | T1 = 1)
                               = E (Y1,1 ) P( T2 = 1) + E (Y1,0 ) P( T2 = 0),

where the first equality follows from the law of iterated expectations and the second
equality follows by the definition of potential outcomes and random assignment. Simi-
larly, obtain

                E (Y | T1 = 0) = E (Y0,1 ) P( T2 = 1) + E (Y0,0 ) P( T2 = 0).

Thus, we have

              s
              1 = E (Y | T1 = 1) - E (Y | T1 = 0)
                   = E (Y1,1 - Y0,1 ) P ( T2 = 1) + E (Y1,0 - Y0,0 ) P ( T2 = 0) .

A.2.3   Consistency of the OLS estimators based on model (18)

Here we show that when the interaction cell is empty and T1 and T2 are randomly
assigned, the OLS estimators based on the regression model (18) are consistent for the
main effects.



                                              55
              ^   (  ^ , ^ ^                                        -1
   Define              0 1 ,  2 ) and   (  0 ,  1 ,  2 ) = E ( XX )    E ( XY ), where X =
                                              p
                                           ^
(1, T1 , T2 ) . Under standard conditions,    . Hence, it remains to show that 
                                                  
                                                                                      1 and
 2 are equal to the main effects. In what follows, we focus on  1 ; the derivation for 
                                                                    
                                                                                          2
is similar. To simplify the exposition, we define p1  P( T1 = 1), p2  P( T2 = 1) and
p12  P( T1 = 1, T2 = 1).
   Multiplying out yields the following expressions for    1:

        ( p2 p12 - p1 p2 ) E(Y ) + p1 ( p2 - p2
                                              2 ) E (Y | T1 = 1) + p2 ( p1 p2 - p12 ) E (Y | T2 = 1)
1     =                                                                                              .
                                 - p1 p2 - p1 p2
                                    2
                                               2 + p1 p2 + 2 p1 p2 p12 - p12
                                                                            2


Using the fact that the interaction cell is empty, which implies that p12 = 0, obtain

                  - p1 p2 E(Y ) + p1 p2 (1 - p2 ) E(Y | T1 = 1) + p1 p2
                                                                      2 E (Y | T2 = 1)
            1   =                                                                                 (19)
                                         - p2           2
                                            1 p2 - p1 p2 + p1 p2

Because p12 = 0, we have that

E(Y ) = E(Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) p1 + E(Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0)(1 - p1 - p2 ) + E(Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 1) p2 .
                                                                                        (20)
Combining (19) and (20) and simplifying yields:

                     1 = E (Y | T1 = 1, T2 = 0) - E (Y | T1 = 0, T2 = 0)


The result now follows by random assignment of T1 and T2 and the definition of potential
outcomes.


A.3     Variance reductions and power gains based on the short model
A.3.1   Formal power comparison between the short and the long model

Suppose that the researcher has access to a random sample {Yi , T1i , T2i }iN
                                                                            =1 and that the
data are generated according to the following linear model

                            Yi =  0 +  1 T1i +  2 T2i +  12 T1i T2i +  i ,

where  i  N (0, 2 ) is independent of ( T1i , T2i ) and 2 is known. Normality allows us to
compute the finite sample power and to formally compare the t-tests based on the long
and the short regression model. In what follows, we focus on  1 . The analysis for  2 is
symmetric and omitted.


                                                  56
   Define T 1  ( T11 , . . . , T1 N ) and T 2  ( T21 , . . . , T2 N ) . If the interaction effect is zero
(i.e.,  12 = 0), it follows from standard results that, conditional on (T 1 , T 2 ),                ^1 
N  1 , Var   ^ 1 and     ^ s  N  1 , Var      ^ s , where
                           1                    1


Var ^ 1 = 2 N1 + N2             and   Var ^ s = 2            N1 N3 + N1 N4 + N2 N3 + N2 N4
                                                                                                 .
                                            1
             N1 N2                                     N1 N2 N3 + N1 N2 N4 + N1 N3 N4 + N2 N3 N4

The following lemma computes and compares the finite sample power of a two-sided
t-test for the hypothesis H0 :  1 = 0 against H1 :  1 = 0 based on the short and the long
regression model. We show that because the variance of        ^ 1 is larger than the variance
of  ^ s , the t-test based on the short model exhibits higher finite sample power than the
      1
t-test based on the long model.29
   Let t  ^s =  ^ s /SE  ^ s and t
                                 ^ = ^ 1 /SE ^ 1 , let P denote probabilities under the as-
                  1        1                            1
sumption that  1 is the true coefficient and let c1-/2  -1 (1 - /2), where -1 is
the quantile function of the standard normal distribution and   (0, 0.5) is the nominal
significance level.

Lemma 1. Suppose that the assumptions stated in the text hold and that  12 = 0. Then:

 (i) The finite sample power of the t-tests based on the short and the long model is

                                                  1                                   1
         ^| > c1-/2 | T1 , T2
     P1 |t                            =               - c1-/2          +1-                + c1-/2       ,
                                                SE ^1                               SE ^1

     and

                                                   1                                   1
         ^s | > c1-/2 | T1 , T2
     P1 |t                             =               - c1-/2          +1-                + c1-/2          .
                                                 SE ^s                               SE ^s
                                                     1                                   1


(ii) The t-test based on the short model is more powerful than the t-test based on the long model:

                               ^s | > c1-/2 | T1 , T2  P |t
                           P1 |t                          ^| > c1-/2 | T1 , T2 .
                                                        1
  29 To   see this, note that

                    ^ 1 - Var ^ s = 2                     N3 N4 ( N1 + N2 )2
                Var             1                                                            0.
                                        N1 N2 ( N1 N2 N3 + N1 N2 N4 + N1 N3 N4 + N2 N3 N4 )




                                                    57
Proof. Part (i): Under the assumptions in the statement of the lemma,

                                ^ 1 - 1
                                
                                        | T 1 , T 2  N (0, 1) .
                                SE   ^1

It follows that, for z  R,

                                                   ^1
                                                   
              P1   ^ > z T 1, T 2
                   t                  = P1              > z T 1, T 2
                                                 SE  ^1
                                                 ^ 1 - 1
                                                                1
                                      = P1               > z-            T 1, T 2
                                                 SE   ^1      SE ^1

                                                 1
                                      =              -z .
                                               SE ^1

Thus, the power of a two-sided test is

      ^| > c1-/2 | T 1 , T 2
  P1 |t                              ^ > c1-/2 | T 1 , T 2 + P t
                                = P1 t                          ^ < -c1-/2 | T 1 , T 2
                                                              1

                                            1                             1
                                =               - c1-/2           +1-         + c1-/2      .
                                          SE ^1                         SE ^1

Similarly, one can show that

                                            1                             1
     ^s | > c1-/2 | T 1 , T 2
 P1 |t                          =               - c1-/2           +1-         + c1-/2      .
                                          SE ^s                         SE ^s
                                              1                             1

Part (ii): To establish the result, we show that the power is decreasing in the standard
error. Using the same arguments as in Part (i), it follows that the power of a t-test based
on an estimator   ~ 1 which satisfies

                                    ~ 1 - 1
                                    
                                ~
                                t           | T 1 , T 2  N (0, 1)
                                    SE(  ~)

is given by

                                             1                           1
         ~| > c1-/2 | T 1 , T 2 ) = 
    P1 (|t                                         - c1-/2        +1-          + c1-/2 .
                                            SE( ~)                      SE( ~)




                                                58
Consider30
      ~| > c1-/2 | T 1 , T 2 )
 P1 (|t                                      1               - 1         1                 - 1
                               =                  - c1-/2           -         + c 1 -  /2
         SE(  ~)                          SE(  ~)          SE( ~ )2    SE( ~)         
                                                                                          SE( ~ )2
                                         1            1                  1
                                     =                    + c1-/2 -            - c1-/2       0,
                                           ~
                                       SE( ) 2          ~
                                                    SE( )               SE( ~)

which follows from the shape of the normal distribution.


A.3.2       Power gains and the size of the interaction cell

Here we discuss how the power gains of the t-test based on the short model are related
to the size of the interaction cell. Recall that in a 2×2 factorial design, the variance of the
estimate of  1 is given by

Var ^ 1 = 2 N1 + N2             and     Var ^ s = 2            N1 N3 + N1 N4 + N2 N3 + N2 N4
                                                                                                   .
                                              1
             N1 N2                                       N1 N2 N3 + N1 N2 N4 + N1 N3 N4 + N2 N3 N4

Moreover, as shown in Lemma 1, the power of the t-test is decreasing in the variance of
the estimator.
  To illustrate, we simplify the problem by assuming that N1 = N2 = N3 , and hence
that the researcher simply has to determine the relative size of N4 . Let  be such that
N4 =  N . Thus, N1 = N2 = N3 = 1  3 (1 -  ) N . Then:



                  ^1                6                    ^s                6(1 + 2 )
              Var         2                   and    Var  1       2                       .
                                (1 -  ) N                              (1 -  ) N (1 + 8 )

   Figure A.1 shows how the variance changes for different values of . The more sample
we allocate to the interaction cell, the higher the variance of   ^ 1 (i.e., the lower the power)
of the long model. However, for the short model the relationship is non-monotonic. The
lowest variance (highest power) is achieved when the sample size is allocated equally
across cells (i.e.,  = 0.25). Intuitively, given that we ignore the fact that some individuals
get both treatments, at this point the size of the treatment and the control group for T1
is the same.
  30 See,   for example, Lemma 2 in Carneiro et al. (2017) for a similar argument.




                                                      59
            Figure A.1: Var ^ 1 and Var ^ s as the interaction cell becomes larger
                                          1


                                      0.012
                                                    N=1,000                 Long
                                                    1=1                     Short


                                      0.010




                               V(1)
                                      0.008




                                      0.006




                                      0.004


                                              0.0        0.1       0.2        0.3   0.4    0.5

                                                                         




A.4        Implementation details for Section 5.3
Recall that under Assumption 1,  12  {b12 : |b12 |  C }  B12 . Hence, our problem falls
into the regularized regression setting of Armstrong et al. (2019). We therefore adopt the
algorithm outlined in their Section 5 to our problem. The algorithm has three steps:31

 1. Obtain an estimator ^ 2 of 2 by taking the square root of the average of the squared
    residuals from estimating the long model by OLS.

                        |Bias( ^  )|
 2. Minimize cv                               SE ^  with respect to  over [0, ), where
                          SE( ^)



                                                                               T1 - T12     2
                                        SE ^                        ^2
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                 2
                                                                            (T1 - T12  ) T1

                                       ^                          C (T1 - T12  ) T12 
                                  Bias                    
                                                                 | | (T1 - T12  ) T1

      and  solves min T1 -  T12                           2
                                                          2    + | |. Denote the solution by  .
  31 The   implementation of the optimal confidence intervals with potentially heteroskedastic and non-
Gaussian errors mimics the common practice of applying OLS (the validity of which requires homoscedas-
ticity) in conjunction with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors, rather than weighted least squares.




                                                                  60
 3. Construct an optimal confidence interval as

                                               |Bias  ^  |
                                 ^  ± cv
                                                               SE ^  ,
                                                 SE  ^ 

      where
                                        ^   = ( T1 - T2    ) Y .
                                        
                                              ( T1 - T2    ) T1
      In this last step, we use the residuals from the initial estimate to construct a het-
      eroskedasticity robust version of SE  ^  .


A.5     Additional econometric approaches
In this section, we discuss two additional econometric approaches.


A.5.1    Model selection with a Bonferroni-style correction

A natural approach to control size in the presence of model selection is to take a least
favorable (LF) approach and to use the largest critical value across all values for the
nuisance parameter (e.g., D. W. K. Andrews & Guggenberger, 2009; Leeb & Potscher,     ¨
2017). However, it is well-known that this worst-case approach can exhibit poor power
properties. McCloskey (2017) suggests a procedure that improves upon the LF approach,
asymptotically controls size and has non-negligible power. The basic insight of this ap-
proach is that one can construct an asymptotically valid confidence interval for  12 . As a
consequence, one can search for the largest critical value over the values of  12 in the con-
fidence interval rather than over the whole parameter space as in the LF approach. The
uncertainty about the nuisance parameter (  12 ) and the test statistic can be accounted
for using a Bonferroni-correction. Alternatively, one can adjust critical values according
to the null limiting distributions that arise under drifting parameter sequences. We refer
to McCloskey (2017, 2019) for more details as well as specific implementation details.32
  32 We implement the adjusted Bonferroni critical values outlined in Section 3.2 and use the algorithm

"Algorithm Bonf-Adj" in the Appendix of McCloskey (2017). We employ conservative model selection
and the use a tuning parameter of 0.9, where  is the nominal level of the test.




                                                  61
Figure A.2: McCloskey (2017)'s Bonferroni-style correction controls size but does not
exhibit power gains relative to the long model
                                                                    (a) Size                                                                                                       (b) Power


                                      0.5     q        Long                                                                                           1.0
                                                       Short
                                                       Bonferroni correction
  Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                  Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                      0.4                                                                                                             0.8


                                                                                                                                                             q                 q    q          q          q         q          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q                                              q
                                      0.3                                                                                                             0.6          q                      q         q          q



                                                  N=1,000
                                                  1=2=0
                                      0.2                                                                                                             0.4



                                      0.1                                                                                                             0.2

                                             q     q      q
                                                               q
                                                                    q     q    q    q    q    q         q    q
                                                                                                                                                              q        Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2=0
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                       Short                            N=1,000
                                      0.0                                                                                                             0.0              Bonferroni correction            1=0.2

                                            -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                             -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0        0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                              12                                                                                                              12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size for figures A.2a
and A.2b is  = 0.05. For the model selection, the short model is estimated if one fails to reject  12 = 0 at the 5%
level.


   Figure A.2 reports the results of applying McCloskey (2017)'s Bonferroni-style correc-
tion to our running example. It shows that model selection with state-of-the-art Bon-
ferroni adjustments leads to tests that control size for all values of  12 . However, this
method can be conservative and does not yield power gains relative to the t-test based
on the long model, at least not over the regions of the parameter space considered here.33


A.5.2                                       An alternative inference approach based on Assumption 1

Here we discuss an alternative inference approach based on Assumption 1, which im-
plies that  12 lies in a compact interval,

                                                                                         12  [-C, C ]  l12 , u
                                                                                                             12 .


            For a given  12  l12 , u
                                   12 , the population regression coefficient from a regression of
      33 This
          conclusion is specific to our simulation design. Based on a different data generating process,
McCloskey (2017) finds local power gains relative to the long model. However, as we discuss in Section
5.1, the scope for improving power relative to the t-tests based on the long regression model is limited.



                                                                                                             62
Y -  12 T12 on X  (1, T1 , T2 ) is

                                         -1
                  (  12 )  E XX               E ( X (Y -  12 T12 ))
                                         -1                           -1
                            = E XX            E ( XY ) -  12 E XX          E ( XT12 )

                    -1
Note that E ( XX ) E ( XT12 )  (0 , 1 , 2 ) is the population regression coefficient from
a regression of T12 on X . Independence of T1 and T2 implies that 1 = E( T12 | T1 =
1) - E( T12 | T1 = 0) and 2 = E( T12 | T2 = 1) - E( T12 | T2 = 0) both of which are
positive. Consequently, the identified set for  t , t  {1, 2}, is given by

              t       t (  12 ),  12  [ l12 , u            u           l      l    u
                                              12 ] =  t (  12 ),  t (  12 )   t ,  t .


The lower bound lt can be estimated from an OLS regression of Y - u      12 T12 on X . Sim-
ilarly, the upper bound u                                                       l
                         t can be obtained from an OLS regression of Y -  12 T12 on X .
Under standard conditions, the OLS estimators   ^ l and ^ u are asymptotically normal and
                                                  t       t
                                ^ l           ^ u
the asymptotic variances Avar  t and Avar  t can be estimated consistently. We can
therefore apply the approach of Imbens & Manski (2004) and Stoye (2009) to construct
confidence intervals for  t :34


                                                                               
                                        Avar ^l                            ^
                                                                      Avar  tu
                      ^ lt - c I M ·          t   ^u
              CI1- =                            ,  t + cI M ·
                                                                               ,               (21)
                                           N                             N

where the critical value c I M solves
                                                                 
                                         ^u - 
                                              ^l
                                          t    t                  -  ( - c I M ) = 1 - .
                                                                 
           c I M +  N·                                           
                               max Avar ^ l , Avar ^l
                                          t         t


Imbens & Manski (2004) and Stoye (2009) show that (21) is a valid confidence interval
for  t .
  In Figure A.3, we report the rejection probabilities of a test that rejects if zero is not
in the confidence interval (21). For the purpose of illustration, we assume that C = 0.1
which implies that  12  [-0.1, 0.1]. Our results suggest that imposing prior knowledge
can improve power relative to the long regression model, while controlling size when
  34 By construction, the upper bound is always weakly larger than the lower bound. Hence Lemma 3 in
Stoye (2009) justifies the procedure in Imbens & Manski (2004).


                                                  63
this prior knowledge is in fact correct. However, this method exhibits substantial size
distortions when the prior knowledge is incorrect.

Figure A.3: Restrictions on the magnitude of  12 yield power gains if they are correct
but lead to incorrect inferences if they are not
                                                                   (a) Size                                                                                                            (b) Power



                                      0.5                          q     Long                                                                              1.0    q     Long
                                                                         Short                                                                                          Short
                                                                                                                                                                        IMS (|12|  0.1)
                                                                         IMS (|12|  0.1)
  Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                       Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                      0.4                                                                                                                  0.8


                                                                                                                                                                  q          q     q      q        q          q         q         q
                                      0.3                                                                                                                  0.6          q                     q          q         q         q

                                                                                                                                                                      N=1,000
                                                                             N=1,000
                                                                                                                                                                      1=0.2
                                                                             1=2=0
                                                                                                                                                                      2=0
                                      0.2                                                                                                                  0.4



                                      0.1                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                   q          q                         q               q
                                             q          q          q     q    q    q         q     q         q




                                      0.0                                                                                                                  0.0
                                            -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1        0.2       0.3                                                  -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0        0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                             12                                                                                                                   12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size for figures A.3a
and A.3b is  = 0.05. IMS refers to Imbens & Manski (2004) and Stoye (2009) approach for constructing valid
confidence intervals under prior knowledge about the magnitude of  12 .



A.6                                         Additional figures and tables


                                                 Table A.1: Articles published in top-5 journals between 2007 and 2017

                                                                                             AER            ECMA                                           JPE          QJE        ReStud              Total
                                                       Other                                 1218            678                                            367         445            563              3271

                                                       Field experiment                          43              9                                          14          45              13              124

                                                       Lab experiment                            61          16                                              5          10              18              110

                                                       Total                                 1322            703                                            386         500            594              3505



                                                                                                                  64
A.6.1                                                 Ignoring the interaction


                                                                                           Figure A.1: Long and short model: Size and power
                                                            (a) Size                                                                                                                            (b) Power

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                                         1.0     q        Long
                                                                            Short                                                                                                         Short
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                     Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                                  0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                    N=100
                                                                                                    1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                                  0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                                  0.2

                                           q     q    q     q
                                                                 q
                                                                       q    q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                q     q     q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q     q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q    N=100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1=0.2
                                    0.0                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                               2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                  -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                    12

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                                         1.0     q        Long
                                                                            Short                                                                                                         Short
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                     Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                                  0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                    N=500
                                                                                                    1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                q           q     q    q               q    q    q    q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q                      q    q                         q




                                    0.1                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                           q     q          q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N=500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1=0.2
                                                      q




                                    0.0                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                               2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                  -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                    12

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                                         1.0     q        Long
                                                                            Short                                                                                                         Short
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                     Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                                  0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                q                 q    q          q         q         q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                               q
                                    0.3                                                                                                                                  0.6          q                      q         q         q



                                                                                                    N=1,000
                                                                                                    1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                                  0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                                  0.2

                                           q     q    q
                                                            q
                                                                 q     q    q    q    q    q          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N=1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1=0.2
                                                                                                q




                                    0.0                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                              2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                  -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                    12

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                                         1.0    q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                          Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q     q    q



                                                                            Short                                                                                                         Short
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                     Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                                  0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                               N=10,000
                                                                                               1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                                  0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                           q     q    q     q    q          q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                      q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N=10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1=0.2
                                                                       q




                                    0.0                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                         2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                  -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                    12


Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures
is  = 0.05.


                                                                                                                 65
                                                                       Figure A.2: Long and short model: Power curves

                                    1.0                                                                                                                        1.0
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                           Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.8                                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.3
                                    0.6                                                                                                                        0.6



                                    0.4                                                                                                                        0.4    q                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.2
                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                   q




                                    0.2                                                                       1=0.3                                            0.2               q                                         q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                       q                              q
                                           q
                                                 q                                                   q
                                                                                                          q   1=0.2                                                                                              q
                                                                                                              1=0.1
                                                      q                                         q                                                                                           q

                                           q     q    q
                                                            q
                                                            q    q
                                                                 q     q    q
                                                                            q    q    q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q    q    q
                                                                                                          q   1=0                                                     q     q    q     q    q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q    q    q    q    q    q    1=0
                                    0.0        N=100                                                                                                           0.0        N=500

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                                         -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                         12

                                    1.0                                                                                                                        1.0    q     q    q                                         q    q    q   1=0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                              1=0.3
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                           Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.8                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                           q                                                              q


                                    0.6                                                                       1=0.2                                            0.6
                                                 q                                                   q




                                    0.4                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                      q                                         q




                                                                                                                                                                                                  q         q
                                                            q                              q
                                    0.2                                                                       1=0.1                                            0.2
                                                                 q                    q



                                                                                                               1=0                                                                                                                        1=0
                                                                       q         q
                                           q     q    q     q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q    q    q                                                           q     q    q     q    q     q         q    q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                    0.0        N=1,000                                                                                                         0.0        N=10,000

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                                         -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                         12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures
is  = 0.05. In each figure, dashed lines show the power for the long model, while solid lines show power for the
short model.




                                                                                                                      66
A.6.2                                                 Model selection (pre-testing)


                                                                                                     Figure A.3: Model selection: Size and power
                                                            (a) Size                                                                                                                                     (b) Power

                                    0.5                         q      Long                                                                                                      1.0     q        Long
                                                                       Short                                                                                                                      Short
                                                                       Model selection                                                                                                            Model selection
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                                          0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                                          0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                           q     q    q     q
                                                                 q
                                                                       q    q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q     q      q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q     q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q    N=100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q  q

                                                                                                    N=100                                                                                                                                          1=0.2
                                    0.0                                                             1=2=0                                                                        0.0                                                               2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                          -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                            12

                                    0.5                         q      Long                                                                                                      1.0     q        Long
                                                                       Short                                                                                                                      Short
                                                                       Model selection                                                                                                            Model selection
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                                          0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                                          0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                        q            q    q    q               q    q    q    q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q                      q    q                         q




                                    0.1                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                           q     q          q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N=500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1=0.2
                                                      q
                                                                                                    N=500
                                    0.0                                                             1=2=0                                                                        0.0                                                               2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                          -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                            12

                                    0.5                         q      Long                                                                                                      1.0     q        Long
                                                                       Short                                                                                                                      Short
                                                                       Model selection                                                                                                            Model selection
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                                          0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                        q                 q    q          q         q         q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                              q
                                    0.3                                                                                                                                          0.6          q                      q         q         q




                                    0.2                                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                           q     q    q
                                                            q
                                                                 q     q    q    q    q    q          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N=1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1=0.2
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                    N=1,000
                                    0.0                                                             1=2=0                                                                        0.0                                                              2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                          -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                            12

                                    0.5                         q      Long                                                                                                      1.0    q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q     q    q



                                                                       Short                                                                                                                      Short
                                                                       Model selection                                                                                                            Model selection
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                                          0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                                          0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                           q     q    q     q    q          q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                      q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N=10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1=0.2
                                                                       q
                                                                                               N=10,000
                                    0.0                                                        1=2=0                                                                             0.0                                                         2=0

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                                          -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                                            12


Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures
is  = 0.05. For the model selection, the short model is estimated if one fails to reject  12 = 0 at the 5% level.


                                                                                                                         67
A.6.3                                                 Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test


                                                                Figure A.4: Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test: Size and power
                                                            (a) Size                                                                                                               (b) Power

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                            1.0     q        Full
                                                                            Short                                                                                            Short
                                                                            EMW                                                                                              EMW
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                        Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                     0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                     0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                     0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                            q               q                         q                                                            q     q     q          q     q    q           q         q    q
                                           q     q    q                q         q    q    q    q                                                                                    q                     q          q               q
                                                                 q                                         q
                                                                                                    N=100                                                                                                         N=100         2=0
                                    0.0                                                             1=2=0                                                   0.0                                                   1=0.2

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                     -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0         0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                       12

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                            1.0     q        Full
                                                                            Short                                                                                            Short
                                                                            EMW                                                                                              EMW
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                        Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                     0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                     0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                   q           q     q    q                q     q    q    q          q
                                                                                                                                                                         q                      q    q                          q




                                    0.1                                                                                                                     0.2
                                           q     q          q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2=0
                                                      q
                                                                                                    N=500                                                                                                         N=500
                                    0.0                                                             1=2=0                                                   0.0                                                   1=0.2

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                     -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0         0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                       12

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                            1.0     q        Full
                                                                            Short                                                                                            Short
                                                                            EMW                                                                                              EMW
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                        Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                                                                                                   q                 q    q          q           q         q          q
                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                q
                                    0.3                                                                                                                     0.6          q                      q          q          q




                                    0.2                                                                                                                     0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                 q          q                         q
                                           q          q          q     q    q    q         q          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2=0
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                    N=1,000                                                                                                    N=1,000
                                    0.0                                                             1=2=0                                                   0.0                                                1=0.2

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                     -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0         0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                       12

                                    0.5                                q    Long                                                                            1.0    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                         q     q
                                                                                                                                                                             Full
                                                                                                                                                                                     q    q     q    q     q     q    q    q    q     q



                                                                            Short                                                                                            Short
                                                                            EMW                                                                                              EMW
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                        Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                     0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                     0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                     0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                     0.2
                                           q     q          q    q               q    q    q          q    q
                                                      q                     q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2=0
                                                                       q
                                                                                               N=10,000                                                                                                   N=10,000
                                    0.0                                                        1=2=0                                                        0.0                                           1=0.2

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3                                                     -0.3        -0.2       -0.1       0.0         0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                       12


Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures
is  = 0.05.


                                                                                                                68
                                Figure A.5: Long model and Elliott et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test: Power curves

                                    1.0                                                                                                                        1.0
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                           Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.8                                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.3
                                    0.6                                                                                                                        0.6



                                    0.4                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.2


                                    0.2                                                                       1=0.3                                            0.2
                                                                                                              1=0.2                                                                                                                      1=0.1
                                                                                                              1=0.1
                                           q     q    q     q
                                                            q    q     q
                                                                       q    q
                                                                            q    q    q    q    q    q
                                                                                                     q    q   1=0                                                     q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q    q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q    q    1=0
                                    0.0        N=100                                                                                                           0.0        N=500

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                                         -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                         12

                                    1.0                                                                                                                        1.0                                                                       1=0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.1
                                                                                                              1=0.3
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                           Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.8                                                                                                                        0.8



                                    0.6                                                                       1=0.2                                            0.6



                                    0.4                                                                                                                        0.4



                                    0.2                                                                       1=0.1                                            0.2


                                           q     q
                                                 q    q     q
                                                            q    q     q
                                                                       q    q    q    q
                                                                                      q    q    q
                                                                                                q    q    q    1=0                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q    q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                    0.0        N=1,000                                                                                                         0.0        N=10,000

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                                         -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                         12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures
is  = 0.05. In each figure, dashed lines show the power for the long model, while solid lines show power for Elliott
et al. (2015)'s nearly optimal test.




                                                                                                                      69
A.6.4                                              Restrictions on the magnitude of  12 : Armstrong et al. (2019)


                                                                 Figure A.6: Armstrong et al. (2019)'s approach: Size and power
                                                         (a) Size                                                                                                       (b) Power

                                    0.5          Long                                                                                                  1.0          Long
                                                 EMW                                                                                                                EWM
                                                 AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                    AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                   Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N=100
                                                                                 N=100                                                                                                                  1=0.2
                                    0.0                                          1=2=0                                                                 0.0                                              2=0

                                          -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3                                                                     -0.3    -0.2   -0.1      0.0   0.1   0.2      0.3
                                                                   12                                                                                                                 12

                                    0.5          Long                                                                                                  1.0          Long
                                                 EMW                                                                                                                EWM
                                                 AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                    AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                   Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N=500
                                                                                 N=500                                                                                                                  1=0.2
                                    0.0                                          1=2=0                                                                 0.0                                              2=0

                                          -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3                                                                     -0.3    -0.2   -0.1      0.0   0.1   0.2      0.3
                                                                   12                                                                                                                 12

                                    0.5          Long                                                                                                  1.0          Long
                                                 EMW                                                                                                                EWM
                                                 AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                    AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                   Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    N=1,000
                                                                                 N=1,000                                                                                                            1=0.2
                                    0.0                                          1=2=0                                                                 0.0                                          2=0

                                          -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3                                                                     -0.3    -0.2   -0.1      0.0   0.1   0.2      0.3
                                                                   12                                                                                                                 12

                                    0.5          Long                                                                                                  1.0          Long
                                                 EMW                                                                                                                EWM
                                                 AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                    AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                   Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                0.8



                                    0.3                                                                                                                0.6



                                    0.2                                                                                                                0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  N=10,000
                                                                               N=10,000                                                                                                           1=0.2
                                    0.0                                        1=2=0                                                                   0.0                                        2=0

                                          -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3                                                                     -0.3    -0.2   -0.1      0.0   0.1   0.2      0.3
                                                                   12                                                                                                                 12


Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures
is  = 0.05.


                                                                                              70
                                      Figure A.7: Long model and Armstrong et al. (2019)'s approach: Power curves

                                    1.0                                                                                                                        1.0
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                           Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.8                                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.3
                                    0.6                                                                                                                        0.6



                                    0.4                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.2


                                    0.2                                                                       1=0.3                                            0.2
                                                                                                              1=0.2                                                                                                                      1=0.1
                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                              q
                                                 q                                                            1=0.1                                                         q                                                   q
                                                                                                              1=0                                                                                                                         1=0
                                           q          q     q    q     q    q    q    q    q    q    q    q                                                                      q                                    q    q
                                           q     q    q     q          q    q    q    q    q    q    q                                                                q     q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q    q          q    q    q    q         q    q
                                                                 q                                        q                                                                      q                q    q    q              q


                                    0.0        N=100                                                                                                           0.0        N=500

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                                         -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                         12

                                    1.0                                                                                                                        1.0                                                                       1=0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1=0.1
                                                                                                              1=0.3
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                           Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.8                                                                                                                        0.8



                                    0.6                                                                       1=0.2                                            0.6



                                    0.4                                                                                                                        0.4



                                    0.2                                                                       1=0.1                                            0.2
                                           q                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                              q
                                                 q                                                   q
                                                      q                                         q                                                                           q                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1=0
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                               1=0
                                                            q                              q                                                                                           q                              q
                                           q     q    q     q    q     q    q    q    q
                                                                                      q    q    q    q    q                                                           q     q    q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q     q    q    q    q    q    q    q    q
                                                                       q    q    q                                                                                                                     q    q

                                    0.0        N=1,000                                                                                                         0.0        N=10,000

                                          -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3                                                         -0.3       -0.2       -0.1       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3
                                                                           12                                                                                                                         12

Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. The size across all figures is
 = 0.05. In each figure, dashed lines show the power for the long model, while solid lines show power for Armstrong
et al. (2019)'s approach based on restrictions on the magnitude of  12 .




                                                                                                                      71
A.6.5                                             Leaving the interaction cell empty


                                                                                  Figure A.8: No factorial design: Size and power
                                                        (a) Size                                                                                                                   (b) Power

                                    0.5                     Long                                                                                                 1.0          Long
                                                            Short                                                                                                             Short
                                                            EMW                                                                                                               EMW
                                                            AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                   AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                            No factorial design                                                                                               No factorial design


                                    0.3                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                    N=100
                                                                                    1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                           N=100        2=0
                                    0.0                                                                                                                          0.0                                       1=0.2

                                          -0.3   -0.2    -0.1    0.0     0.1      0.2   0.3                                                                            -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0      0.1      0.2     0.3
                                                                 12                                                                                                                             12

                                    0.5                     Long                                                                                                 1.0          Long
                                                            Short                                                                                                             Short
                                                            EMW                                                                                                               EMW
                                                            AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                   AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0
                                    0.4                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                            No factorial design                                                                                               No factorial design


                                    0.3                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                    N=500
                                                                                    1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                           N=500        2=0
                                    0.0                                                                                                                          0.0                                       1=0.2

                                          -0.3   -0.2    -0.1    0.0     0.1      0.2   0.3                                                                            -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0      0.1      0.2     0.3
                                                                 12                                                                                                                             12

                                    0.5                     Long                                                                                                 1.0          Long
                                                            Short                                                                                                             Short
                                                            EMW                                                                                                               EMW
                                                            AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                   AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                            No factorial design                                                                                               No factorial design


                                    0.3                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                    N=1,000
                                                                                    1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                        N=1,000     2=0
                                    0.0                                                                                                                          0.0                                    1=0.2

                                          -0.3   -0.2    -0.1    0.0     0.1      0.2   0.3                                                                            -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0      0.1      0.2     0.3
                                                                 12                                                                                                                             12

                                    0.5                     Long                                                                                                 1.0          Long
                                                            Short                                                                                                             Short
                                                            EMW                                                                                                               EMW
                                                            AKK (|12|  0.1)                                                                                                   AKK (|12|  0.1)
Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                                                                                                             Probability of rejecting H0 : 1=0




                                    0.4                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                            No factorial design                                                                                               No factorial design


                                    0.3                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                  N=10,000
                                                                                  1=2=0
                                    0.2                                                                                                                          0.4



                                    0.1                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                      N=10,000     2=0
                                    0.0                                                                                                                          0.0                                  1=0.2

                                          -0.3   -0.2    -0.1    0.0     0.1      0.2   0.3                                                                            -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0.0      0.1      0.2     0.3
                                                                 12                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                           = 0.29 N and
Note: Simulations are based on sample size N, normal iid errors, and 10,000 repetitions. NT
  = 0.42 N. The size across all figures is  = 0.05.
N1


                                                                                                        72
