                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHO PAYS FOR AND WHO BENEFITS FROM MINIMUM WAGE INCREASES?
   EVIDENCE FROM ISRAELI TAX DATA ON BUSINESS OWNERS AND WORKERS

                                         Lev Drucker
                                        Katya Mazirov
                                        David Neumark

                                      Working Paper 26571
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26571


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




The views expressed are those of the authors alone, and do not represent the views of the Israel
Ministry of Finance or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are very grateful to
Tatiana Slobodnitsky for help with tax data issues, and to seminar participants at Beijing Normal
University, DIW-Berlin, and Renmin University for helpful comments.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lev Drucker, Katya Mazirov, and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Pays for and Who Benefits from Minimum Wage Increases? Evidence from Israeli Tax
Data on Business Owners and Workers
Lev Drucker, Katya Mazirov, and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 26571
December 2019, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. H22,H23,J23,J38

                                         ABSTRACT

A key goal of a higher minimum wage is income redistribution towards low-income families.
Existing research on the minimum wage focuses on the impact on affected workers, but is silent
on the incomes of the owners of businesses who pay for a higher minimum wage. Higher
minimum wages will do more to redistribute income if the owners of businesses who pay the
higher minimum are at the top of the income distribution. Conversely, if minimum wage
employers have relatively low incomes, the redistributional effects are weakened. We study
evidence on this question using a unique administrative dataset on the universe of tax records for
Israel, in the period surrounding a large minimum wage increase. We find that the minimum
wage hike reduced profits of companies, with minimum-wage intensive companies bearing the
bulk of the cost and adjusting their workforces more aggressively, and profits declining more for
lower-income business owners. Moreover, owners of businesses with higher shares of minimum-
wage workers ranked at the bottom of the income distribution of business owners, and their
incomes were comparable to those of mid-to-high level workers. In most cases, spouses of
business owners earn less than the owners while spouses of minimum wage workers earn more,
further reducing the redistributive effect of the minimum wage increase.

Lev Drucker                                     David Neumark
Israel Ministry of Finance                      Department of Economics
Eliezer Kaplan 1                                University of California, Irvine
Jerusalem                                       3151 Social Science Plaza
Israel                                          Irvine, CA 92697
lev.drucker@gmail.com                           and NBER
                                                dneumark@uci.edu
Katya Mazirov
Israel Ministry of Finance
Eliezer Kaplan 1
Jerusalem
Israel
katyam@mof.gov.il
1. Introduction

           At its core, the minimum wage is a redistributive policy, meant to increase incomes of low-income

families. In the U.S. context, Senator Edward Kennedy, a perennial sponsor of legislation to raise the

minimum wage, argued that "The minimum wage was one of the first ­ and is still one of the best ­ anti-

poverty programs we have" (Clymer, 1999, p. 449).

           Existing research on the minimum wage focuses on the impact on affected workers. Many of the

research findings on the minimum wage are contested. There is little doubt that higher minimum wages

raise wages of affected workers. There is a good deal of recent evidence that higher minimum wages

reduce employment of the least-skilled (e.g., Belman and Wolfson, 2019; Clemens and Wither, 2019;

Kabátek, 2015; Gopalan et al., forthcoming; Meer and West, 2016; Monras, 2019), but this conclusion is

contested, and there is recent evidence to the contrary (e.g., Cengiz et al., 2019), and also recent evidence

that far more workers may experience wage gains than job losses, in part because estimated job losses are

small (Harasztosi and Lindner, 2019). 1

           In terms of redistribution, researchers have focused on whether minimum wages reduce poverty or

"near-poverty" (being below one-half of the poverty line). Most research tends to find no statistically

significant evidence of poverty reductions (e.g., Sabia and Nielsen, 2015), although the point estimates tend

to point in this direction (see, e.g., Neumark, 2016; Dube, 2018), and one recent study finds evidence of

substantial poverty reductions (Dube, 2019).

           Another potentially important dimension of the relationship between the distributional effects of

minimum wages and the impact of minimum wages is not who benefits from the minimum wage, but who

pays for it. However, the research literature is silent on the incomes of the owners of businesses who pay

for a higher minimum wage. Higher minimum wages will do more to redistribute income if the owners of

businesses who pay the higher minimum are at the top of the income distribution. Conversely, if minimum

wage employers have relatively low incomes, the redistributional effects are weakened, and ­ on this



1
    For a comprehensive review of recent evidence, see Neumark (2019a).



                                                          1
dimension at least ­ minimum wages would be less effective at redistributing from high-income individuals

or families to low-income individuals or families. 2

         Casual evidence on the distributional effects of the incidence of the minimum wage on businesses

appears to point in a number of possible directions. There are likely many relatively small, lower-income

business owners ("mom and pop" shops) who use low-skill workers and hence will have to pay for higher

minimum wages. But there are also some large corporations (e.g., Wal-Mart) that also pay relatively low

wages. On the other hand, there are clearly many higher-income business owners, investors, and salaried

workers who will not pay directly for a higher minimum wage, and it seems likely that this is true of many

of those who have had the highest income growth in recent years.3

         The likely reason for the absence of evidence on the distributional effects of the incidence of the

minimum wage on businesses is the lack of data on the incomes of business owners. In this paper, we begin

to fill this void, using a unique administrative dataset on the universe of tax records for both workers and

firms in Israel. We study a period surrounding a large minimum wage increase that was an exogenous event

driven by political bargaining, to provide evidence on the incidence of the costs of higher minimum wages

with respect to the family incomes of business owners, and the family income distribution more generally.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first evidence of its kind on the incomes of business owners who

pay for higher minimum wages and their position in the income distribution.

         We find that the minimum wage hike reduced profits of companies, with minimum-wage intensive

companies bearing the bulk of the cost and adjusting their workforces more aggressively, and profits

declining more for lower-income business owners. Moreover, owners of businesses with higher shares of

minimum-wage workers ranked at the bottom of the income distribution of business owners, and their

incomes were comparable to those of mid-to-high level workers. In most cases, spouses of business owners



2
  In this sense, the minimum wage could be quite different from other redistributional policies financed by taxes ­
such as the U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit. Redistributional policies financed by taxes by construction distribute
income from those who pay the most taxes, although how progressive this financing side of the redistribution is
depends, of course, on the progressivity of the tax system.
3
  For example, Piketty et al. (2018) note that in the United States, the surge in top incomes since 2000 has been mostly
associated with capital income.


                                                           2
earn less than the owners while spouses of minimum wage workers earn more, further reducing the

redistributive effect of the minimum wage increase.

2. Minimum Wages in Israel

         The first collective labor agreement regarding minimum wages in Israel was signed in 1972, setting

the minimum wage as a percentage of the average wage in the economy. 4 Since 1987, instead, the
                                                                                 3F




minimum wage level is set by legislation, with the initial statutory constraint that the minimum wage

cannot fall below 39% of the average wage, raised to 45% in April 1988 and 47.5 in April 1997. 5           4F




However, indexation to the average wage was not done consistently; rather, the ratio was used as guidance

when there was a change in nominal value of the minimum wage.

         The minimum wage "event" we study is the set of increases that occurred from 2006 through 2008.

There were no increases in the nominal minimum wage in the few years preceding 2006. In the subsequent

three years the nominal minimum wage was increased in three increments, leading to a sizable increase in

the minimum wage relative to the statutory floor from 2006 to 2008. There were then no changes to the

nominal minimum wage from 2008 until 2011. In addition to the minimum wage history providing stable

pre- and post-periods for the 2006 to 2008 increases, these increases were large and plausibly exogenous

(as discussed more below).

         The variation in the nominal wage in Israel over the longer term, and during our sample period ­

2003-2010 ­ is depicted in Figure 1. For the three-year period 2006-2008, the total nominal increase was

15.4%. 6 This figure shows the relative stability of the statutory minimum wage in windows before and after

the 2006-2008 increases. There were frequent increases beginning in 2011, covering the period until our


4
  The minimum wage is set in hourly and monthly terms, in a compatible manner based on full-time work.
5
  The average wage is computed by the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) based on administrative records provided
by the National Insurance Institute, covering the entire economy. It includes both full-time and part-time jobs.
6
  This increase is small relative to increases in the U.S. minimum wage. For example, three increases from 2007-2009
raised the federal minimum wage by a cumulative 41% (nominal). However, keep in mind that U.S. minimum wage
increases are much less frequent, with increases, in recent decades, only in 1990-91, 1996-97, and the last increases in
2007-2009 (over 10 years ago). Most of the U.S. evidence focuses on state minimum wage increases, which are often
much smaller, with increases in the range of 25 or 50 cents (a few percent) very common. For example, see the state
minimum wage database at:
http://www.economics.uci.edu/~dneumark/MW_LW%20dataset%20updated%20through%202019%20-%201-01-
20%20Update.csv.



                                                           3
data set ends in 2016. 7 Our data only extend through 2016; but as the figure shows, even a couple more

years of data would not give us a post-period with a stable nominal minimum wage which to study the

latter increases in the minimum wage.

        The 2006-2008 minimum wage increases led to a large relative increase in the minimum wage

relative to the average wage in this period, as there was only moderate growth in average wages or prices

from 2006-2009. Figure 2 depicts the real increases (relative to the CPI published by the Israeli Central

Bureau of Statistics).

        The minimum wage increases that occurred in 2006-2008 were the result of a lengthy campaign led

by the Labor Party (HaAvoda), which won 19 seats (16%) in the elections for the 17th Knesset (Israel's

parliament). After the 2006 elections, the Labor Party became one of the key government coalition parties,

led by Amir Peretz, who previously served as the head of largest labor union. Increasing the minimum

wage and supporting "fair" earnings was among Labor's pre-election commitments (see Appendix A).

However, there were no substantive changes in labor market developments in the period leading up to the

election; Figure 3 shows the time-series on the unemployment and participation rates. Moreover, the

minimum wage did not get much attention prior to the election or implementation of the increases; the

Google trends data graphed in Figure 4 show no clear increase prior to the minimum wage hikes beginning.

Alternatively, one could read the absence of any uptick in searches on the minimum wage as an indicator

that the minimum wage increase was not predicted (Choi and Varian, 2012). Hence, the increases in the

minimum wage in this period did not result from labor market developments, but rather were an exogenous

event driven by political bargaining.

        Figure 3 also shows that there were no significant sharp cyclical changes around the time of the

minimum wage increases we study, as measured by the output gap. Moreover, our pre- and post-periods


7
  The next minimum wage increases following those in 2006-2008 occurred in July 2011 and October 2012, when the
minimum wage was raised to NIS (New Israeli Shekels) 4,100 and then NIS 4,300. In November 2014, the
"Histadrut" (the national labor union) and the Coordinating Bureau of Economic Organizations agreed to raise the
minimum wage in the business sector, which later also applied to public sector employees (with certain limitations).
As a part of the agreement, the minimum wage increased to 5,000 NIS in three stages, in April 2015, July 2016, and
January 2017. On March 30, 2015, an additional collective agreement was signed between the Histadrut and
Coordinating Bureau of Economic Organizations, raising the minimum wage to NIS 5,300 in December 2017.


                                                         4
(2004-2005 and 2009-2010) were at quite similar points in the business cycle, in terms of both level and

trends. Nonetheless, in all of our analyses we are careful to compare developments in businesses more

affected vs. businesses less affected by the minimum wage increase, even within industry, to net out any

aggregate or sector-specific influences.

3. Research on the Effects of Minimum Wages on Firms

        The literature on the effects of minimum wages on labor markets is voluminous. For example,

Neumark and Wascher (2007) review over 100 studies of the employment effects of minimum wages,

focusing only on papers since the early 1990s. Belman and Wolfson (2019) review many recent studies of

employment effects. Broader reviews of the minimum wage literature are provided in the books by

Neumark and Wascher (2008), Belman and Wolfson (2014), and, earlier, Card and Krueger (1995). These

broader reviews focus mostly on employment effects, but also cover many other outcomes, including

effects on poverty, the distribution of wages and income, skill accumulation, and prices.

        As noted in the Introduction, we know of no work that studies the incidence of minimum wages on

business owners who pay for higher minimum wages, and their position in the income distribution.

However, the very limited literature on the effects of minimum wages on firms might provide some clues

as to how minimum wages affect business income or profits, and for which businesses.

        Card and Krueger (1995) do an event study of the effects of the 1990-1991 federal minimum wage

increases ­ and news stories related to them ­ on the daily excess returns of stock prices for two

subsamples of firms: one of 110 firms in industries with the highest proportions of minimum wage

workers; and the second of 28 firms (mostly in the restaurant industry) that referred to the 1990-1991

increases in their annual reports. They also do a similar analysis of events related to a proposal to increase

the minimum wage to $4.75 (it went to $4.25 in 1991). The results of these analyses are rather weak,

without a clear indication that profits fall, although as Card and Krueger noted, this could be because the

news events studied did not provide much relevant information to market participants. 8 This research



8
 Similar ambiguous findings are reported for an event analysis of stock prices in New Zealand (Pacheco and Naiker,
2006).


                                                         5
applies to publicly-held firms, and hence cannot provide direct evidence on the incomes of those affected

by paying for higher minimum wages. Stocks are on average held by high-income people, but they are also

held by pension funds. 9 (Our analysis also faces the challenge of not being able to interpret data on the

effects of minimum wages on the profits of publicly-held firms in terms of the income of owners, but we

have data on both publicly-held and non-publicly-held firms.)

        More compelling evidence on the effects on firms comes from an analysis of the 1999 introduction

of the minimum wage in the United Kingdom (Draca et al., 2011), because data used capture firm-level

profits. Draca et al. use pre-1999 information on the distribution of wages (triangulating different sources

of information on average wages and the distribution of wages) to measure differences in how firms are

impacted, and find significant reductions in profitability (but no impact on employment). One virtue of one

of the data sets used ­ the FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy) data ­ is that it covers a wide range of

firms, including smaller and medium-sized firms (and of course many firms not listed on the stock market),

although some small firms are excluded from having to report data. A related analysis of data on U.K.

residential care homes ­ a very low-wage sector ­ finds corroborating evidence. Based on the FAME data,

the negative effect of the minimum wage on profits is more evident for firms with more market power (as

measured by the Lerner Index, based on the price-cost margin), which the authors argue is consistent with

more competitive firms being more likely to pass on minimum wage increases to prices. However, this

evidence does not map into how effects are distributed across the income distribution of business owners. 10

        A slice of the research literature focuses on small businesses. This research is potentially

informative about how minimum wage impacts are distributed across the income distribution of business

owners, because the incomes of small business owners are likely considerably lower than those of other


9
  For the United States, Wolff (2017, Table 10) shows that direct stock ownership is heavily concentrated in the top
1% of the wealth distribution (53.4% for 2016, vs. 40% in the next 9% and 6.8% in the bottom 90%), while pension
accounts are more equitably distributed, but still skewed to higher-wealth households (13.7% in the top 1%, 51.2% in
the next 9%, and 35.2% in the bottom 90%).
10
   Belman and Wolfson (2014) review five additional studies of effects of minimum wages on profitability or what
might be considered related measures ­ exits or failures. Machin and Wilson (2004) also study the effects of the
introduction of the U.K. minimum wage on closures of residential care homes, based on their own survey. They find
some evidence of employment declines, but do not detect a closure effect on homes more impacted by the minimum
wage. Two other papers report conflicting evidence on firms exits or failures (Waltman et al., 1998; and Orazem and
Mattila, 2002).


                                                         6
business owners or other potentially high-income professional workers.

           Despite the presumption that small businesses may be hit hardest by minimum wage increases, the

empirical evidence is not so clear. Some of the studies discussed above focus on smaller firms, such as the

Draca et al. (2011) analysis of residential care homes (which tend to be small), survey evidence from the

United Kingdom in Mason et al. (2006), and a study by Orazem and Mattila (2002) that focused on firms in

services and retail newly covered by Iowa's minimum wage law. However, these studies were not

explicitly focused on the question of whether minimum wage effects fell more heavily on small businesses,

comparing minimum wage responses in a uniform way, with comparable data, between smaller and larger

firms. Luca and Luca (2019) study the effects of minimum wages on the restaurant industry, using data

from Yelp to study restaurant closure. They find that more marginal restaurants (as indicated by lower

ratings) are disproportionately led to exit because of minimum wage increases, and find no impact for the

top-rated restaurants.

           The only study of which we are aware that provides an analysis of effects by firm size is a recent

paper by Chava et al. (2019). They use the National Establishment Time Series (NETS), 11 and estimate the

effects of minimum wage increases on establishment credit (Paydex) scores. They find that federal

minimum wage increases in states where the federal minimum wage binds reduced credit scores, more so

for small establishments (defined as below median sales in the 4-digit NAICS code); differences in effects

associated with sales were likely related to differences in effects associated with incomes of business

owners. They also report that minimum wage hikes increased firm exit, and again find evidence of more

adverse effects for small establishments. The Chava et al. study is the best evidence of which we are aware

that minimum wages (in the United States) have more adverse impacts for small businesses. But again, one

can only draw an indirect inference from this evidence that lower-income business owners are more

adversely affected.

           In U.S. policy debate, minimum wage opponents often appeal to the difficulties small firms will

face as a result of minimum wage increases. For example, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, in criticizing a


11
     For details, see Neumark et al. (2007).


                                                        7
proposed New Orleans living wage law in 2002, argued that "the mandated wage increases ... will hit small

businesses the hardest." 12 More recently, the Virginia Chamber of Commerce argued that a proposed

minimum wage increase in Virginia "would primarily impact small business who rely on affordable labor

to compete." 13 And a website published by the Employment Policies Institute includes videos of small

business owners claiming difficulties in adjusting to high minimum wages. 14 The reasons are not always

made clear, reference is often made to small profit margins, 15 or a high share of wages in total costs (e.g.,

Chava et al., 2019). Minimum wage laws sometimes reflect the presumption that small businesses (and

hence their owners) will be harder hit, perhaps because of lower incomes. U.S. minimum wage laws have

long had a minimum sales or revenue threshold (currently $500,000). 16 Similarly, in Korea a large

minimum wage hike in 2018 was accompanied by compensation to firms employing less than 30 workers. 17

In Israel, in contrast, the minimum wage is applied to all workers regardless of firm size. 18

4. Data

Sources and key variables

        Our empirical analysis relies on administrative records of the Israeli Tax Authority. Our data set is

constructed from three sources ­ matching company records, employee data, and business owners. In

addition, family income variables for business owners and workers are constructed using these data. 19 The

key variables we construct and use, and some others used in the analysis or in auxiliary calculations, are

listed and defined in Table 1.

        The first data source is annual files of company tax records covering 2003-2010, which provide


12
   See https://www.uschamber.com/press-release/us-chamber-challenges-living-wage-law.
13
   See https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/virginia-chamber-of-commerce-releases-fact-sheet-on-proposed-
minimum-wage-increase-2019-01-16.
14
   See https://www.facesof15.com/.
15
   See, e.g., https://www.pbs.org/wnet/chasing-the-dream/stories/minimum-wage-increase-means-small-businesses/
and https://nsba.biz/dems-pushing-minimum-wage-hike/.
16
   See https://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/q-a.htm.
17
   The compensation covered the difference between the minimum wage increase and trend wage growth rate in the
past five years, and subsidized social insurance premiums (OECD, 2018).
18
   The only possible exemption is that the Ministry of Labor can set a lower minimum wage for mentally or physically
disabled workers employed in pre-defined organizations that receive budgets from the government. (See
https://www.nevo.co.il/law_html/Law01/P222K11_001.htm#Seif11, item 17, in Hebrew.)
19
   According to Tax Authority records, family income consists of spouses' incomes only, as discussed more below.



                                                         8
data on each company's characteristics and indicators of business activity, such as sales and industry

classification. The company files are used to construct annual measures of profits, or corporate income

from all sources, including reimbursement of the owner's salary. In our models, we use the inverse

hyperbolic sine (IHS) of profits. The IHS can be interpreted similarly to natural logs, but can accommodate

zeroes and negative numbers (Ravallion, 2017); in particular, the interpretation of estimated coefficients of

right-hand side variables when the dependent variable is expressed in terms of the IHS are nearly identical

to the interpretation when the dependent variable is expressed in terms of natural logs. 20 We also construct

a profitability measure defined as corporate income divided by sales. Finally, we use the Central Bureau of

Statistics (CBS) classification of economic sectors to define 23 sector dummy variables.

           The second data source we use is tax records of all employees for 2003-2010, which were matched

to the employers. The employee files provide data on each worker, including employment type, earnings,

and number of months the employee worked at the same job. Our tax records include employees for whom

pay is reported to tax authorities in Israel, i.e., if a company is situated in Israel. The data files also cover

temporary employment abroad that is included in the payroll of an Israeli company. However, people who

work abroad and their "center of life" is not in Israel are not included in the tax files. 21 For each company,

we match all employees based on unique personal and company identifiers. We created the database at the

employee level, with workers matched to firms over time, and then calculated employee-related aggregates

for each firm, including total employment.

           Our research does not cover self-employed workers or employees related to these individuals (in




20
     As an example, the table below shows some calculations for hypothetical changes in log profits and IHS profits.

                Initial profits       Change in profits       Change in log profits      Change in IHS profits
                   -10000                  1000                    Undefined                0.105360515
                     -100                    10                    Undefined                0.105354652
                      100                    10                   0.09531018                0.095305841
                     1100                   100                   0.09531018                0.095310136
                  1100000                 100000                  0.09531018                 0.09531018
21
   According to the tax law, citizens with "center of life" abroad (based on a given set of criteria such as presence in
Israel, family location, etc.) are not liable for taxes in Israel.



                                                            9
unincorporated businesses). In 2005, there were approximately 287,000 self-employed workers,

representing 11.5% of employment. 22 There were 61,460 unincorporated businesses that employed 126,688

workers. 23 The majority of these unincorporated businesses were very small, averaging around 2 employees

per establishment. 24 Regardless, the self-employed are not relevant for studying the impact of minimum

wages, as the self-employed decide on their own wage given tax and business considerations. Moreover,

adding profits of unincorporated business is problematic since such businesses report income to the tax

authority in a different manner than companies do. However, we compared monthly earnings of employees

in the unincorporated businesses to earnings in companies; excluding extreme values, earnings appear to be

similarly distributed, suggesting that our results could be applicable to unincorporated business

employment and income. 25 Thus, we study only incorporated companies.

         We use the data on employees to construct a critical variable for our analysis: the fraction affected

(FMW), which is the proportion of workers at a company earning below or equal to the minimum wage.

The data do not distinguish part-time vs. full-time workers, and earnings are reported monthly, not hourly.

We therefore define FMW as the fraction of full-year employees working at their main job, in 2005 (the last

year of the pre-treatment period), who were paid less or equal to the monthly minimum wage that prevailed

in the post-hike period (2009-2010). 26 We base FMW on full-year employees working at their main job

because when we compared the Tax Authority earnings reports with those of the Central Bureau of

Statistics (CBS), by industry, we found that the earnings of employees that worked full-year at the main job

were closest to the wages that CBS reports. Moreover, we compared average wages and FMW derived from

the tax data we use to those reported in the income survey (the equivalent of the Current Population

Survey), by economic sector. Monthly wages and FMW rates are very similar by sector. 27



22
   This is based on CBS data (https://old.cbs.gov.il/publications18/1673/pdf/t02_01.pdf).
23
   These figures relate to 2010, as prior data regarding self-employed are less reliable.
24
   There is a small number of larger establishments of this kind, with tax records tying workers directly to company
owners (i.e., to the individuals who own the companies, rather than company identifiers).
25
   These results are available upon request.
26
   The main job is the one that the worker chooses for the application of tax credits and benefits. In general, if an
individual works in more than one job, defining the higher-paying job as the main job minimizes tax payments.
27
   These results are available upon request.



                                                          10
         The third data source is a registry of company owners for 2003-2010, which includes ownership

structure for each company and allows the identification of individual business owners. 28 We identify

owners (and their spouses, when present) of the companies in the sample for the year 2005. This is the most

recent year before the minimum wage hike, and the year for which FMW was computed. Of the 57,520

companies in that year, we could identify data on 47,275 sole owners (out of a total of 63,674 owners,

because of foreign ownership, firms that are owned by other local companies, and co-ownership). 29

         For both business owners and workers, we construct measures of family incomes. We assembled

data on owners' salary from the company, salary from other sources, age, marital status, and earnings of the

spouse. We also define where business owners' and workers' salaries are in the distribution of labor

incomes, assigning percentiles in the distribution (between 1 and 100). 30

         Two age-related issues are relevant to the measurement of family income. First, teens could not be

matched to the parents, as tax records do not provide information beyond number of children in the

household, and hence teenagers' labor incomes are not included in family income. However, teen

employment is relatively low in Israel; the participation rate of youths (aged 15-17) is 9.6%, of whom only

1.5% do not study at the same time. Correspondingly, according to the income survey published by the

CBS, 31 only 7.2% of households had more than two providers in year 2005; and according to tax records,

only 3.7% of employees (including the self-employed) were younger than 19 in 2005. 32 Among business

owners, the tax records show that there was a single owner (i.e., one person) aged 18 in the year 2005, with

owners below the age of 25 constituting fewer than 1% of owners.

          Second, military service in Israel is obligatory for men aged (18-21) and women aged (18-20,


28
   Some of the companies are owned by other companies or foreign residents.
29
   There were 2,010 companies (out of 57,520 in 2005) that were fully owned by foreigners. 2,414 companies (out of
57,520 in 2005) were fully owned by other companies. According to tax records, 60.5% of companies have a single
owner, 29.1% have two owners, and the remainder have three or more owners.
30
   We study labor income rather than asset income. One problem with asset income is that wealthy individuals can
hold large companies, which could post significant losses in given year (in the form of undistributed profits), resulting
in low income ranks that would be misleading.
31
   See the 2005 Income Survey
(https://old.cbs.gov.il/webpub/pub/text_page_eng.html?publ=11&CYear=2005&CMonth=1).
32
   See the 2005 state revenue administration report
(https://mof.gov.il/ChiefEcon/StateRevenues/StateRevenuesReport/DocLib/2005/Report2005_05.pdf).



                                                           11
with some exceptions). 33 Soldiers are reported in the official statistics as part of the labor force, but the

army was excluded because it is in the government sector. However, there is no restriction on ownership of

companies by soldiers in the family income calculation.

Sample

         To define our sample, we begin with data on all companies that were active in Israel from 2003

through 2010. 34 The pre-period for our analysis of minimum wage effects begins in 2004; our data start in

2003, however, because the calculation of profits requires lagged data for carryover losses. The treatment

period (2006-2008) was excluded from the estimation sample for most of our analyses, so we evaluate the

evidence on changes from the 2004-2005 pre-period to the 2009-2010 post-period. We impose several

restrictions to arrive at our analysis sample, as documented in Table 2. (The table also reports some

descriptive statistics on key measures, to show how these change with the sample restrictions.)

         We exclude the government sector and non-profit organizations, as we would expect such

organizations to respond differently to minimum wages than do private-sector firms. Moreover, our interest

is in the incidence of minimum wages in relation to the owners of firms, and the incomes of firm owners

are most simply conceptualized and defined for private-sector firms. We exclude companies that were in

the liquidation process at any point during our sample period. In principle, these events could be related to

the minimum wage, in which case we could potentially understate adverse employment effects of the

minimum wage. However, we exclude these companies because they are likely to experience large

employment declines and liquidation could be caused by quite different factors. 35 We do not exclude

publicly held companies. Our sample includes 144 publicly held companies in 2005, with 135 surviving

through 2010. 36



33
   These were the age ranges during the sample period. The conscription rate for men is above 75% for the majority of
cities in Israel (https://www.idf.il/2018--/--//).
34
   Firms that exit in 2010 are still included in the sample since the post-treatment period covers 2009-2010. Firms that
exited in 2009 or earlier were excluded from the sample.
35
   If we instead exclude those that are in liquidation only in the pre-treatment period, to allow for the possibility that
post-treatment liquidation is caused by the minimum wage, 433 observations are added. In this case, the estimated
effects are little changed, but generally more negative.
36
   We thank Kosta Kosenko for sharing his data on publicly-traded companies in Israel.



                                                           12
         Companies that are likely to be holding financial companies, based on extreme values of the

profitability measure, are also excluded. These companies can show extraordinarily high profits relative to

sales (or employment), because of the nature of such companies, and also because of ambiguities regarding

where profits are assigned relative to where they are generated.37 We cannot directly identify holding

companies. However, when we explored extreme profitability values for specific companies, we found that

they were frequently of this type. 38 Thus, we restricted the range of the profitability variable to be between

-100% and +100%.

         For companies established after 2005, we cannot generate a measure of FMW that is independent

of employment or wage adjustments after minimum wage increases begin in 2006. Hence, we exclude these

companies. Similarly, we had to exclude companies with no earnings data in 2005, because the FMW

calculation requires workers employed full-year at a specific company in 2005. This excludes a fairly large

number of companies, for two reasons. First, there are some very small companies in terms on number of

employees, with high labor turnover during the year. Second, until 2017 there were many companies that

were set up for tax purposes, which had earned profits but had not distributed them (effectively used as a

tax shelter for various professionals due to higher personal income tax rates).

         The combined set of restrictions reduces the size of the estimation sample. But we believe our

restrictions provide a sample that is informative about the effects of the minimum wage on private-sector

firms that employ at least some minimum wage workers. Table 3 shows that our sample period begins with

about 55,000 companies and ends with about 44,000. The number declines because companies had to have

been established by 2005 to be included in our sample, so we lose companies through deaths before 2010,

but do not gain them through births.

Descriptive statistics


37
   For example, in the data there is a company with three employees that reports revenues of a large construction
company fully owned by it.
38
   We examined extreme values of profitability to try to understand if these represent real activity or some recording
technique, and found that the majority of companies with these extremes were holding companies. These companies
were fully owned by business group owners and did not have economic activity beyond holding a portfolio of
companies.



                                                          13
         Table 4 provides descriptive statistics on the key variables for our analysis sample. On average, in

2005, the average share of minimum wage workers across companies was 18%. However, as shown in

Table 2, these workers were concentrated in fewer than half of all companies (the median value of FMW is

0); 56% of companies had no minimum wage workers. 39

         As reported in Table 4, average profits of the firms in the estimation sample were around 1.3

million NIS, but the median value was much smaller at NIS 0.2 million. It is important to note that profits

can be negative (or zero). On average, throughout the estimation sample period, profitability of companies,

calculated as profits divided by sales, was 15%.

         Average employment per firm was 36 workers. Figure 5 shows the distribution of company-year

observations in the estimation sample by FMW bins. As shown in Figure 6, large shares of companies with

FMW equal to 0 or 100% were firms with only one worker (the only values FMW can take on for these

firms). Companies with FMW in the range 80-90% were on average largest in terms of employment, with

average employment around 250 workers per firm (see Figure 7). The largest company in this range, with

7,304 workers, is a nursing home company; the remainder of the companies in this group were, naturally, in

economic sectors with large shares of minimum-wage workers (e.g., cleaning, security, and health services

and social work).

5. Effects on Employment and Profits

         In this section we first report some standard types of evidence on the effect of minimum wages on

employment and earnings, and then move on to evidence on how the minimum wage affects company

profits. The following section turns to the evidence on how cost of minimum wage increases is distributed

across the income distribution.

Minimum wage effects on earnings and employment

         We want to be clear, at the outset, that countries with a national minimum wage ­ like Israel and

many others ­ pose more of a challenge for estimating minimum wage effects than countries with regional


39
 Note that FMW would likely be higher (and higher at more firms) if we could directly measure wages. There is no
way to verify this directly, because if we expand the sample to workers other than full-year workers in their main job,
we cannot map as reliably from earnings to wages (and hence FMW).


                                                          14
variation (or some other variation, like sectoral). We are not using the Israeli data to get a better estimate of

the employment effect of the minimum wage. Rather, we are using the Israeli data because the tax data

provide the other critical information (incomes of business owners and data on the companies they own).

That said, we try to obtain as compelling evidence as we can on effects on employment (and earnings), and

our ability to do so is important, because much of our evidence on effects on business owners uses the same

identification strategy. At its core, our identification hinges on variation in effects for firms with different

fractions of workers paid at or below the new, higher minimum in the period just before the minimum wage

increases being, denoted FMW. Among other things we do to make it more likely that we are estimating a

causal effect, we study the effects of this variation within sectors, to allow for differential shocks to sectors

that could otherwise generate spurious evidence on minimum wage effects.

         Figure 8 shows trends in average annual earnings, 40 covering the pre-treatment, treatment, and

post-treatment years, for workers in firms with very few minimum wage workers (FMW  10%), firms in

the midrange (40% < FMW  75%), and firms with a high fraction of affected workers (FMW > 75%). We

normalize to 2005 values. In the pre-treatment period, there is not much difference in the trends in average

earnings at the three groups of firms; if anything earnings are growing faster at the firms with lower FMW.

After the minimum wage increase, earnings in lower-wage (higher FMW) firms grew faster, consistent with

a direct effect of minimum wages on earnings. Note also that the initial relative increases are largest for the

highest FMW firms, as we would expect. There is no evidence of a change in the trend for the low FMW

firms.

         Figure 9 presents more detailed evidence, with a more granular disaggregation by FMW, showing

that the minimum wage increase raised earnings more in high FMW firms. The estimates in this figure are

based on regressions on the FMW bins and firm fixed effects, with estimates measured relative to the FMW

= 0 group. The figure shows that the average real earning rose more from 2003-2005 to 2009-2010 in firms

where the percentage of workers below the minimum wage (FMW) was higher, and the relationship is


40
  Technically, these are earnings associated with the main job position, but since we cover full-year employees on
their main jobs, it is not unreasonable to think of these as wages. Still, to be as clear as possible we refer to earnings
instead of wages.


                                                             15
approximately monotonic. Figure 9 also presents evidence on employment changes. The figure indicates

that employment fell among firms with a higher FMW (above around 20%), but not at very low FMW firms

(relative to FMW = 0). Moreover, among the higher FMW firms, the employment decline was generally

sharper the higher FMW. The exception is at the very highest FMW firms; we discuss this below, in relation

to the regression estimates. The line labeled "combined" effect is the average earnings-weighted

employment change. Given that earnings rose at the more-affected (higher FMW) firms, this series declined

by less than employment. This evidence is consistent with rather sharp disemployment effects of minimum

wages, given the magnitude of the minimum wage increase (see Figure 2). With regard to expected effects

on firm income, the employment declines suggested by Figure 9 will mitigate some of the costs of the

higher minimum wage for more-affected firms; but of course this will also impact firm revenue and

income.

           It is possible, of course, that the employment changes depicted in Figure 9 reflect different sectoral

trends over the sample period, and the correlation between FMW and sector, rather than actual employment

effects. Hence, in our regression analysis that follows we estimate difference-in-differences regression

models with and without sector dummy variables and their interaction with POST.

           To estimate the effects of minimum wages on employment in a regression framework, we begin

with a simple difference-in-differences specification. Indexing firms by i, years by t, and denoting firm-

level controls (such as the sector dummy variables) by X, we first estimate

           Log(Employment)it =  + FMWi + POSTt + FMWi × POSTt + Xi+ it .                                (1)

           Note that FMW has only an i subscript, since it is defined at the firm level, but only for the pre-

treatment period. POST has only a period subscript, since it is a dummy variable for the post-treatment

period. The estimate of  from equation (1) is a difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of FMW ­

the fraction affected by the minimum wage ­ on employment. We then add sector dummy variables and

their interaction with POST, to allow for differential changes in profits by sector, as well as firm fixed

effects.




                                                         16
        The results in Table 5 shows a negative impact of the minimum wage increase on employment. The

estimated coefficient of  is negative and significant, and robust across the three columns. The estimated

elasticity from column (3) of Table 5 implies that for a company with FMW larger by 10 percentage points,

the employment decline is 1.1% larger. 41 We explored whether we see changes in the pre-treatment period

that look the same as the changes in the treatment period, which would be evidence of spurious trends. We

found employment was growing faster at high FMW firms (slope not significantly different from zero),

which rules out the treatment effects on employment reflecting declining employment at high FMW firms

in the pre-treatment period. 42

        A potential concern is that sectors with relatively high FMW were more adversely impacted by the

global financial crisis, potentially leading to spurious evidence of adverse effects of minimum wages. This

is not a concern. First, the financial crisis had a relatively modest effect in Israel, with the unemployment

rate going up only 1.5 percentage points in 2009, and declining the next year (as Figure 3 shows). Second,

the companies most affected were in the financial sector, and those that are export oriented. These are

sectors where firms are generally not in the high FMW range, so if there was a bias it would be against

finding adverse minimum wage effects. Moreover, the financial sector was already partially omitted based

on our profitability criterion. In addition, our model includes sector × POST interactions, to account for

differential impacts by sector that could otherwise be confounded with minimum wage increases. Finally,

however, we have run the models in Table 5 (and the tables that follow) excluding the financial and export-

oriented sectors, and the results/estimates barely change. 43

        In Table 6, we report estimates from a less constrained model, where instead of using a linear

measure of FMW, we break FMW into a number of categories. We show the estimates with and without the



41
   Given that the mean of FMW is 0.18, the implied elasticity is around -0.02 (approximately 1.1/[(10/18) ×100].)
This is smaller than the central tendency of employment estimates (with respect to changes in the minimum wage) in
the literature, which is around -0.1 (Belman and Wolfson, 2019). However, that literature is nearly exclusively based
on elasticities computed for workers, typically with a focus on workers likely to be strongly affected (like teens).
Moreover, we do not weight in our analysis, since our goal is to study effects on business owners. For both of these
reasons, we do not think there is a clear comparison to the more conventional estimates in the literature (which are
estimated at the individual level).
42
   These results are available upon request.
43
   These results are available from the authors upon request.


                                                         17
sector × POST interactions, but all columns include firm fixed effects. In columns (1) and (2) ­ column (2)

includes the sector-POST interactions ­ the negative minimum wage effect on employment is increasing

with FMW, except in the top range of FMW > 80%.

        Further exploration revealed that companies in the upper range of FMW are quite heterogeneous in

terms of size and activity, with companies with very high FMW concentrated in different industries and

much smaller; the latter point was already noted with respect to Figures 6 and 7. In column (3) of Table 6

we therefore split the FMW > 80% range into two groups ­ 80% < FMW  94% and FMW > 94%. The

group of companies with 80% < FMW  94% is characterized by large employment, with 196.4 workers on

average, while the group of companies with FMW > 94% is much smaller, with average employment of

16.8. Moreover, among companies with FMW > 94%, 32.9% have only one worker; this percentage is

0.4% among companies with 80% < FMW  94%. In addition, the sectors are quite different, with

companies in the lower range (80% < FMW  94%) concentrated in wholesale and retail trade (16%),

cleaning and security (16%), and health services and social work (12%), while companies in the upper

range (FMW > 94%) are highly concentrated in the latter industry (46%), and also manpower (8%) and

business services (7%).

        When, in column (3) of Table 6, we break the FMW > 80% range up in this way, we find more

negative effects than in column (2). Most notably, it is only the effect in the very top range (FMW > 94%)

that is not negative (and near zero). We believe this is because companies with such a high FMW share

have less scope for adjusting employment. 44 This conjecture about the inability to adjust employment for

the firms with very high FMW is consistent with the results for the impact of the minimum wage hike on

profits; below, we report that the profits of companies with very high FMW are reduced more strongly by

the minimum wage increase. 45


44
   For companies with only one worker, which is common in this top FMW range, the inability to adjust employment
is clear. For larger companies, the lack of employment response may reflect Marshall's Third Law of Labor Demand,
in which under some conditions the elasticity of labor demand is smaller when labor's share is larger (see, e.g.,
Hoffman, 2009).
45
   Table 6 does not provide an indication of relative employment growth at low FMW firms stemming from the
minimum wage increase, which suggests there is not a large reallocation of labor from lower-wage to higher-wage



                                                       18
         We did one other potentially important robustness check. We re-estimated the models for

employment retaining the firms that exited before the post-period, setting their employment to zero, and

using the IHS function instead of logs to accommodate the zero values. For both Tables 5 and 6, we found

stronger evidence of negative employment effects for higher values of FMW, consistent with the higher

minimum wage doing more to increase firm exit. The estimates were a good deal more negative, which is

not surprising given that the employment declines to zero can be very influential. In addition, in these

specification we found a strong and significant negative effect for the highest FMW firms (FMW > 94%),

with an estimated coefficient of -0.212 (significant at the 1% level) ­ consistent with an inability to adjust

employment, as discussed above, but with adverse effects on these firms. 46

Minimum wage effects on profits

         We next turn to estimation of the effects of minimum wages on owners. We begin with the effects

of minimum wages on profits. We begin with a similar specification to equation (1), but for profits:

         IHS()it =  + FMWi + POSTt + FMWi × POSTt + Xi+ it .                                                  (2)

         As shown in Table 7, we begin, in column (1), with a simple specification. In columns (2) and (3)

we then add sector dummy variables and their interaction with POST, to allow for differential changes in

profits by sector, and firm fixed effects. The estimate of  from equation (2) is a difference-in-differences

estimate of the effect of FMW ­ the fraction affected by the minimum wage ­ on profits.

         As shown in column (1) of Table 7, profits decline in relative terms for firms with a higher value of

FMW in the pre-treatment period. The negative estimate implies that a higher minimum wage reduces

profits at firms with a high share of minimum wage workers, relative to firms with a low share. 47 Since our



firms. Longitudinally linked employee-employer data, which we do have at this time, could provide more decisive
evidence on whether some reallocation occurs, and where (by sector or by FMW).
46
   We do not feature these estimates because, as discussed below, it is not clear how to define profits for firms that
fail, and we wanted to focus on similar samples for the employment and profit results. These results are available upon
request.
47
   Like for the analysis of employment, we explored whether we see changes in the pre-treatment period that look the
same as the changes in the treatment period, which would be evidence of spurious trends. We actually find that profits
were growing faster at high FMW firms (slope not significantly different from zero), which rules out the treatment
effects on profits reflecting declining profits at high FMW firms in the pre-treatment period; these results are available
upon request.



                                                           19
sample does not include failed firms, the adverse effect of the minimum wage on higher FMW firms could

be stronger than this estimate implies. 48

         To interpret the magnitude, in the regression FMW is defined on a scale of zero to one. Thus, the

estimated coefficient of -0.749 on FMW × POST in column (1) implies that profits declined by about 7.5%

for firms where the fraction affected by the minimum wage, based on the pre-treatment period data, was

about 10 percentage points higher. With the sector dummies and "trends" added, in column (2), this

estimate becomes -0.795, and with firm fixed effects the estimate is similar (-0.720). These estimates

appear to us to be sizable. For example, the latter estimate implies that profits of firms at the 90th percentile

of FMW decline by 21% more than profits of firms at the 75th percentile of FMW. 49 (We return to the
                                                                                                48F




other columns of Table 7 later.)

         To provide a different way to convey the magnitude of the effect, we estimate a specification that

measures the effect on profits of an estimate of the mechanical increase in labor costs from the minimum

wage increase, based on the number of minimum wage workers in 2005 (the end of the pre-period) and the

increase in the minimum wage. We modify equation (2) to be, instead

         IHS()it =  + log(WBMWi )+ log(RMWt )+ log(WBMWi )× log(RMWt )+ Xi+ it .                                 (3)

         In this specification, log(WBMI) is the log of the wage bill for minimum wage workers, computed

as the number of minimum wage workers in 2005 multiplied by the statutory 2005 minimum wage, where

minimum wage workers are defined as those below the deflated minimum wage in the post-period.

Log(RMW) is the log of the relative minimum wage in the pre- and post-periods, defined as zero (log(1))



48
   The data allow identification of failed companies in the post-treatment period, but lacks information regarding
profits for those firms. Assigning zero values for profits can be misleading since profits could have negative values. A
related point is that, especially if there is some exit of the most-affected firms, surviving firms could do better. Indeed,
in a recent study of Germany's new minimum wage, Dustmann et al. (2019) find that affected workers have some
tendency to move to higher-wage firms, consistent with reallocation towards more-productive firms, and also find
evidence that there is some firm exit (among small businesses) and that surviving firms became more productive. We
estimated models for firm survival to the post-treatment period, and found that the most-affected firms were
significantly less likely to survive (results available upon request). This implies that our evidence of declines in profits
for affected firms understate the negative impact of the minimum wage on firms. These results are available upon
request.
49
   The 75th percentile of FMW is 0.308, and the 90th percentile is 0.600. Multiplying this difference by the estimated
effect of -0.720 predicts a decline in profits of 21%.



                                                            20
for the pre-period and log(1.154) for the post-period, given the 15.4% increase in the minimum wage. The

interaction therefore measures the percent change in profits for a one-percent higher effect of the minimum

wage increase on the wage bill (based on minimum wage workers in 2005). 50 Note that the increase in the

wage bill we consider is a "mechanical" one, assuming no other adjustments in behavior.51 We expect the

estimate to be negative but less than one in absolute value, as firms can adjust to the wage increase by

varying employment, prices, and other variables.

        The specification is otherwise the same as in Table 7 (and we report the estimates for column (3),

including the sector dummies and their interactions with POST, and firm fixed effects). The results are

reported in Table 8. The estimated coefficient of the interaction is a statistically significant -0.269,

indicating that, for example, if the minimum wage increase implied a 10% larger mechanical increase in the

wage bill for minimum wage workers for a firm, its profits fell by 2.7%. The implied effect is far less than

one-for-one, consistent with the average FMW of 0.18 and with firms making other adjustments to offset

the effects of the higher minimum wage (including, but not limited to, the reductions in employment among

the lowest-earning workers that we have already estimated).

        A richer breakdown of firms into six bins based on FMW, paralleling our employment

specifications, provides results that reinforce the conclusion that profits fell more at firm with larger share

of minimum wage workers (see Table 9). Compared with the zero FMW firms in the sample, the estimates

show that the minimum wage hike had no statistically significant effect on profits for the second and third

bins (0 < FMW  40%). For companies with FMW above 40%, profits decline ­ for the fourth bin (40-60%)

by 20%, for the fifth bin (60-80%) by 44-45%, and for the highest FMW firms (80-100%) by 87-92%.

Hence, the relationship is monotonic. The results are robust to allowing for different changes over time by

economic sector (column 2). As noted in the previous discussion of the employment results in Table 6, low



50
   Note that this is not quite the same as the implied cost of topping off below-minimum wage workers to the
minimum wage, and hence allows for some increases in wages to a bit above the minimum wage; on the other hand, it
does not include potential spillovers to those above the new minimum wage, and hence should provide a good back-
of-the envelope estimate of the cost of the minimum wage increase.
51
   There is, in fact, evidence of adjustment along other margins, including price (e.g., Aaronson, 2001), substitution
towards higher-skilled labor (e.g., Clemens et al., 2018), and the provision of benefits (e.g., Marks, 2011).


                                                         21
labor adjustment in the top FMW firms can explain the larger negative impact on profits.

         Returning to Table 7, the remaining columns (4)-(7) report estimates for the effect of minimum

wages on profits for the four quartiles of the profit distribution (based on the data from the period prior to

the minimum wage increase) ­ from lowest to highest. We find the strongest negative impact of minimum

wage on profits in the 1st quartile of profits (including companies with losses or near-zero profits). The

effect weakens significantly for firms in the 2nd to 4th quartiles. This evidence suggests that it is the low-

profit firms that bear most of the cost associated with higher minimum wages.

Effects by year

         Our empirical results thus far compare the post- and pre-periods. To provide more information on

the evolution of the dependent variables by year, Figure 10 graphs estimates of effects for earnings,

employment, and IHS profits. The specifications (except for variation in the dependent variable) are the

same as those in Table 9, column (1), with fixed effects added, although interacting the minimum wage

variables with dummy variables for each year. We graph the interactions of the minimum wage variables

with the dummy variable for each year from 2006-2010. For earnings, we see that the increases for the

more-affected firms began early and reached their maximum in the post-period (2009-2010). Employment

at more-affected firms began to fall with the minimum wage increases, also reaching the lowest levels in

the post-period for all groups except the highest FMW group (as discussed earlier with respect to the

regressions). In the profits graph, the decline is persistent and profits reach their lowest in the post-period

only for the three most-affected groups of firms (FMW between 40% and 60%, between 60% and 80%, and

between 80% and 100%). 52

6. Evidence on the Distribution of the Costs of Minimum Wage Increases

         We now turn to the evidence that is unique to this paper, exploring how the incidence of the cost of


52
   It would be too messy to include confidence intervals in these figures. In the earnings graph, the standard errors for
the estimates shown reach a maximum of about 0.013, so nearly all of the estimates are significant (using, for this
footnote, the 5% level). For the employment regressions, the standard errors for the estimates shown reach a
maximum of about 0.022, so again most of the estimates are significant. For the profit regressions, the standard errors
are larger, reaching a maximum of about 0.123. All of the estimates for the groups with FMW between 60% and 80%,
and between 80% and 100%, are statistically significant, as are the estimates for firms with FMW between 40% and
60% beginning in 2007.


                                                           22
minimum wage increases varies across the income distribution, as well as comparing the incomes of

affected business owners with the incomes of workers.

Minimum wage effects across the income distribution

         We noted earlier that a more adverse effect of minimum wages on profits at relatively low-profit

firms would likely also predict that a higher minimum wage has more adverse effects on business owners

with relatively low incomes ("mom and pop" shops, among businesses). To explore this question directly,

we alter our regression model to estimate the effects of minimum wages on profit not by FMW, but by the

owners' income percentile in the income distribution of owners and workers together (see Table 1 for

variable definitions). Denoting income percentile by IP, 53 our regression model now becomes

         IHS()it =  + IPi + POSTt + IPi × POSTt + Xi+ it .                                                    (4)

         We have substituted IP for FMW, to detect post-treatment changes in profits across the distribution

of incomes of business owners. Note that IP has only an i subscript, since it is defined at the owner level,

but only for the pre-treatment period.

         The results are reported in Table 10. Recall that a higher income percentile implies higher income

of business owners. Thus, the positive estimated coefficients on the IP × POST interaction imply that

profits of lower-income business owners declined more in relative terms in the post-treatment period. For

example, the estimated coefficient of 2.351 in column (2) implies that firms with owners earning median

income suffered a 7.6% larger decline in profits than those at the 75th percentile. 54 The estimated direct

effect is smaller than the decline in profits estimated in Table 7. This could be explained by the fact that we

estimate the effect on company profits and not on the owner's business income. 55

Minimum wage impacts relative to the income distribution

         The implication of the preceding estimates is that profits of lower-income business owners were


53
   The income percentiles are calculated based on universe of business owners and workers in 2005. Owners' income
includes wages from owned business and other labor income.
54
   The median of IP is 0.9516, and the 75th percentile is 0.9842. Multiplying this difference by the estimated effect of
2.351 predicts a decline in profits of 7.6%.
55
   Owners' income percentile is calculated based on all labor-related incomes including wages of owners in their
companies and labor income from other sources. Moreover, a substantial share of companies are owned by more than
one owner.


                                                           23
more adversely affected by the 2006-08 minimum wage increases. We already saw that profits (and

employment) of higher FMW firms were also more adversely affected. Column (1) of Table 11 shows why

these results coincide. Based on pre-treatment data ­ as is all the analysis in this subsection ­ the owners of

businesses with higher FMW are lower in the income distribution. The relationship between FMW and the

income percentile of business owners is nearly monotonically negative. 56

        Note, though, that even among the high FMW firms, business owners are relatively high in the

income distribution ­ for individuals, for example (column (1)), ranging from the 74th to the 94th percentile

across different FMW bins. Thus, this evidence suggests that the impact of minimum wage increases is

regressive in terms of the income distribution of business owners, but still relatively progressive with

regard to the overall distribution of income. 57

        To provide a richer perspective on distributional effects, column (2) shows the average income

percentiles of workers, based on FMW at the firms at which they were employed prior to the minimum

wage increase. As we would expect, workers in higher FMW firms have lower incomes on average; the

income percentile declines nearly monotonically with FMW.

        The comparison across columns (1) and (2) is also of interest. This comparison shows that in the

lowest FMW firms, workers' average income percentiles (77) are about the same as those of owners in the

higher FMW firms (the percentiles range from 74 to 78 for firms with FMW above 60%). In this sense, too,

the redistributional impacts of the minimum wage seem, if not strictly regressive, than at least sharing the

burden of the minimum wage very unequally between economic agents at similar points in the income

distribution, with owners paying directly for the higher minimum wage, while workers with similar

incomes do not. On the other hand, incomes of workers in the high FMW firms are clearly lower than

incomes of the owners of these firms, and in that sense the minimum wage does redistribute income

downward.



56
   We use pre-treatment ownership data is to abstract from ownership and income changes that could result from the
minimum wage hike.
57
   And this would be more the case if, as seems likely, business owners have more assets because of the businesses
they own.


                                                        24
        In columns (3) and (4) of Table 11 we extend the analysis to family income ­ the usual lens

through which we view redistribution, poverty, etc. Doing so amplifies the regressivity of the incidence of

the minimum wage with respect to the distribution of incomes of business owners. Families with ownership

of the highest FMW firms earn slightly less than the median family income in 2005 (column (3)), and the

income percentiles for firms with FMW > 60% are not much above the median. Moreover, the income

percentile declines significantly more, as FMW increases, in column (3) compared to column (1). In

addition, workers in the lowest FMW firms are at higher income percentiles than business owners at the

highest FMW firms. On the other hand, it is still very much the case that workers at high FMW firms are

considerably lower in the family income distribution than workers at low FMW firms (column (4)). Thus,

we might conclude that, overall, the effect of the minimum wage hike is fairly regressive for business

owners (and even more so for families of business owners), but is progressive for workers (and even more

so for families including minimum wage workers).

        Table 12 provides more details on the income distribution by FMW that includes family incomes

(adding owners'/workers' spouses). Panel A shows the details for married business owners. 58 Owners of

high FMW businesses are younger, slightly more likely to be female, and have more children. The first two,

at least, are almost certainly associated with lower income. As shown in column (5), average incomes of

owners drops dramatically with FMW ­ and the contrast between lower FMW firms (e.g., FMW below

20%) and higher FMW firms (e.g., FMW above 30%) is quite striking. Columns (9) and (10) show that

incomes of spouses exacerbate the relationship between FMW and income, as incomes of spouses are

higher for owners of low FMW firms, and hence the gaps in family income across the distribution of FMW

are generally larger than for owner income alone (column (5) vs. (10)). The numbers in column (11)

provide a summary measure showing this conclusion, indicating that family income declines quite sharply

as FMW increases. These data reinforce the conclusion that, among business owners, the burden of the

minimum wage falls on lower-income families.


58
 The division between married and single provides income comparisons that do not depend on marital status. Among
business owners, 85% are married, while the share of married workers is lower at 61%. The comparison of single
business owners/workers is shown in Table 13.


                                                       25
        But how do the incomes of the business owners who bear the burden of the minimum wage

compare to the incomes of the potential beneficiaries of higher minimum wages ­ families with workers

earning the minimum wage? Panel B of Table 12 shows that, as expected, average worker earnings decline

with FMW (column (5)) ­ reflecting the fact that at high FMW firms most workers earn the minimum wage.

This is reinforced by spouse's earnings, which also decline with FMW, indicating that incomes of spouses

are positively correlated. However, spouses' earnings do not decline nearly as steeply with FMW.

Moreover, earnings of spouses of workers in high FMW firms are generally much higher, as reflected in the

fact that average earnings of spouses of those in high FMW firms are much higher than those of the workers

in these firms (column (8) vs. column (5)). This indicates that a large share of minimum wage workers are

the secondary earners in families, which reduces the redistributional effects of minimum wages towards

families with the lowest incomes. 59

        At the same time, a comparison of the family incomes of owners and workers in higher FMW firms

­ in column (10) of Panels A and B ­ indicates that the family incomes of minimum wage workers are

much lower than those of the owners of high FMW firms. For example, in firms where FMW exceeds 90%,

average family income of owners is 198,334 NIS, vs. average family income of workers in those firms of

74,137 NIS. And the average family incomes of workers in low FMW firms are similarly to the average

family incomes of the owners of high FMW firms, implying that a large share of the cost of the minimum

wage ­ for high FMW firms ­ falls heavily on one among two different types of agents (owners vs.

workers), despite them having relative similar incomes. This kind of evidence is inconsistent with

horizontal equity.

        Analysis for singles, who constitute a much smaller share of the sample, provide similar results

(see Table 13). As before, incomes of business owners and average earnings of workers decline with FMW.

The main and obvious difference is that single owners and workers do not enjoy additional income of

spouses.


59
  This parallels evidence for the United States, for example, that the high share of teens and young adults among
minimum wages implies that a large share of the benefits of higher minimum wages do not go to poor families
(Lundstrom, 2017).


                                                         26
         Thus, the conclusions from Table 12 (and 13) are similar to those from Table 11. The higher

minimum wage does redistribute income towards lower-income families. But the redistribution is not from

the top of the income distribution, but rather from owners whose incomes are higher than those of

minimum wage workers, but whose incomes are lower than those of many other owners who do not bear

the burden of the minimum wage, and similar to those of many higher-earning workers. 60 Moreover, note

that this distributional analysis does not account for profits of publicly-held companies paid out as

dividends (or reflected in appreciation of stocks). Since these companies are large and likely least affected

by minimum wage increases, 61 and stocks are held by higher-income individuals and families, our

distributional analysis almost certainly understates the degree to which the burden of the minimum wage

falls on lower-income business owners ­ making our evidence of the regressive nature of the burden of

minimum wages, with respect to the income distribution among business owners, more striking.

7. Conclusions

         In this paper, we study an unexplored dimension of the distributional effects of the minimum wage,

turning attention from the question of the effects on workers, who are potentially helped by a higher

minimum wage, to the question of who pays for it. A key goal of a higher minimum wage is income

redistribution towards low-income families. Existing research on the minimum wage focuses on the impact

on affected workers, but is largely silent on the incomes of the owners of businesses who pay for a higher

minimum wage, and especially silent on the incidence of the costs of a higher minimum wage across the

income distribution.

         We study evidence on this dimension of the distributional effects of minimum wages using a

unique administrative dataset on the universe of tax records for Israel, in the period surrounding a large and

plausibly exogenous minimum wage increase. The evidence indicates that the minimum wage hike reduced



60
   A related issue, which we do not address here, is how minimum wages affect prices, since price changes affect the
purchasing power of income changes. Indeed recent U.S. evidence in Renkin et al. points to significant (actually, full)
price pass-throughs of minimum wage increases, with the negative effects larger for poor families. Effects like these
work against any progressive redistribution from the minimum wage.
61
   In results available upon request, we compute the equivalent of Figure 5, but for publicly-traded companies. There
are much lower shares of companies in bins with high values of FMW.


                                                          27
profits of companies, with minimum-wage intensive companies bearing the bulk of the cost and adjusting

their workforces more aggressively, and profits declining more for lower-income business owners.

Moreover, owners of businesses with higher shares of minimum wage workers ranked at the bottom of the

income distribution of business owners, and their incomes were comparable to those of mid-to-high level

workers. In most cases, spouses of business owners earn less than the owners while spouses of minimum

wage workers earn more, reducing the redistributive effect of the minimum wage.

           Overall, then, the evidence indicates that the higher minimum wage does redistribute income

towards lower-income families. However, the redistribution is not from the top of the income distribution.

Rather, it is from owners whose incomes are higher than those of minimum wage workers, but whose

incomes are lower compared to other owners who do not bear the burden of the minimum wage, and

similar to those of many higher-earning workers. The latter result implies that a large share of the cost of

the minimum wage ­ for high FMW firms ­ falls heavily on one among two different types of agents

(owners vs. workers), despite them having relative similar incomes ­ inconsistent with horizontal equity.

           Thus, minimum wages, while somewhat redistributive, are not effectively redistributing from the

highest-income individuals or families (aside from the issue, addressed in prior research, that minimum

wages do not do a very good job of targeting benefits to low-income individuals or families). In that sense,

the minimum wage is quite different from other redistributional policies financed by taxes ­ such as the

U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit. 62 We have no way of doing a direct comparison of the minimum wage

with other redistributive tax policies, including simply more progressive taxation, in the absence of a

structural model, so we do not, in this paper, quantify the differences in the distributional effects of the

minimum wage and alternative policies. But our results clearly suggest that such an inquiry could be very

useful (for Israel as well as other countries). Another policy that could be considered to improve the

targeting of who pays for a higher minimum wage is to create a tax credit that offsets part of the cost of

higher minimum wages borne disproportionately by the businesses that employ a relatively higher share of

minimum wage workers (Neumark, 2019b) ­ businesses that, as we have shown, have lower profits and are


62
     There is also an EITC in Israel (see Brender and Strawczynski, 2019).


                                                           28
owned by those with lower incomes than the owners of other businesses and incomes comparable to those

of higher-income workers.




                                                  29
                                              References

Aaronson, Daniel. 2001. "Price Pass-Through and the Minimum Wage." Review of Economics and
Statistics 83(1), pp. 158-69.
Belman, Dale, and Paul J. Wolfson. 2019. "15 Years of Research on U.S. Employment and the
Minimum Wage." LABOUR 33(4), pp. 488-506.
Belman, Dale, and Paul J. Wolfson. 2014. What Does the Minimum Wage Do? Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn
Press.
Brender, Adi, and Michel Strawczynski. 2019. "The EITC Program in Israel: Employment Effects and
Evidence on Differential Impacts of Family vs. Individual-Income Based Design," The Maurice Falk
Institute for Research in Israel, Discussion Paper No. 19.04.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
Wage. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2019. "The Effect of Minimum Wages
on Low-Wage Jobs." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(3), pp. 1405-54.
Chava, Sudheer, Alexander Oettl, and Manpreet Singh. 2019. "Does a One-Size-Fits-All Minimum Wage
Cause Financial Stress for Small Businesses?" NBER Working Paper No. 26523.
Choi, Hyunyoung, and Hal Varian. 2012. "Predicting the Present with Google Trends." Economic Record
88, 2-9.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer. 2018. "Impacts of the Minimum Wage on Skill
Requirements: Evidence from Vacancy Postings." Discussion paper, Yale University.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2019. "The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of
Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers." Journal of Public
Economics 170, pp. 53-67.
Clymer, Adam. 1999. Edward M. Kennedy: A Biography. New York: William Morrow & Co.
Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin, and John Van Reenen. 2011. "Minimum Wages and Firm Profitability."
American Economic Review: Applied Economics 3(1), pp. 129-51.
Dube, Arindrajit. 2019. "Minimum Wages and the Distribution of Family Incomes." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 11(4), pp. 266-304.
Dube, Arindrajit. 2018. "Minimum Wages and the Distribution of Family Incomes." NBER Working Paper
No. 25240.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Barton Hamilton, Ankit Kalda, and David Sovich. "Minimum Wages,
Employment, and Wage Spillovers: Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data." Forthcoming in Journal
of Labor Economics.
Dustmann, Christian, Attila Lindner, Uta Schönberg, Matthias Umkehrer, and Phillipp vom Berge. 2019.
"Reallocation Effects of the Minimum Wage: Evidence from Germany." Unpublished manuscript.
http://sarkoups.free.fr/dustmann719.pdf.
Harasztosi, Peter, and Attila Linder. 2019. "Who Pays for the Minimum Wage?" American Economic
Review 109(8), pp. 2693-727.
Hoffman, Saul D. 2009. "Revisiting Marshall's Third Law: Why Does Labor's Share Interact with the
Elasticity of Substitution to Decrease the Elasticity of Labor Demand?" Journal of Economic Education
40(4), pp. 437-45.
Kabátek, Jan. 2015. "Happy Birthday, You're Fired! The Effects of Age-Dependent Minimum Wage on
Youth Employment Flows in the Netherlands." IZA Discussion Paper No. 9528.
Luca, Dara Lee, and Michael Luca. 2019. "Survival of the Fittest: The Impact of the Minimum Wage on
Firm Exit." NBER Working Paper No. 25806.
Lundstrom, Samuel M. 2017. "When Is a Good Time to Raise the Minimum Wage?" Contemporary
Economic Policy 35(1), pp. 29-52.
Machin, Stephen, and Joan Wilson. 2004. "Minimum Wages in a Low-Wage Labour Market: Care Homes
in the UK." Economic Journal 114: C102-9.
Marks, Mindy S. 2011. "Minimum Wages, Employer-Provided Health Insurance, and the Non-
Discrimination Law." Industrial Relations 50(2), pp. 241-62.
Mason, Colin M., Sara Carter, and Stephen K. Tagg. 2006. "The Effects of the National Minimum Wage
on the UK Small Business Sector: A Geographical Analysis." Environment and Planning C: Government
and Policy 24(1), pp. 99-116.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016 "Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics."
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 500-22.
Monras, Joan. 2019. "Minimum Wages and Spatial Equilibrium: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Labor
Economics 37(3), pp. 853-904.
Neumark, David. 2019a. "The Econometrics and Economics of the Employment Effects of Minimum
Wages: Getting from Known Unknowns to Known Knowns." German Economic Review 20(3), pp. 293-
329.
Neumark, David. 2019b. "The Higher Wages Tax Credit." In Expanding Economic Opportunity for More
Americans." Melissa S. Kearney and Amy Ganz, eds. (Aspen, CO: The Aspen Institute Economic Strategy
Group), pp. 196-212.
Neumark, David. 2016. "Policy Levers to Increase Jobs and Increase Income from Work after the Great
Recession." IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 5:6 (on-line).
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2008. Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2007. "Minimum Wages and Employment," Foundations and
Trends in Microeconomics 3(1-2), pp. 1-182.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall. 2007. "Employment Dynamics and Business
Relocation: New Evidence form the National Establishment Time Series." Research in Labor Economics
26, pp. 39-83.
OECD. 2018. OECD Economic Surveys: Korea. June 2018.
Orazem, Peter F., and J. Peter Mattila. 2002. "Minimum Wage Effects on Hours, Employment, and
Number of Firms: The Iowa Case." Journal of Labor Research 23(3), pp. 3-23.
Pacheco, Gail, and Vic Naiker. 2006. "Impact of the Minimum Wage on Expected Profits." International
Review of Applied Economics 20(4), pp. 469-90.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. "Distributional National Accounts: Methods
and Estimates for the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(2), pp. 553-609.
Ravallion, Martin. 2017. "A Concave Log-Like Transformation Allowing Non-positive Values."
Economics Letters 161, pp. 130-32.
Renkin, Tobias, Claire Montialoux, and Michael Siegenthaler. 2019. "The Pass-Through of Minimum
Wages into U.S. Retail Prices: Evidence from Supermarket Scanner Data." Unpublished manuscript.
http://economics.ceu.edu/sites/economics.ceu.edu/files/attachment/event/1118/tobiasrenkinjmp.pdf.
Sabia, Joseph J., and Robert B. Nielsen. 2015. "Minimum Wages, Poverty, and Material Hardship: New
Evidence from the SIPP." Review of Economics of the Household 13(1), pp. 95-124.
Waltman, Jerold, Allan McBride, and Nicole Camhout. 1998. "Minimum Wage Increases and the Business
Failure Rate." Journal of Economic Issues 32(1), pp. 219-23.
Wolff, Edward N. 2017. "Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has Middle Class
Wealth Recovered?" NBER Working Paper No. 24085.
                                               Appendix A

                                 Minimum wages in the 2006 elections

        This Appendix documents the importance of the minimum wage during the pre-election period

prior to the 2006 general elections. Amir Peretz, who served in a previous role as a head of the national

labor union (Histadrut), promised to increase the minimum wage, and later during coalition negotiations

insisted on a minimum wage hike. Below are excerpts from official statements by the Labor Party:

        "The challenge facing the Israeli society is to accelerate the processes of economic development
        and growth, and to ensure fair distribution to the public... The government, led by the Labor
        Party, will set a goal of reducing unemployment, raising minimum wage, effectively enforcing
        labor laws, reducing social gaps in income, education and housing quality."

                        ­ Labor party pre-election platform

        "Mr. Speaker of the Knesset, Ministers, Members of the Knesset...First of all, I am glad to tell to
        all of those who said that the last increase of the minimum wage will cause a severe crisis to the
        unemployment rate, that if the minimum wage will be raised the crisis for the economy will be
        unmanageable- we see nowadays that the economy continues to grow, the consumption of all
        those million people who enjoy the new minimum wage helps to improve the economy and
        doesn't harm it.... But the most important thing is that there are no budget consequences. Why?
        The Ministry of finance claims it will cost 230 million shekels. But those million people who will
        get the extra 140 shekels, most of them work in the business sector and not for the government.
        They won't buy diamonds in Paris or a house in Manhattan with this money, they will use it to
        purchase inside the Israeli market, which means the Ministry of finance gets taxes..."

                ­Amir Peretz , in the 75th Session of the 17th Knesset, November, 2007
         Figure 1: Evolution of the Statutory Minimum Wage in Israel in Analysis Period
 5,500




 5,000




 4,500




 4,000




 3,500




 3,000




 2,500
         1998Q2
         1999Q1
         1999Q4
         2000Q3
         2001Q2
         2002Q1
         2002Q4
         2003Q3
         2004Q2
         2005Q1
         2005Q4
         2006Q3
         2007Q2
         2008Q1
         2008Q4
         2009Q3
         2010Q2
         2011Q1
         2011Q4
         2012Q3
         2013Q2
         2014Q1
         2014Q4
         2015Q3
         2016Q2
         2017Q1
         2017Q4
         2018Q3
         2019Q2
The minimum wage is in NIS per month, at current prices, based on full-time work. The box shows the
period covered by our analysis.
                  Figure 2: Percent Change in Real Monthly Minimum Wage
         10.0%
                                                      8.3%
          8.0%

          6.0%

          4.0%

          2.0%

          0.0%

         -2.0%             -1.3%
         -4.0%

         -6.0%
                                                                               -6.4%
         -8.0%
                   pre-period (2003-2005)     treatment (2006-2008)    post-period(2009-2010)

         Notes: The real minimum wage is in NIS per month (deflated by the CPI), based on full-
         time work. The values shown measure changes within periods; for example the pre-
         period value is the change of CPI deflated minimum wage between 2006Q1 and
         2003Q1.


Figure 3: Participation and Unemployment Rates (Population aged 15+), and Output Gap


 13%                                                                                                66%
 12%
 10%                                                                                                64%
  9%
  7%
                                                                                                    62%
  6%
  4%
                                                                                                    60%
  3%
  1%
 -1%                                                                                                58%

 -2%
 -4%                                                                                                56%
                        Unemployment rate % (LH)             Output Gap (LH)
                        Participation rate % (RH)
Source: For unemployment rate and participation rate: CBS, LFS. We calculated the output gap by
applying Hodrick-Prescott filter to quarterly national accounts series for GDP. Output Gap is calculated as
part of the macroeconomic forecasting process in the Israeli Ministry of Finance and serves as a measure
of slack in the economy. OECD publishes similar figures for the Israeli economy as part of the OECD
Economic Outlook.
                                Figure 4: Google Trends Data on Minimum Wages
                         120                                                               6000


                         100                                                               5000
   Google trends index



                          80                                                               4000




                                                                                                  Statutory MW
                          60                                                               3000


                          40                                                               2000


                          20                                                               1000


                           0                                                               0
                               2004-01
                               2004-07
                               2005-01
                               2005-07
                               2006-01
                               2006-07
                               2007-01
                               2007-07
                               2008-01
                               2008-07
                               2009-01
                               2009-07
                               2010-01
                               2010-07
                               2011-01
                               2011-07
                               2012-01
                               2012-07
                               2013-01
                               2013-07
                               2014-01
                               2014-07
                               2015-01
                               2015-07
                               2016-01
                               2016-07
                               2017-01
                               2017-07
                               2018-01
                               2018-07
                               2019-01
                                   Hourly MW        Minimum wage       MW (RHS)

Notes: Leading search terms related to minimum wage in Hebrew as follows: minimum wage ­  ,
hourly minimum wage ­   . Google trends index is available since 2004. Zero values in
Google trends commonly represent search query sample that is not large enough to be reported. The box
shows the period of the increases.
 Figure 5: Distribution of Company-Year Observations in the Analysis Sample,
                                by FMW Bins
     140,000

     120,000

     100,000

      80,000

      60,000

      40,000

      20,000

             0
                       0.0     0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90 90-100
                                                      FMW


Figure 6: Share of Firms with FMW Equal 0 or 100% that have Only One Worker
   35%                                                                 33.32%

   30%
   25%
   20%                            16.64%
   15%
   10%
    5%
    0%
                                     0                                  100
                                                     FMW

   Notes: The percentages shown are for the shares of one-worker firms out of all firms in
   given an FMW category.

                 Figure 7: Employment per Firm, According to FMW Bins
     300

     250

     200

     150

     100

       50

         0
                 0.0         0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90 90-100
                                                    FMW
  Figure 8: Earnings Trends for Workers in Firms with Low and High Initial Fractions of
      Minimum Wage (FMW) Workers, Normalized to Earnings in 2005, 2003-2010
 140%
 135%
 130%
 125%
 120%
 115%
 110%
 105%
 100%
  95%
  90%
             2003      2004        2005        2006        2007       2008        2009        2010

                       0-10% of employees under MW          40-75% of employees under MW
                      75+% of employees under MW

Note: Annual earnings in NIS normalized to earnings in 2005 for each group of workers based on FMW at
their firms.



  Figure 9: Employment and Earnings Changes following Minimum Wage Hike by FMW
                       Bins, % Change, 2004-2005 to 2009-2010
     30%


     20%


     10%


        0%


    -10%


    -20%


    -30%
               0    10%< 10-20% 20-30% 30-40% 40-50% 50-60% 60-70% 70-80% 80-90% 90-99% 100%
               combined effect      employment        earnings        CI-low         CI-high

Note: Earnings growth and combined effect are in real terms. For employment effects, "CI-low" and "CI-
high" are the bottom and top of the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 10: Estimated Effects on Earnings, Employment, and Profits by Year, 2006-2010

                                           A. Log earnings
          0.25

           0.2

          0.15

           0.1

          0.05

             0
                      2006         2007           2008        2009           2010

                              0<fmw<20          20<fmw<40        40<fmw<60
                              60<fmw<80         80<fmw<100


                                          B. Log employment
           0.05

                  0
                       2006         2007           2008        2009          2010
           -0.05

            -0.1

           -0.15

            -0.2

           -0.25

                              0<fmw<20           20<fmw<40       40<fmw<60
                              60<fmw<80          80<fmw<100


                                            C. IHS Profits
           0.4
           0.2
             0
                      2006         2007           2008         2009          2010
           -0.2
           -0.4
           -0.6
           -0.8
            -1
           -1.2

                              0<fmw<20           20<fmw<40       40<fmw<60
                              60<fmw<80          80<fmw<100

          Note: Specifications correspond to Tables 6 and 9, column (3), except that we
          include dummy variables for each year rather than a simple POST variable.
Table 1: Variables Used in Study

 Variable                                Description
 Company data
 Profits                                 Taxable corporate income from all sources including reimbursement of
                                         owner's salary (1,000's NIS/year)
 IHS()                                   Inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation of corporate income
                                         variable, defined as:
                                         sinh-1 (income) = log[income + income2 + 1]
 Profitability                           Corporate income/sales (used for sample restriction)
 Initial profit quartiles:               Dummy variables for quartiles of companies' profits in the pre-period
    Low                                  (2004-2005)
    Medium-low
    Medium
    High
 Sector dummies                          23 sector dummy variables
 Employee data, matched to
 company
 Employment                              Employee headcount at the company level (main position)

 Log(employment)                         Natural logarithm of employee headcount (main position)
 FMW                                     Fraction of employees paid monthly wages at or below the post-hike
                                         minimum wage for 2009-2010 based only on 2005 data on employees
                                         who worked continuously throughout the full year on their main job;
                                         2005 is the last year before treatment; FMW is measured on a 0-1 scale
                                         (although the charts present percentages for clarity)
 POST                                    Post-treatment dummy variable for years 2009-2010 (vs. the 2004-2005
                                         pre-treatment period)
 Income variables
 Owners' income percentile (IP)          Percentiles of business owners' incomes in the total income distribution
 in 2005                                 of business owners and workers, in 2005
 Workers' income percentile (IP)         Percentiles of workers' incomes in the total income distribution of
 in 2005                                 business owners and workers, in 2005
 Weighted owners' income                 After calculating owners' income percentile (IP) in 2005 at the
 percentile by company (IP) in           individual-level, we calculated a weighted average, by percentage of
 2005                                    ownership, of IP for each company
NIS = New Israeli Shekels. The sectors are: manufacturing (mining, food production, textiles, paper products and ,
furniture, chemical products, mineral and metal products, electronics and medical, diamonds); agriculture; high tech;
electricity and water supply; construction; wholesale and retail trade; accommodation services and restaurants; transport
and communications; financial institutions; real estate; computer and related activities; R&D; manpower; security and
cleaning; education; health services and social work; communities and other social and personal services; and other
business activities.
Table 2: Construction of Analysis Sample, and Descriptive Statistics
                                                       Number of
                                      Number of         employee
                                      company        observations on      Employees per company                   Profitability                          FMW
 Sample                              observations     the main job       (min, median, mean, max)          (min, median, mean, max)            (min, median, mean, max)
 Full sample of companies              658,804         21,719,245          (1, 6, 33.48, 36,387)    (-35,331,478, 0.08, -1,667.6, 9,892,492)    (0.00, 0.00, 0.20, 1.00)
 matched to employees,
 2004-2010
 Exclude government sector             654,159          19,668,656         (1, 6, 30.54, 32,606)    (-35,331,478, 0.08, -1,676.2, 9,892,492)    (0.00, 0.00, 0.20, 1.00)
 Exclude non-profits                   593,865          17,185,309         (1, 6, 29.35, 32,606)    (-35,331,478, 0.09, -1,778.3, 9,892,492)    (0.00, 0.00, 0.18, 1.00)
 Exclude companies in                  588,484          17,128,975         (1, 6, 29.51, 32,606)    (-35,331,478, 0.09, -1,793.8, 9,892,492)    (0.00, 0.00, 0.18, 1.00)
 liquidation
 Exclude companies likely to be        542,583          16,358,953         (1, 7, 30.53, 32,606)               (-1, 0.09, 0.15, 1)              (0.00, 0.00, 0.18, 1.00)
 holding companies based on
 extreme profitability measures
 Exclude companies established         519,050          16,018,885         (1, 7, 31.17, 32,606)               (-1, 0.09, 0.16, 1)              (0.00, 0.00, 0.18, 1.00)
 after 2005
 Exclude companies with no             356,893          13,120,034         (1, 8, 36.85, 32,606)               (-1, 0.10, 0.16, 1)              (0.00, 0.00, 0.18, 1.00)
 earnings data in 2005
 Exclude company observations          202,187           7,255,846         (1, 8, 35.97, 29,694)               (-1, 0.09, 0.15, 1)              (0.00, 0.00, 0.18, 1.00)
 in 2006-2008 (treatment period)
Note: Pre-treatment years are 2004-2005 and post-treatment years are 2009-2010.
                            Table 3: Number of Observations Per Year
                                                                        Number of employees at
                               Year      Number of companies               main position
                               2004           55,159                         1,802,782
                               2005           57,520                         1,945,423
                               2009           45,955                         1,738,612
                               2010           43,553                         1,769,029



Table 4: Descriptive Statistics of the Estimation Sample, 2004-2005 and 2009-2010
Variable                                    N                  Median        Mean        Std. Dev.    Minimum     Maximum
Profits, thousands NIS                   202,187                195          1,282        40,859     -1,610,081   8,840,595
IHS()                                    202,187                5.95          4.11         4.80        -14.98       16.69
Profitability                            202,187                0.09          0.15         0.27         -1.00        1.00
Initial profit quartiles:
    Low                                  202,187                 0            0.23         0.42          0           1
    Medium-low                           202,187                 0            0.24         0.43          0           1
    Medium                               202,187                 0            0.26         0.44          0           1
    High                                 202,187                 0            0.27         0.44          0           1
Employment                               201,742                8.00         35.97        254.51         1         29,694
Log(employment)                          201,742                2.08          2.15         1.44         0.00       10.30
FMW                                      202,187                 0            0.18         0.28          0           1
POST                                     202,187                 0            0.44         0.50          0           1
Owners' income percentile (IP) in         58,384                 95            90           15           0          100
2005
Workers income percentile (IP) in        1,269,078               48           48            28           0           99
2005
Weighted owners income                    44,866                 94           90            14           0           99
percentile by company (IP) in 2005



             Table 5: Regression Estimates for Minimum Wage Effect on Log Employment, Based
             on Fraction Affected by Minimum Wage (FMW), 2004-2005 and 2009-2010
              Variables                                (1)                      (2)                      (3)
              FMW                                   0.109***                 -0.084***                   ...
                                                    (0.022)                   (0.020)
              POST                                  0.068***                   0.023                    -0.057
                                                    (0.005)                   (0.063)                  (0.058)
              FMW × POST                           -0.122***                 -0.098***                -0.114***
                                                    (0.019)                   (0.018)                  (0.013)
              Sector dummies and sector                no                       yes                       yes
              dummies × POST
              Firm fixed effects                     no                        no                       yes
              Adj. R2                               0.001                    0.118                     0.925
              N                                   201,742                   201,742                   201,742
             Notes: Dependent variable is log(employment) per firm in each year. Levels of significance: 10%*,
             5%**, 1%***. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The intercept is not reported. FMW is
             measured on a 0-1 scale in the regressions.
Table 6: Regression Estimates for Minimum Wage Effect on Log Employment,
with Separate FMW Bins, 2004-2005 and 2009-2010
 Variables                           (1)                   (2)                      (3)
 FMW >0-20%                          ...                   ...                      ...
 FMW 20-40%                          ...                   ...                      ...
 FMW 40-60%                          ...                   ...                      ...
 FMW 60-80%                          ...                   ...                      ...
 FMW 80-100%                         ...                   ...
 FMW 80-94%                                                                          ...
 FMW 94-100%                                                                         ...
 FMW 0%                              ...                    ...                      ...
 POST                             0.029***                -0.035                   -0.034
                                  (0.004)                (0.049)                  (0.049)
 FMW >0-20% × POST               -0.072***              -0.072***                -0.072***
                                  (0.009)                (0.009)                  (0.009)
 FMW 20-40% × POST               -0.135***              -0.132***                -0.132***
                                  (0.010)                (0.010)                  (0.010)
 FMW 40-60% × POST               -0.130***              -0.126***                -0.127***
                                  (0.013)                (0.013)                  (0.013)
 FMW 60-80% × POST               -0.190***              -0.184***                -0.184***
                                  (0.021)                (0.021)                  (0.021)
 FMW 80-100% × POST                0.005                   0.006
                                  (0.016)                (0.016)
 FMW 80-94% × POST                                                                -0.062*
                                                                                  (0.037)
 FMW 94-100% × POST                                                                0.014
                                                                                  (0.435)
  FMW 0% × POST                        ...                 ...                      ...
  Sector dummies and                   no                  yes                      yes
  sector dummies × POST
  Adj. R2                            0.925                0.926                   0.926
  N                                201,742               201,742                 201,742
Notes: Dependent variable is log(employment) per firm in each year. Specifications include
firm fixed effects. Levels of significance: 10%*, 5%**, 1%***. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level. The intercept is not reported. FMW is measured on a 0-1 scale in the
regressions. Specification (3) splits the top FMW 80-100% bin into two groups that are more
homogenous, as explained in the text.
Table 7: Regression Estimates of Minimum Wage Effect on Profits (IHS()), Based on Fraction Affected by Minimum Wage (FMW),
2004-2005 and 2009-2010
 Variables                     (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)                 (5)                     (6)                    (7)
                                                                             Sample: low        Sample: medium         Sample: medium          Sample: high initial
                           Full sample     Full sample     Full sample       initial profits    low initial profits      initial profits            profits
 FMW                         0.155***        0.179***           ...                ...                  ...                    ...                     ...
                             (0.022)         (0.023)
 POST                       -1.416***       -2.022***       -2.017***           4.603***            -1.330***              -1.668***                -1.841***
                             (0.034)         (0.224)         (0.227)            (0.503)              (0.354)                (0.387)                  (0.553)
 FMW × POST                 -0.749***       -0.795***       -0.720***          -1.805***             -0.172*                -0.362**                  0.026
                             (0.068)         (0.070)         (0.070)            (0.152)              (0.105)                (0.123)                  (0.167)
  Initial profits              yes             yes             yes                 no                   no                     no                       no
  dummies
  Initial profits × POST      yes             yes              yes               no                   no                      no                        no
  Sector dummies and           no             yes              yes               yes                 yes                     yes                       yes
  sector dummies ×
  POST
  Firm fixed effects           no             no               yes               yes                 yes                     yes                       yes
  Adj. R2                    0.551          0.554             0.732            0.641                0.471                   0.465                     0.483
  N                         202,187        202,187          202,187            47,146              48,082                  52,332                     54,627
Notes: Dependent variable is IHS() per firm in each year. Levels of significance: 10%*, 5%**, 1%***. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The intercept
is not reported. FMW is measured on a 0-1 scale in the regressions.
Table 8: Regression Estimates of Minimum Wage Effect on Profits
(IHS()), Based on Estimated Mechanical Cost of Minimum Wage
Increase, 2004-2005 and 2009-2010
 Variables                                                               (1)
                                                                    Full sample
  Log wage bill for minimum wage workers (Log WBMW)                       ...
  Log relative minimum wage (log RMW)                                -13.065***
                                                                       (1.713)
  Log wage bill for minimum wage workers × log relative               -0.269***
  minimum wage                                                         (0.093)
  Initial profits dummies                                                yes
  Initial profits × POST                                                 yes
  Sector dummies and sector dummies × POST                               yes
  Adj. R2                                                               0.732
  N                                                                   202,187
Notes: Dependent variable is IHS() per firm in each year. Specification includes
firm fixed effects. Log wage bill for minimum wage workers is computed as the
log of the wage bill for minimum wage workers, with the wage bill computed as
the number of minimum wage workers in 2005 multiplied by the statutory 2005
minimum wage, where minimum wage workers are defined as those below the
deflated minimum wage in the post-period. Log relative minimum wage is
defined as zero (log(1)) for the pre-period and log(1.154) for the post-period,
given the 15.4% increase in the minimum wage. The interaction measures the
percent change in profits for a one-percent higher effect of the minimum wage
increase of the wage bill (based on minimum wage workers in 2005). Levels of
significance: 10%*, 5%**, 1%***. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
The intercept is not reported. FMW is measured on a 0-1 scale in the regressions.
Table 9: Regression Estimates of Minimum Wage Effect on Profits
(IHS()), Based on Fraction Affected by Minimum Wage (FMW), with
Separate FMW Bins, 2004-2005 and 2009-2010
 Variables                                                 (1)                 (2)
 FMW >0-20%                                                ...                 ...
 FMW 20-40%                                                ...                 ...
 FMW 40-60%                                                ...                 ...
 FMW 60-80%                                                ...                 ...
 FMW 80-100%                                               ...                 ...
 FMW 0%                                                    ...                 ...
 POST                                                  -1.431***           -2.088***
                                                        (0.037)             (0.227)
  FMW >0-20% × POST                                      0.015               0.098*
                                                        (0.059)             (0.059)
  FMW 20-40% × POST                                      -0.004              0.032
                                                        (0.056)             (0.056)
  FMW 40-60% × POST                                    -0.201***           -0.197***
                                                        (0.064)             (0.065)
  FMW 60-80% × POST                                    -0.438***           -0.451***
                                                        (0.105)             (0.106)
  FMW 80-100% × POST                                   -0.874***           -0.924***
                                                        (0.084)             (0.085)
  FMW00 × POST                                             ...                 ...
  Initial profit dummies                                   yes                yes
  Initial profit dummies × POST                            yes                yes
  Sector dummies and sector dummies × POST                 no                 yes
  Adj. R2                                                0.730               0.732
  N                                                     202,187            202,187
Notes: Dependent variable is IHS() per firm in each year. Specifications include firm
fixed effects. Levels of significance: 10%*, 5%**, 1%***. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level. The intercept is not reported.
Table 10: Regression Estimates of Minimum Wage Effect on Profits (IHS()), Based on
Income Percentile for Incomes of Business Owners, 2004-2005 and 2009-2010
 Variables                                                         (1)                            (2)
 Income percentile (IP)                                            ...                            ...
 POST                                                          -3.431***                      -3.909***
                                                                (0.175)                        (0.285)
  Income percentile (IP) × POST                                 2.395***                       2.351***
                                                                (0.178)                        (0.178)
  Initial profit dummies                                          yes                            yes
  Initial profit dummies × POST                                   yes                            yes
  Sector dummies and sector dummies × POST                         no                            yes
  Adj. R2                                                        0.724                          0.725
  N                                                             155,647                       155,647
Notes: Dependent variable is IHS() per firm in each year. Specifications include firm fixed effects. Levels
of significance: 10%*, 5%**, 1%***. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. (Clustering at the owner
level is complicated because there can be multiple and overlapping owners.) The intercept is not reported. IP
is measured on a 0-1 scale in the regressions.
Table 11: Income Percentiles of Business Owners and Workers, Individual and Family, by FMW, 2005
                     (1)                     (2)                   (3)                   (4)
               Business owners'       Workers' income   Business owners' family     Workers' family
   FMW         income percentile          percentile       income percentile       income percentile
      0               88                     77                    71                    57
   < 10%              94                     77                    82                    57
  10-20%              87                     60                    72                    44
  20-30%              85                     54                    69                    40
  30-40%              81                     48                    63                    37
  40-50%              79                     44                    60                    35
  50-60%              80                     38                    61                    31
  60-70%              78                     38                    56                    30
  70-80%              78                     38                    57                    28
  80-90%              79                     34                    53                    25
 90-100%              74                     36                    48                    24
   Total              87                     68                    68                    49
Note: Individual figures represent approximate rank of column (5) in Tables 12 and 13. Family figures represent
approximate rank of column (10) in Table 12. Family income represents combined income of both married spouses in the
year 2005. Annual owner or worker earnings below 6,000 NIS were omitted from calculation, as these can reflect small
components of income that are not labor income from the main job. The rank was calculated based on the family
distribution including both owners' and workers' families.
Table 12: Descriptive Statistics for Family Income by FMW: Married Business Owners and Workers, 2005
                                                                              A. Owners
                (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)             (8)         (9)         (10)            (11)          (12)
                                                                                                                                           Family income
                                                                                                                                             relative to     Owner/
                                                  # children                                         Annual         % of                     average in      spouse
                          Average                 under 18     Owners      Spouse   Spouse %          spouse      spouses     Family        0<FMW0.1         income
   FMW          N           age      % female      in 2005     income       age      female          income       working     income           range           ratio
      0       28,904       49.85      4.4%           2.33      235,192      46.9     95.7%           116,235       64.3%      312,083           68%             3.1
   < 10%      3,419        52.66      2.7%           2.32      372,911      49.4     97.3%           140,150       59.4%      458,600          100%             4.5
  10-20%      5,181        50.92      3.4%           2.34      230,751      47.7     96.6%           104,015       63.7%      298,226           65%             3.5
  20-30%      3,086        49.50      4.5%           2.38      202,910      46.4     95.5%           101,814       66.1%      269,795           59%             3.0
  30-40%      3,712        49.05      4.4%           2.44      168,659      45.8     95.7%            91,188       66.9%      229,877           50%             2.8
  40-50%      3,962        49.26      5.1%           2.38      159,372      46.1     95.0%            88,750       67.4%      221,902           48%             2.7
  50-60%       801         48.37      4.4%           2.45      166,414      45.0     95.7%            86,703       63.8%      223,853           49%             3.0
  60-70%      1,149        48.63      5.0%           2.48      159,633      45.2     95.1%            82,982       64.2%      215,152           47%             3.0
  70-80%       628         47.16      6.2%           2.64      149,760      44.1     93.9%            87,533       64.3%      206,732           45%             2.7
  80-90%       258         45.96      5.8%           2.63      168,803      42.3     94.1%            92,481       53.9%      217,249           47%             3.4
 90-100%      2,728        50.83      6.0%           2.42      134,650      47.7     94.2%            91,137       62.0%      198,334           43%             2.4
                                                                             B. Workers
                                                                                                                                             Family income   Worker/
                                                  # children                                           Annual         % of                     relative to   spouse
                         Average                  under 18     Annual      Spouse      Spouse %         spouse      spouses      Family       0<FMW0.1       income
   FMW           N         age       % female      in 2005    earnings       age        female         income      working      income           range         ratio
      0       228,395     40.72        29.3%         1.44     131,069       39.1        66.1%          104,518       67.4%      207,498          102%           1.9
   < 10%      263,140     40.06        34.5%         1.35     130,888       38.6        61.6%           98,712       70.8%      202,744          100%           1.9
  10-20%      100,238     40.04        45.7%         1.35      73,505       39.4        47.5%           89,811       65.1%      138,431           68%           1.3
  20-30%       60,511     38.54        46.5%         1.26      62,541       37.9        47.0%           85,500       65.1%      122,979           61%           1.1
  30-40%       60,808     38.47        50.1%         1.22      53,218       38.0        42.6%           81,848       64.6%      112,959           56%           1.0
  40-50%       37,324     38.42        48.7%         1.27      49,519       38.2        43.6%           83,757       63.0%      107,895           53%           0.9
  50-60%       19,391     38.35        52.4%         1.22      41,239       38.3        39.4%           74,144       62.3%       93,238           46%           0.9
  60-70%       23,041     39.63        59.0%         1.26      38,086       39.9        33.6%           74,344       63.7%       89,567           44%           0.8
  70-80%       10,339     38.18        55.0%         1.32      37,129       38.4        34.8%           73,247       60.2%       85,074           42%           0.8
  80-90%       9,759      40.66        66.7%         1.40      29,494       41.2        24.1%           71,446       59.8%       74,276           37%           0.7
 90-100%       18,561     43.81        70.1%         1.32      28,652       44.1        21.9%           79,643       58.7%       74,137           37%           0.6
Notes: Annual owner or worker earnings below 6,000 NIS were omitted from calculation. Family income is calculated by combining spouses' incomes.
Table 13: Descriptive Statistics by FMW: Single Business Owners and Workers,
2005
                                        A. Owners
                 (1)          (2)          (3)                (4)               (5)
                                                          # children
                                                         under 18 in      Annual owner
    FMW           N          Age         % female            2005           earnings
       0        5,347       47.38          21.5%             1.80           191,728
    < 10%        491        53.35          25.7%             1.79           393,442
   10-20%        766        49.20          23.5%             1.82           199,852
   20-30%        489        46.60          26.6%             1.89           160,847
   30-40%        667        47.07          25.8%             1.81           142,512
   40-50%        773        45.72          25.5%             1.86           124,418
   50-60%        150        44.31          19.3%             2.00           151,856
   60-70%        236        43.35          23.7%             1.79           105,619
   70-80%        123        43.11          28.5%             2.21           113,148
   80-90%         62        39.81          16.1%             2.58           108,605
  90-100%        742        45.48          24.4%             1.76            81,367
                                        B. Workers
                                                          # children
                                                         under 18 in
   FMW             N         Age          % female           2005         Annual earnings
      0        100,316      32.26          37.5%             0.36              72,937
   < 10%       111,393      32.37          44.3%             0.33              75,927
  10-20%        62,031      31.12          47.8%             0.31              43,042
  20-30%        48,414      28.90          44.9%             0.23              37,045
  30-40%        52,701      28.09          47.6%             0.22              30,853
  40-50%        35,770      27.51          46.6%             0.20              27,958
  50-60%        21,264      27.11          47.5%             0.21              24,578
  60-70%        22,865      28.37          55.2%             0.24              23,465
  70-80%        10,429      27.75          49.9%             0.22              23,289
  80-90%         8,215      31.61          60.4%             0.33              20,296
 90-100%        12,312      38.46          71.6%             0.44              21,396
Notes: Annual owner or worker earnings below 6,000 NIS were omitted from calculation.
