                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FINTECH PLATFORMS AND MUTUAL FUND DISTRIBUTION

                                        Claire Yurong Hong
                                           Xiaomeng Lu
                                              Jun Pan

                                        Working Paper 26576
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26576


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2019




This paper was previously entitled "The Economic Impact of Distributing Financial Products on
Third-Party Online Platforms." We are grateful to Darrell Duffie, Hao Jiang, Andrew Karolyi,
Jennifer Huang, Xing Huang, Yi Huang (discussant), Wenlan Qian, Clemens Sialm, Laura Stark,
Baolian Wang, Joakim Westerholm (discussant), Shangjin Wei, Wei Xiong, Xiaoyun Yu, Lu
Zheng, and Haoxiang Zhu for valuable discussions and comments. We thank seminar and
conference participants at Tsinghua University PBC School of Finance, Chinese University of
Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Lingnan University, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, National University of Singapore, the 2019 China
FinTech Research Conference, the 2020 Finance Down Under Conference, the behavioral finance
online seminar organized by Wei Xiong. We are grateful to the Howbuy platform for data
provision. We thank Linchen Liu, Shiwen Tian, and Heming Zhang for research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Claire Yurong Hong, Xiaomeng Lu, and Jun Pan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
FinTech Platforms and Mutual Fund Distribution
Claire Yurong Hong, Xiaomeng Lu, and Jun Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 26576
December 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G0,G10,G15,G2,G20,G23,G4,G40,G5

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the economic impact of the emergence of FinTech platforms on financial
intermediation. In China, platform distributions of mutual funds emerged in 2012 and grew
quickly into a formidable presence. Utilizing the staggered fund entrance onto platforms, we find
markedly increased flow sensitivities to performance. Akin to the winner-take-all phenomenon in
the platform economy, net flow captured by top 10% performing funds more than triples its pre-
platform level. This pattern of platform-induced performance chasing is further confirmed using
private data from Howbuy, a top platform in China. Consistent with this added incentive of
becoming top performers in the era of large-scale platforms, fund managers increase risk taking
to enhance the probability of becoming top performers. Meanwhile, organizational cohesiveness
of fund families weakens as platforms level the playing field for all funds.

Claire Yurong Hong                               Jun Pan
211 West Huaihai Road                            Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai                                         Shanghai Jiao Tong University
China                                            Shanghai, China
yrhong@saif.sjtu.edu.cn                          and NBER
                                                 junpan@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
Xiaomeng Lu
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Datong Plaza, 211 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai
P.R.China, 200030
xmlu@saif.sjtu.edu.cn




The updated version is available at http://en.saif.sjtu.edu.cn/junpan/Platform.pdf
1       Introduction
The rise of the platform economy over the past decade is transforming the way we live. Em-
powered by technological innovations, platforms are like intermediaries on steroids, creating
social and business connectivity on a previously unimaginable scale. Widely adopted plat-
forms, such as Google for information, Amazon for retail, Facebook for social networking,
and Uber for taxi rides, have profoundly reshaped how information is aggregated and dissem-
inated in their respective industries, and, for better or worse, our actions follow accordingly.
    In this paper, we focus on the impact of the emergence of FinTech platforms on financial
intermediation. Technological developments over the past quarter century have greatly facil-
itated online trading of financial products,1 but the recent emergence of platform economy
is an entirely new phenomenon. In particular, even with the widespread presence of online
trading, the intermediation of financial products such as mutual funds remains segmented
by the numerous distribution channels organized by fund families, banks, and brokers. The
emergence of the FinTech platforms, created by tech-driven firms independent of the tradi-
tional distribution channels, threatens to break this institutional segmentation and reshape
financial intermediation as Amazon did for books and retail goods. On the consumer side,
FinTech integrates mutual fund investment into investors' everyday life. With increased
technological efficiency, investors can access a vast number of mutual funds, which, via apps
on mobile devices, are literally at their fingertips. On the product side, fund managers, no
matter how small or invisible, have the potential to reach the entire user base of these plat-
forms. By vastly improving the means of connectivity and offering technological efficiency,
the platform model takes down barriers, allows information to flow more freely, and levels
the playing field for all mutual funds. But as the distribution of funds is made more efficient
via the platform model, what is the impact on investors' allocations of risk? Likewise, as
the platforms improve the means of connectivity, what are the economic consequences, both
intended and unintended, of this new and powerful distribution channel on fund investors,
fund managers, and fund families?
    Our paper provides direct empirical evidence to address these important questions. Plat-
form intermediation of financial products has often been discussed in the literature because
of its huge growth potential (e.g., Goldstein, Jiang, and Karolyi (2019), Philippon (2018),
and Frost et al. (2019)). Nonetheless, there is limited empirical evidence with respect to
what actually happens when platforms take hold of a sizable market share in the distribu-
tion of financial products. Taking advantage of a 2012 policy change in China, which allowed
FinTech platforms to distribute mutual funds, our paper is the first to fill in the knowledge
    1
     See, for example, Barber and Odean (2001, 2002) and Choi, Laibson, and Metrick (2002) on how internet
affects investor behavior.


                                                    1
gap. Living in the era of digital payments via Alipay, and later fueled by the enthusiasm for
Yu'ebao, the money market fund provided by Ant Financial in 2013, the Chinese customers
are early adopters of FinTech platforms. By 2018, the platforms have already grown into a
formidable presence in distributing mutual funds, with the top platforms covering almost all
of the equity, bond, and mixed mutual funds in China.2
    Focusing first on the impact of the platforms on investor behavior, our empirical results
document a strong platform-induced amplification of performance chasing. We find a striking
increase in performance sensitivity, driven by flows chasing the top-ranked funds much more
aggressively after the emergence of the platforms. Upon ranking actively managed equity
funds by their past 12-month returns into deciles, the average net flow to the funds in the top
decile increases from 1.88% pre-platform (2008­2012) to 19.65% post-platform (2013­2017).
This amplification of the performance chasing post-platform shows up not only in the equity
funds but also in the mixed funds. Using the US equity funds as a benchmark, we do not
find such a pattern and the average net flow to the top-decile funds in the US is around
6% in both time periods. We further take advantage of the fact that our data include the
exact dates on which each mutual fund signs up for the platforms. Using this information on
staggered entrance, we further test this pattern of amplified performance chasing at the fund
level. By regressing quarterly fund net flows on fund rankings and controlling for fund-level
characteristics and time and style fixed effects, we find that the post-platform performance
sensitivity is around three times the pre-platform level for both equity and mixed funds.
    The fact that our results can be detected in the publicly observed data is significant ­
it indicates that the platforms have grown important enough to influence the entire mutual
fund industry. We further provide direct evidence by taking advantage of a proprietary
dataset obtained from Howbuy, one of the top platforms in China. We find that perfor-
mance chasing is indeed stronger on the platforms. For example, from 2015 through 2018,
the top-decile equity funds account for an average of 49.37% of the quarterly purchases on
Howbuy, significantly larger than the average of 37.61% for the entire market, which aggre-
gates purchases over all distribution channels, both on- and off-platform. Pre-platform, only
23.79% of the quarterly purchases goes to the top-decile equity funds.
    Performance chasing has long been documented as a salient feature of investor behavior
in the mutual fund industry.3 What is new and important in our findings is the strong
amplification effect associated with the emergence of platforms. Understanding the reason
behind this amplified performance chasing is therefore important for the future of FinTech
   2
     While the sales numbers have been closely guarded by the platforms, it was estimated that, by 2018,
about one-third of the sales of equity, bond, and mixed mutual funds took place on the platforms and another
one-third via banks, the largest distribution channel in the pre-platform era.
   3
       See, for example, Gruber (1996), Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996), and Chevalier and Ellison (1997).


                                                     2
platforms. First and foremost, we hypothesize that the unique features of FinTech plat-
forms ­ their technological efficiency and centralized information structure ­ result in a
pattern of synchronized performance chasing, which are the main driver of the amplified
flow-performance sensitivity. Central to our argument is the observation that the flow of
information is uniquely different on and off platforms. Off platform, the information flow
is dispersed in nature, with different investors receiving different information from their
respective distribution channels. On platform, the information flow is uniform in nature.
Almost all the platforms adopt a simple performance rank list setting to display funds in
their mobile apps.4 With investors receiving almost identical signals focusing mostly on past
performance, performance chasing at the individual investor's level gets synchronized and
this synchronized performance chasing gives rise to the amplified performance chasing.
   To formally test our hypothesis of synchronized performance chasing, we take advantage
of the fact that the front page of each FinTech platform's mobile app has limited space.
Depending on the size of their cell phones, investors normally see 6 to 10 funds per page
on their mobile apps. If our hypothesis of synchronized performance chasing is correct, we
expect to see platform-induced performance chasing to concentrate among those few top
performing funds that are more likely to show up on the front page of the mobile apps. This
is exactly what we find. The platform-induced performance chasing is the strongest for the
top 6 funds and decreases precipitously with the ranking of the funds as they become less
likely to appear on the front page.
   We further investigate other alternative channels through which amplified performance
chasing can arise. For example, platforms might attract new and inexperienced investors who
are more prone to performance chasing. Focusing on the time surrounding the introduction
of FinTech platforms, we do not find significant changes in the number and fraction of retail
investors, either at the individual fund level or the aggregate level. Another possibility is
that the timing of funds' entrance onto platform might be endogenous. For example, it just
happens that funds enter the platform exactly when, for various reasons, investors of such
funds become more prone to performance chasing. Such stories, while possible, are hardly
plausible, given the sudden amplification of performance chasing occurring immediately after
funds' entrance onto platforms. Nevertheless, we go over each of such endogenous scenarios
carefully in the paper to rule them out. A third possibility is that improving market condition
might enhance investors' propensity for performance chasing. Building on our staggered
   4
     Investors on the platforms share the same set of information displayed on their digital devices. Most
platforms group mutual funds by style into tabs for equity, bond, mixed, and index funds. Within each tab,
the default page displays the funds in the order of their past raw returns. More recently, the traditional
channels such as banks and brokers are moving to the platform model by building their own digital apps,
which very much resemble the apps provided by the platforms. There is, however, one important difference
­ the default page of the banks' apps usually displays their affiliated funds at the top.


                                                    3
entrance test, which utilizes the different timing of funds' entrance onto platforms, we further
control for the time-varying flow-performance sensitivity for each year. We find that the
platform effect still exists, suggesting that changing market conditions cannot explain our
results.
   To understand the broader impact of FinTech platforms, we further investigate the be-
haviors of fund managers and document the changing landscape for fund families. We find
that, in the presence of amplified performance chasing, fund managers increase risk taking to
enhance the probability of getting into the top rank. Specifically, we find that funds in the
top decile exhibit a pattern of increased volatility for at least two quarters prior to getting
into the top ranking. In contrast, funds outside the top decile do not exhibit such a pattern.
Decomposing the fund volatility further into systematic and idiosyncratic components, we
find that this added risk taking is present in both components, but the increased risk taking
in the systematic component is more troubling. Given the positive risk premium associated
with systematic risk, boosting the systematic component in risk taking does provide higher
expected returns, which indicates that the fund managers have already reached the limit
of their own skills and are using leverage to get ahead. While the economic magnitude of
the result is relatively small, the emergence of such a practice points to the unintended
consequences associated with the platform intermediation of financial products.
   The emergence of these platforms also has a profound impact on large fund families.
Before the rise of the platform economy, large fund families are like segmented mini-platforms
whose resources are attractive to fund managers. This is similar to how, before Uber arrived,
taxi drivers relied heavily on dispatch services. In the era of the platform economy, however,
large fund families lose their cohesiveness as organizations. Empirically, after joining the
top platforms, the importance of within-family-ranking weakens, whereas the importance
of universal ranking gets amplified in attracting subsequent flows. In other words, after
the introduction of platforms, fund managers are increasingly being compared to the entire
universe of funds, resulting in the lowered importance of their relative standing within a
family. At the same time, fund families' incentive to groom star managers also drops, as
they no longer have a strong hold on their fund managers. Consistent with this hypothesis,
we find that, pre platform, funds from the top ten largest families account for a significantly
higher share in the top decile than in other deciles. Post platform, however, they no longer
have a large presence in the top decile.
   Our paper contributes to the new and exciting field of FinTech by offering the first
comprehensive study on the large-scale disruption of FinTech platforms in the mutual fund
industry. Relative to Goldstein, Jiang, and Karolyi (2019), Philippon (2018) and Frost et al.
(2019), where FinTech opportunities and their potential impact on existing financial insti-
tutions are discussed and anticipated, our paper is the first to provide extensive empirical

                                               4
evidence on what actually happens when the tech-driven mobile-device-based platforms are
allowed to enter the financial intermediation industry to distribute financial products. Given
that this large-scale disruption in the mutual fund industry has not yet happened elsewhere,
our paper offers a glimpse into the future, documenting the intended and unintended con-
sequences of such a disruption. The scope of our results is much broader than what has
been documented in the existing literature. While most of the existing empirical work in
this area that relies on proprietary data from one particular platform to measure the impact
of FinTech,5 we provide evidence using both the publicly available data of the entire mutual
fund industry and the data from a top platform in China. In other words, we are reporting
the impact of FinTech on the entire industry, not just one platform or one company.
    As such, our findings serve as important and essential building blocks to facilitate the
much needed discussion on the welfare implications of the FinTech development. As ex-
pected, FinTech platforms can considerably lower the barrier to financial market participa-
tion and level the playing field for all mutual funds. But also shown in our paper is the fact
that technological efficiency of the platforms does not necessarily imply economic efficiency,
and there is indeed cause for concern. Among the most significant results of our paper is
the power of information flow in the platform economy and its unintended consequences. In
particular, the winner-take-all effect is overwhelmingly strong on these FinTech platforms.
Whether or not the platforms should be more proactive in regulating the flow of information
or in offering financial advices to alleviate the unintended consequences is a topic of great
interest.6
    Our paper is also related to the existing literature that studies the effectiveness of dis-
tribution channels of financial products. As documented by Bergstresser, Chalmers, and
Tufano (2009), Chalmers and Reuter (2020), Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2013), Jenk-
inson, Jones, and Martinez (2016), and Cookson et al. (2020), there is ample evidence of the
conflicts of interest among brokers, financial advisors, and web-based platforms. We com-
plement their study by examining the impact of FinTech platforms. The conflict-of-interest
issue is arguably less of a concern, as these FinTech platforms often display funds according
to objective measures, like performance ranking. We show that, in the absence of guidance
from banks and brokers, individual investors pay more attention to the prominent features
   5
     See, for example, D'Acunto, Prabhala, and Rossi (2019) on the impact of robo-advising, Wei and Yang
(2019) on online and offline mutual fund investing, Cookson et al. (2020) on the conflict-of-interest issue of
online platforms, Vallee and Zeng (2019) on P2P lending, Hau et al. (2017) on the impact of FinTech credit
on entrepreneur growth, and Buchak et al. (2018) and Fuster et al. (2019) on mortgage origination.
   6
     Outside the financial intermediation industry, the fact that the platforms can influence investor behavior
through personalized information flow has been recognized, and its validity debated. For example, Sun et al.
(2019) document the large economic impact of the platforms' information flow on customer buying behavior
through a large-scale field experiment with Alibaba's retail platform.



                                                      5
of platform apps, e.g., performance ranking lists.
    Finally, our paper also adds to the extensive literature on the impact of mutual fund
performance on investment flows. For example, Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tu-
fano (1998), Goldstein, Jiang, and Ng (2017) among others document the flow-performance
sensitivity for equity funds and bond funds. More relevantly, Kaniel and Parham (2017)
investigate how visibility and prominence through media coverage affect investors' attention
and flow to top performers. We find that the technological efficiency and information struc-
ture on large-scale FinTech platforms can exacerbate the flow-performance sensitivity in the
market.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data used in
our study and the institutional background. Section 3 presents the main results related to
flow-performance sensitivity and presents direct evidence of amplified performance chasing
using proprietary data from Howbuy. Section 4 investigates the channels and alternative
explanations of the results. Section 5 explores the economic consequences of platforms on
fund managers and fund families. Section 6 conducts robustness checks under alternative
settings. Section 7 concludes.


2       Data and Institutional Background
2.1       The Emergence of FinTech Platforms
In China, platforms are allowed to distribute mutual funds since 2012. China Securities
Regulatory Commission (CSRC) announced in February 2012 that tech firms independent
of fund families, banks, and brokers may distribute mutual funds. CSRC further issued
guidelines in March 2013 for sales agencies distributing funds through e-commerce platforms.7
Before the introduction of platforms, funds could only be distributed through banks, brokers,
and fund families. The upper left panel of Figure 1 shows the number of major types of
distribution channels over time. Since 2008, there has been a steady increase in the number
of distribution channels via banks and brokers, with the banks growing faster than the
brokers. Platforms entered the scene in 2012, quickly catching up with the banks and
brokers and reaching a total number of 115 by 2018. As is typical in the platform economy,
the top platforms grabbed most of the market shares while the smaller platforms struggled
for survival. Thus, of the 115 platforms, only a handful are active.
    As of 2018, the two largest platforms were Tiantian and Ant Financial in terms of market
share. Tiantian is among the first four institutions to obtain the fund distribution license
    7
        http://www.csrc.gov.cn/pub/csrc en/laws/overRule/Announcement/201306/t20130603 228916.html



                                                  6
from China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) in February 2012. Ant Financial
missed the first batch of license issuance, but quickly entered the platform business in April
2014 by acquiring Hundsun, the parent firm of a platform called Shumi.8 The introduction of
Yu'ebao and the acquisition of Hundsun are highlighted in the graphs, marking two milestone
events for Ant Financial and the entire mutual fund industry.
   The upper right and bottom left panels of Figure 1 report the coverage of actively man-
aged mutual funds in our sample by the top four platforms (Ant, Howbuy, Tiantian, and
Tong Huashun) and an average bank and a broker. The coverage is reported both in per-
centage (bottom left panel) and in number (upper right panel). As we can see, the adoption
of platforms by mutual funds has been swift. Over the span of just one year, from 2012Q2 to
2013Q2, the coverage increased from zero to over 60% for the top three platforms, indicating
that over 60% of the actively managed mutual funds in our sample have signed up to be
covered by the platforms. The coverage of mutual funds has become significantly large since
the emergence of platforms as compared to that of an average broker or bank. For example,
by 2018, each of the top four platforms covered over 2000 actively managed funds, while an
average bank carried less than 300 funds and an average broker carried less than 1000 funds.
   Overall, the entrance of the platforms has been swift, with mutual funds quickly signing
up with the platforms. It should be emphasized, however, that coverage does not equate
to actual transactions. While the actual sales numbers have been closely guarded by the
platforms, we get a glimpse of these numbers using the annual reports from East Money,
the parent company of Tiantian platform, one of the first and largest platforms in China.
The 2018 sales of mutual funds on Tiantian totaled RMB 525 billion, including RMB 328.7
billion for money market funds. Excluding money market funds, the 2018 sales number of
mutual funds was RMB 196.4 billion for Tiantian and RMB 2.3 trillion for the entire market.
In other words, as one of the top platforms, Tiantian's market share was about 8.5% in 2018.
This number is roughly consistent with the estimated magnitude reported in the press ­ the
platforms in aggregate account for one-third of the market share.


2.2     The Features of FinTech Platforms
The features and designs of the FinTech platforms in China are highly homogeneous. In
particular, all the platforms adopt a simple performance rank list setting to display funds
in their mobile apps. Most of the FinTech platforms mainly operate through mobile apps
instead of websites. Based on the survey evidence from Asset Management Association of
China in 2018, around 71% of retail investors purchase mutual funds through apps on mobile
   8
     Since customers from Alipay are the major source of investor flow for Ant Financial platform, we use
the acquisition date as the starting date of the platform operated by Ant Financial in our later analysis.


                                                    7
phones, and only 17.4% stick to the Internet website purchases.9 Panel A of Appendix
Figure A1 exhibits cell phone screenshots of two platforms, Ant Financial and Howbuy, for
illustration purposes. The first screenshot shows the front page of the Alipay app provided
by Ant Financial. Alipay is a catch-all app developed by Alibaba, which integrates all kinds
of services from calling a taxi to ordering takeout. Alipay has an embedded mutual funds
section in its ecosystem, making mutual fund investment as easy as other aspects of everyday
life. After entering this fund section, investors can choose funds from a performance rank
list, as shown in the second screenshot. All funds in a specific style are ranked according to
their past raw returns, and investors can choose a return horizon of 1, 3, 6, or 12 months to
rank funds. By clicking on a fund, investors can view detailed information about it, as shown
in the third screenshot. According to the current regulation, platforms cannot rank funds at
their discretion on measures not directly obtained from the fund reports or prospectus. For
example, platforms cannot rank funds based on the platforms' own version of risk-adjusted
returns. The limited screen space on mobile apps, together with tech firms' emphasis on
simple user interface, also constrain the platforms' ability to display additional information.
As a result, all FinTech platforms in China rank funds based on past performance, which is
one of the most important factors that investors care about in mutual fund investment. As
shown in the last screenshot, the performance rank list from the Howbuy app (taken on the
same day) is almost identical to the one from Alipay, with exactly the same list of funds on
top. Since the performance rank list is based on funds' raw returns, there is little room for
platforms to intervene based on their incentive. Therefore, the potential conflict-of-interest
issue is arguably mitigated in this setting.
   For comparison, Panel B of Appendix Figure A1 shows a screenshot from Charles Schwarb
OneSource, a typical brokerage for mutual funds in the US. One can observe several key dif-
ferences between OneSource and the FinTech platforms in China. First, OneSource operates
mainly through Internet websites. They list their own affiliated funds on top, at a position
more salient for investors. Second, below their affiliated funds, they display a subset of third-
party funds according to their own selection criteria, as opposed to all the available funds.
Finally, as a typical financial firm, they provide rich information and abundant criteria for
investors to select funds. They offer individual investors more freedom to customize their
own pool of funds but arguably make fund investment decisions more complicated. Other
standard online brokerage firms (and websites of fund families) share similar features along
these dimensions.
   9
       http://www.amac.org.cn/researchstatistics/report/tzzbg/202001/P020200106520189708039.pdf




                                                   8
2.3    Data and Methodology
We obtain the data for mutual funds from CSMAR (China Stock Market & Accounting
Research) and Wind. In China, there are four types of mutual funds: equity mutual funds,
mixed mutual funds, bond mutual funds, and money market funds. We focus on the actively
managed equity, mixed, and bond mutual funds and exclude index funds, passive funds,
structured funds, and QDII funds from our analysis. For mutual funds with multiple share
classes, we sum all the share classes to derive the total net assets (TNA) of the funds. We
compute fund returns and fund fees as the TNA-weighted average across all the share classes.
   Following prior literature (e.g., Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998)),
the flow to fund i in quarter t is computed using the following equation:

                                      TNAi,t - TNAi,t-1 (1 + Reti,t )
                          Flowi,t =                                   ,
                                                TNAi,t-1

where Reti,t is the quarter-t split and dividend adjusted return of fund i. We assume that
inflows and outflows occur at the end of each quarter, and that investors reinvest the dividend
they receive in the same fund. To alleviate any concern about outliers, flow is winsorized
at 2% and 98% levels. We exclude fund-quarter observations when the absolute values of
two adjacent quarter flows are both larger than 100% but in different signs, which may have
been caused by errors in reporting TNA. We further require a minimum fund size of RMB 1
million and a minimum fund age of two years to be included in our sample. We end up with
26,412 fund-quarter observations from 2008 through 2017 for our sample.
   To examine the impact of platforms, we focus our analyses on two time periods: before
2008­2012 and after 2013­2017. We define our post-platform period from 2013 because,
although some platforms obtain their licenses from the CSRC in February 2012, it is not
until the end of 2012 that the first batch of funds become available for sale on the platforms.
Table 1 provides the summary statistics of the actively managed mutual funds in our sample,
with Panel A reporting the aggregate fund information by year and Panel B reporting the
key fund-level variables for the before and after periods.
   As shown in Panel A of Table 1, the total number of funds steadily increases from fewer
than 200 in 2008 to close to 3000 by 2019. The number of bond funds is particularly small
in the early years, with only 20 funds by 2009, which prompts us to start the before period
for bond funds from 2010. The same pattern can be observed from the bottom right panel
of Figure 1. The aggregate industry size for equity and mixed funds remain relatively stable
around 2012, whereas the industry size for bond funds increases substantially only after 2015.
Another visible change in our sample is the dramatic decrease in the size of equity funds,
along with the dramatic increase in the size of mixed funds in 2015. This is caused by a


                                                9
policy change in August 8, 2015, which increases the minimum stock holding requirement
from 60% to 80% for equity mutual funds. As a result, a large number of equity funds switch
to mixed funds around 2015Q3. The second half of 2015 is also unique because of the sudden
collapse of the Chinese stock market in June 2015. To ensure that our main results are not
driven by these major market events, we perform a few robustness tests with the following
criteria: 1) shrink our before and after windows to 2011­2012 (before) and 2013­2014 (after)
to avoid the inclusion of 2015; 2) exclude 2015 altogether; and 3) exclude the second and
third quarters of 2015. Overall, our results remain robust and often become stronger both
economically and statistically.
   Panel B of Table 1 reports the summary statistics of our main variables for the before
and after periods. There are a few important observations with respect to the differences
between the characteristics of the before and after periods. The first is a significant decrease
in fund size. Taking equity funds as an example, the average fund size decreases from RMB
3.05 billion to 0.62 billion over our sample period, driven by large initiations of new and
smaller funds over our sample period. It should be mentioned, however, that this large-scale
initiation of new funds occurs steadily over our sample period and is not uniquely associated
with the introduction of platforms. Moreover, to show that our main results are not driven
by this difference in sample characteristics, we perform a robustness test that require funds
in the after period to exist in the before period; accordingly, our main results are robust.
   We find the before and after samples to also have a difference in fund returns. The
average monthly return for equity funds is 0.34% in the before sample and 1.43% in the after
sample, although the difference is statistically insignificant. This difference, driven by the
aggregate stock market returns, is unlikely to affect our main results on the cross-section of
fund performance and flow. Therefore, in addition to controlling the time trend by including
time fixed effects, we also perform a robustness test by adopting a narrower window of before
(2010­2012) and after (2013­2014), which exclude the unusual years of the 2008 financial
crisis and the 2015 China stock market crash.
   In terms of quarterly flows, the before and after periods do not exhibit any statisti-
cally significant difference in the average level, but there is a rather strong difference in the
cross-sectional standard deviation. Specifically, the standard deviation of flows increases
substantially from 11.09% to 31.96% for equity funds and from 11.71% to 31.70% for mixed
funds. This indicates that although the level of flow remains stable, the cross-sectional dis-
persion in flow increases significantly in the after period. As our main results will indicate
later on, this is strongly related to the emergence of the platforms. For bond funds, the av-
erage flows are positive for both the periods. Compared to the standard deviation of 11.09%
for the equity funds and 11.71% for the mixed funds in the before period, the flow standard
deviation for the bond funds is quite large at 26.67%, mostly driven by the small sample size

                                               10
and large institutional ownership of bond funds. Overall, this limited pre-platform sample
size of bond funds complicates our main analysis of the difference between the before and
after samples, making the results on bond funds less stable.
    The fees charged by funds, including management fee, redemption fee, and subscription
fee, are the nominal fees quoted in percentage points. The usefulness of these fees in our
analysis turns out to be rather limited, as the quoted fees may not reflect the actual fees
charged to investors. The subscription fees are often waived by different channels, depending
on their promotional policies. As of 2019, both Tiantian and Ant Financial waive 90% of the
subscription fees for all funds offered on their platforms. For management fees, there is little
cross-sectional variation. Most of the equity and mixed funds charge an annual management
fee of 1.5% and bond funds lesser at 0.6%. Our talk with industry practitioners also suggests
that funds follow industry routines when setting the quoted fees. We do observe significant
changes in the fees for the before and after samples. However, they are often in mixed signs,
and the economic magnitude is small.


3     Platform-Induced Performance Chasing
To examine how platform intermediation alters investor behavior, we begin with the flow-
performance relationship, one of the most salient features of investor behavior documented
in the mutual fund literature.


3.1    Evidence from Policy Change
Before and After the Introduction of Platforms

We first examine the flow-performance sensitivity for the period around the emergence of
platforms. Using the start of 2013 as the cutoff point, we test the difference in the flow-
performance sensitivity over two sample periods: before (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017).
We form performance-based deciles by sorting, at the beginning of each quarter, all the
actively managed funds within each style category into ten groups, according to their re-
spective raw returns over the past 12 months, following the methodology of platform apps.
Figure 2 reports the flow-performance relation by plotting the average quarterly flows for
the ten performance deciles.
    Focusing first on equity funds, we see evidence of performance chasing in both the before
and after periods, with the flow to the top-decile funds on average higher than the flows
to the other deciles. But the magnitude of performance chasing increases strikingly post
the emergence of platforms: the top-decile flow increases from 1.88% in the before period


                                              11
to 19.65% in the after period. This result of amplified performance chasing can be best
summarized by the upper left panel of Figure 2, where the flow-performance curve steepens
dramatically in the "after" sample. This amplified performance chasing is also observed in
mixed funds, which are of lower expected returns and lower risk compared with the equity
funds. There is very limited evidence of performance chasing prior to the emergence of
platforms: the top-decile funds attract a statistically insignificant average flow of 1.21%.
Post platforms, however, the top-decile flow increases to 9.51% with a t-stat of 4.19.
   We further compare our results against the flow-performance relation in the US. For the
same time periods, the upper right panel of Figure 2 plots the flow-performance relation for
actively managed equity mutual funds in the US. Since there is no obvious shock to the US
fund market around 2013, the flow-performance relation remains stable in the before and
after periods. The average flow to the top-decile funds is around 6% per quarter, larger
than the average flow of 1.88% per quarter in the pre-platform period and much smaller
than the average flow of 19.65% per quarter in the post-platform period. Given that the
distribution of US mutual funds is still under the traditional model, it makes sense that the
flow-performance sensitivity in the US is much lower than in China's post-platform era.
   For bond funds, the results are less conclusive. Though the top-decile flow is on average
10.21% per quarter (t-stat = 2.12) in the post-platform period, it is not significantly different
from that of the pre-platform period. As discussed in Section 2.3, the bond sample is rather
small and noisy. China's fixed-income market, particularly the credit market, starts to take
off only after 2010 (Geng and Pan (2019)). Besides, we expect the effect of platforms to
be smaller for bond funds, which are dominated by institutional investors. Institutional
ownership is 58% for bond funds in the post-platform period, while their holding fractions
are only 19% and 25% for equity and mixed funds, respectively.
   In addition to the graphical representation in Figure 2, Table 2 further details the fund
flow and return information for the ten performance deciles, for the samples before (2008­
2012) and after (2013­2017) the emergence of platforms. Here, one potential concern is that
the amplified performance chasing might have been caused by a drastically different post-
platform sample, owing to, for example, more dispersed cross-fund returns post platforms.
However, we address this potential concern by including the statistics for fund returns and
return dispersions in Table 2. The cross-decile variation in returns, measured by the return
difference between the top- and bottom-decile funds, remains stable at around 2-3% per
month. Moreover, the magnitude of within-decile return dispersion also remains stable
across the two time periods.




                                               12
Time-Series Variation of Flow-Performance Sensitivity

To further connect the amplified performance chasing to the emergence of platforms, we
examine how the flow-performance sensitivity varies over time. If the drastic increase in
flow-performance relation is driven by the introduction of platforms, we can expect this
amplification effect to take place only on and after 2013. For this, we focus on the quarterly
excess flow to the top-decile funds, measured as the quarterly difference between the top-
decile flow and the flow averaged across all deciles. The upper left panel of Figure 3 plots this
excess flow (red line marked with "o") for equity funds, with the shaded area indicating the
95% confidence intervals. Focusing on the time-series variation around 2013, one can observe
a sudden increase in the excess flow into the top-decile funds shortly after the introduction
of platforms. The change is visible even when we restrict the sample to the narrow window
of two years after the policy change (shaded red region). Extending the window to five years
after the policy change (shaded blue region), we observe a much bigger increase in flows to
the best performing funds, though the confidence interval becomes wider due to the unusual
year of 2015. Following this time series over the long time span, it is interesting to observe
that this amplified performance chasing varies over time, with some quarters exhibiting a
higher level of performance chasing than others.
   Comparing this time-series pattern against that in the US, we see a rather different
trend. The overall flow-performance relationship in the US does not exhibit any significant
shift from 2007 to 2017. As shown in upper right panel of Figure 3, the excess flow to the
top-decile funds in the US also varies over time, peaking at 31% during the first quarter of
2000, after sustained positive flow at the aggregate level, as measured by the value-weighted
average flow (the blue line marked with "x"). Around the same time, the dot-com bubble
peaks in March 2000. One might argue that the boom and bust of the Chinese stock market
in 2015 resembles that of the US market in 1999­2000. But taking out that time period,
we still observe a rather substantial increase in performance chasing. In fact, our results
are stronger after excluding 2015 (See row (1) of Panel A of Table 11). Repeating the same
exercise for the mixed mutual funds, the bottom left panel of Figure 3 paints a similar picture
of increasing performance chasing after 2013. The evidence for the bond funds, as shown in
the bottom right panel, is mixed and inconclusive.


3.2    Evidence from Staggered Entrance of Funds
To build upon the previous analyses, we further take advantage of the information of the
exact dates on which each mutual fund signs up for the platforms. As shown in Figure 1,
funds gradually adopted platform distribution, mainly in the first two years after platform
introduction. This staggered entrance of funds onto the platforms provides a unique setting

                                               13
for us to precisely identify the effect of platforms on flow-performance sensitivity.
    We measure the extent of fund i's coverage by the platforms using the dummy variable
Platformi,t , which equals one when fund i, at the beginning of quarter t, is available on the
two major platforms, Tiantian and Ant Financial. We choose Tiantian and Ant Financial
because these two are the biggest and dominant players in the market.10 Using the fund-
level variable Platformi,t , we investigate the change in the flow-performance relationship in
a panel regression setting as follows:


  Flowi,t =  + 1 · Decile 10i,t-1 + 2 · Platformi,t + 3 · Decile 10i,t-1 × Platformi,t
                                                                    +       j · Controlj
                                                                                       i,t-1 + i,t . (1)
                                                                        j


The results are summarized in Table 3. We include time fixed effects to control for time-
varying market conditions. As detailed in Table 3, we also include the natural logarithm
of fund size, natural logarithm of fund age, fund's last quarter flow, and fees as controls.
Columns (1) to (4) report the results estimated using the five years before (2008­2012) and
five years after (2013­2017) the introduction of platforms, for equity, mixed, bond, and all
funds, respectively. Focusing first on equity funds, the excess flow to the top-decile equity
funds is on average 6.99% per quarter before joining the platforms. After signing up to
the platforms, the same fund in the top decile would attract an additional quarterly inflow
of 16.96% (t-stat = 3.75). Overall, the excess flow to the top-decile funds on platforms is
23.95%.
    For mixed funds, we also see a substantial increase in performance chasing after a fund
joins the top two platforms. The excess flow to the top-decile mixed funds on platforms is
17.53% per quarter, which is 2.86 times the off-platform level. For bond funds, the increase
in excess flow to the top-decile funds after joining the platforms is not significant under this
specification. Finally, by grouping all three styles together, we find that the excess flow to
the top-decile funds on the platforms is on average 16.10% per quarter, which is 1.98 times
the off-platform level of 8.13%.
    To focus more precisely on the event time, we use data from 2011 through 2014 and split
the sample around 2013 into two 2-year windows before and after 2013. As shown in the
last four columns in Table 3, our main results are rather robust. The economic significance
of our results actually increases during this narrow window. The on-platform excess flow to
the top-decile funds is 3.39 times the off-platform level for equity funds and 4.43 for mixed
  10
     Anecdotal evidence suggests that Ant Financial and Tiantian together account for bulk of the platform
business. For example, see http://fund.jrj.com.cn/2018/08/27012825002151.shtml. The entrance of funds
onto Tiantian and Ant are highly correlated with a correlation of 0.88. Our results remain similar if using
either of the two platforms to create the platform entrance dummy.


                                                    14
funds. This specification has the advantage of the year 2015 being excluded from our tests,
which would have introduced two issues into our sample. First, the Chinese stock market
experiences a dramatic run up in the first half of 2015 and then a dramatic crash in the
second half, which would have introduced noise and potentially unusual investor behavior
into our sample. Second, the policy change introduced in August 2015 increases the minimum
requirement of stock holding from 60% to 80% for equity mutual funds, causing many equity
funds to switch to mixed funds in 2015Q3. Moreover, the narrow window specification also
excludes 2008, the year of the financial crisis, from the analysis. The fact that our main
results become stronger by avoiding these unusual years indicates that these market-level
events are not the main drivers of our results.
   One potential concern here is that unknown changes in the market are driving the change
in the flow-performance relationship. In one of the robustness checks in Section 6, we directly
address this issue. In particular, we specify a dummy variable DYear(t = k ) for each year, and
control for all the interactions between the Decile 10 dummy and the year dummies (Decile
10i,t-1 × DYear(t = k )) in this specification to control for time-varying flow-performance re-
lationships. These interaction terms absorb any changes in the flow-performance relationship
due to changes in the market conditions for each year. The significance of the interaction
term Decile 10i,t-1 ×Platformi,t remains, as reported in row (2) in Panel A of Table 11. This
time-varying flow-performance channel is also discussed in detail in Section 4.4. In addition
to the aforementioned analysis, we also investigate the staggered entrance of funds onto plat-
forms using a constant sample of funds, adding fund fixed effect, controlling for bank and
broker exposures, or using alternative performance measures. The results are qualitatively
the same, as reported in Section 6.


3.3       Direct Evidence from Howbuy
In this section, we provide direct evidence for platform-induced performance chasing utilizing
a proprietary dataset obtained from Howbuy, one of the top five platforms in China.
   The dataset from Howbuy contains the share of purchase for funds in each performance
decile, that occurred on their platform from 2015 through 2018.11 To compare the economic
magnitude of the performance-chasing behavior on Howbuy with that of the whole market,
we also obtain the quarterly purchase data at the fund level from CSMAR. The market share
in purchase for each performance decile is calculated as the amount of purchase of all funds
within a particular performance decile, divided by the total amount of purchase of all funds
in the ten deciles. Therefore, the market shares for all ten deciles add up to 100%. The
market shares of purchase occurring on Howbuy and that of the whole market are calculated
  11
       We thank Howbuy for providing this data.

                                                  15
in exactly the same way, using the same sample of funds and the corresponding 12-month
return decile rank for each fund, allowing for direct comparison. Since the whole market
data is the aggregation over all distribution channels, we expect to observe much stronger
performance-chasing behavior with pure-platform trading data from Howbuy.
   Table 4 presents the market share in purchases for funds in each performance decile.
Focusing first on the actively managed equity mutual funds, we can observe a monotonically
increasing market share in purchase from past loser (Decile 1) funds to past winner (Decile
10) funds for the whole market. In the pre-platform period (2008­2012), an average of 23.79%
of the quarterly purchases goes to the top-decile funds, while only 5.14% of purchases goes
to the bottom-decile funds. This purchase-performance chasing behavior becomes much
stronger in the post-platform period (2008­2012). The purchase market share of Decile 10
funds increases from 23.79% to 36.50%. This dramatic increase of 12.71% (t-stat = 4.00) is
consistent with our prior findings using fund net flow.
   Next, we turn to Howbuy for direct evidence. From 2015 through 2018, an average of
49.37% of the quarterly purchases on Howbuy goes to the top-decile funds. In other words,
on pure platform trading, the top 10% funds claim close to 50% of the market share. In
comparison, when aggregated over all distribution channels, the market share of the top 10%
funds during the same time period is on average 37.61%, much smaller than that of Howbuy.
The fact that investors exhibit stronger performance-chasing purchasing behaviors on pure
platform trading lends further support to our interpretation: The rise in flow-performance
sensitivity in the mutual fund market is caused by the introduction of platforms.
   The results for mixed funds are similar to those for equity funds. In particular, the
average market share of purchase for the top-decile funds increases from 19.65% in the pre-
platform period to 27.46% in the post-platform period for the whole market. The difference
is 7.81%, with a t-stat of 2.60. The performance-chasing behavior for mixed funds again
is much stronger for the data from Howbuy. The market share of purchases for top-decile
mixed funds accounts for 39.50% of total purchases on Howbuy, 10.47% (t-stat = 2.35)
larger than that of the whole market. For bond funds, the effect is less pronounced, partially
due to the smaller number of bond funds and larger institutional ownership. The average
market share of purchase for the top-decile bond funds increases only slightly from 13.46%
in the pre-platform period to 15.48% in the post-platform period. This number is higher on
Howbuy, with a magnitude of 24.76%, though the difference on this count between Howbuy
and the whole market is statistically insignificant.
   Comparing across the three categories of funds, we see a pattern that is consistent with
our hypotheses: equity funds, with the largest performance variation among the three cate-




                                              16
gories, start with the highest demand for top performing funds.12 The increase in purchase
fraction for the top-decile funds is also the largest after the introduction of platforms. Mixed
funds exhibit a similar pattern and bond funds a much weaker pattern.
     Figure 4 further plots the market shares of purchases for funds in the ten performance
deciles. Across the three samples, the market share of purchase increases moderately as
performance decile rises from 1 to 9, wheres the market share jumps up for the top decile,
especially for the post-platform sample and the Howbuy sample. Top-decile funds enjoy the
largest purchase market share on Howbuy, followed by the whole market in the after period,
and then followed by the whole market in the before period.
     The lower left panel shows the time-series variation of market share of purchases for the
top-decile equity funds. We present the fraction for the whole market as well as that for the
Howbuy platform. The horizontal blue lines denote the average purchase fractions in the pre-
and post-platform periods, respectively. One can observe a sharp increase in the market share
of purchases for the top-decile funds after the introduction of platforms. When comparing
the market share on Howbuy with that for the whole market quarter by quarter, we find that
the market share of purchases for the top-decile funds on the Howbuy platform comoves well
with that of the whole market. Besides, for the majority of the quarters during this time, the
share on the Howbuy is larger than that for the whole market. The upper right and lower
right panels present the corresponding results for mixed funds. The results for mixed funds
exhibit a similar pattern, though with slightly smaller magnitude when compared to equity
funds. Overall, the data from Howbuy provide direct evidence that added flow-performance
sensitivity on the platform drives the magnified performance-chasing effect in the mutual
funds market.


4        Channels and Alternative Explanations
So far, using both the whole market data and the pure-platform trading data from Howbuy,
we have documented a startling increase in flow-performance sensitivity associated with the
emergence of platforms. In this section, we present the potential channels for our results.


4.1      Platform Information Structure and Technology Efficiency
The unique features of platforms, especially the information structure and the technological
efficiency, might help explain the amplified flow-performance sensitivity. In particular, the
unique information structure makes high past performance more salient to investors, which
    12
    The return standard deviation of equity funds is the highest among the three styles, as reported in
Panel B in Table 1.


                                                  17
can contribute to the amplification of flow-performance sensitivity. Platforms also grant
investors access to almost the entire universe of funds, allowing them to search and transact
with great ease. We provide suggestive evidence along this dimension.

Information Structure -- Front-Page Funds

If the information structure, i.e., the performance rank list provided by FinTech platforms,
is contributing to our results, then funds ranked at the very top on the front page of mobile
apps would attract more attention and get extra flows. As shown in Appendix Figure A1,
within a specific style, the front page of the performance rank list normally displays around
6 to 10 funds, depending on the screen and font size of the cell phone. Since there can be
thousands of funds in each style and investors are unlikely to scroll down for hundreds of
pages, visibility on the front page could be an important determinant of extra flow from
platforms.
    To test the information structure hypothesis, we examine whether the platform effect
is the most pronounced for the top 10 funds and becomes less pronounced as the ranking
goes down, as investors need to scroll down the page to see them. To capture this intuition,
we conduct the same analyses using top X funds instead of top decile funds. In particular,
for each fund style and in each quarter, we classify funds into five ranking groups: Top
10, Top 11 to 20, Top 21 to 50, Bottom 100, and others. We create dummies for each
group. For example, "Top 10" is a dummy variable that equals one for the 10 funds ranked
the highest on the performance list, and zero otherwise. Table 5 presents the corresponding
panel regression results with the ranking dummies and their interactions with the Platformi,t
dummy. "Bottom 100" is omitted in the regression, and the coefficients on the other ranking
dummies can be interpreted as the additional flow for the group relative to the "Bottom
100" group.
    The coefficients on the interactions between the ranking dummies and the Platformi,t
dummy display a general decreasing pattern: In the regression with all styles, the increase
in flow after joining platforms is 19.04%, 10.61%, and 8.02% for Top 10, Top 11 to 20, Top
21 to 50 funds, respectively. For individual styles, equity and mixed funds display a similar
pattern, while there is no significant increase in flow for top bond funds. This decreasing
pattern is in line with the information structure of platforms: after joining platforms, the
extreme top performers displayed on the front page of the app can attract the most flows.13
  13
      The average monthly returns in the past 12 months are 2.76%, 2.04%, and 1.54% for the top 10, top
11 to 20, and top 21 to 50 funds respectively. It is unlikely that such return difference explains the big flow
difference. In addition, the on- and off-platform return differences for the Top 10, Top 11 to 20, and Top 21
to 50 funds, are all insignificant. Therefore, the additional flow to the top performers cannot be explained
by a change in return after funds enter platforms.


                                                      18
    To further pin down this amplification effect after platform entrance, we divide the Top
20 funds into ten equal groups, and conduct similar regression analyses using the Top 1­
2, Top 3­4, ..., and Top 19­20 dummies, and their interactions with the platform dummy.
The results are exhibited in upper panel of Figure 5. The orange bars exhibit flows to
the Top X funds before they enter platforms. The blue bars exhibit flows to the Top X
group funds after they enter platforms. Since "Bottom 100" is omitted in the regression
estimation, the flows shall be interpreted benchmarking to "Bottom 100" group. Before the
funds join platforms, although all of the ten groups of top performers attract more flow than
the medium performers (the "others" group), the magnitude of the flow is rather flat: Top
1­2 funds obtain a flow of 8.93%, whereas the Top 19­20 funds obtain a flow of 6.83%. In
contrast, after platform entrance, the flow to the Top 1­2 funds increases to 41.96%, 4.7 times
its off-platform level, while the flow to the Top 19­20 funds only increases to 14.93%. As
shown in lower panel of Figure 5, the on- and off-platform difference decreases and becomes
less significant as the ranking goes down, consistent with our prior finding that the extreme
top performers on the front page of our mobile phone are more visible. They obtain the
highest benefit from their exposure on performance rank list.14

Technology Efficiency -- Fund Turnover

Another direct implication of this unique feature channel is on fund turnover. In particular,
the technological efficiency and information structure of platforms reduce investors' trading
cost and search cost, and make it easier for investors to find funds with high past performance
and trade on them. This increase in trading tendency can also contribute to the flow-
performance sensitivity after a fund joins platforms, and will also be reflected in the fund
turnover. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 exhibit the impact on fund turnover. Fund
turnover is measured as the sum of purchase and redemption amount in quarter t divided
by the average fund TNA in quarter t and t - 1.
    We regress quarterly turnover on Platformi,t dummy, Decile 10i,t-1 dummy, and the
interaction of the two. Following the specification in Table 3, we include controls of fund
size, age, past flow, and fees. Fund and time fixed effects are included in the estimation so
that the coefficient estimates can be interpreted as change in fund turnover. We find that
after joining platforms, a fund in the top decile experiences a significant increase in fund
turnover. This is consistent with the interpretation that the unique features of platforms
contribute to additional trading in the top decile funds after they enter platforms.
   14
      The estimation of coefficients in this setting can be quite noisy given that there are only two funds in
each group. Despite this issue, we still obtain significant results for the Top 1­2, Top 3­4, Top 5­6 groups.
For the funds ranked slightly lower, the results are also significant when we group more funds together, as
shown in Table 5.


                                                     19
    Overall, our results are in support of the "unique features" channel. The broad coverage
of funds on platforms breaks down the segmentation in the mutual fund industry; the perfor-
mance ranking displayed on every individual's mobile device functions as a signaling device;
the technological efficiency of platforms reduces both the explicit and implicit trading cost.
These unique features of platforms contribute to the amplified flow-performance sensitivity
in the market after the introduction of platforms.


4.2     Endogeneity Issues Related to Investors' Entrance
Apart from the unique features of platforms, one alternative channel is that a certain type
of investors endogenously choose to enter platforms. Those self-selected investors are more
sensitive to fund performance, which results in the amplification of flow-performance relation
that we observe. There are potentially two types of self-selected investors: (1) Existing
investors who used to buy funds through banks or brokers and now switch to FinTech
platforms; (2) New investors, attracted by FinTech platforms, who choose to enter the
mutual fund industry. The first type of investors cannot explain our results, as it only
represents a reallocation of investors from traditional channels to FinTech platforms. In the
absence of any impact from platforms, the aggregate investors composition stays the same
and investors' tendency to chase performance shall stay the same.
    Besides, we find little support in the data whereby the entrance of new investors might
explain our results, either. At the aggregate level, we do not observe any obvious inflow of
new money or new investors into the actively managed mutual fund industry around the
introduction of platforms.15 Specifically, as shown in the bottom right graph of Figure 1,
the size of the equity and mixed fund sectors do not experience any substantial change
around 2012. Moreover, as shown in Figure 3, the average flows to equity and mixed funds
are both negative and close to zero around 2012. Therefore, the actively managed equity
and mixed funds do not experience a large inflow of new money. In addition, the upper
panel of Appendix Figure A2 exhibits the average retail ratio of funds in the market. There
is no systematic change of investor composition in the market around the introduction of
platforms. Therefore, the amplified performance chasing in our analysis is unlikely to be
caused by a systematic entrance of new retail investors.
    To further rule out this channel, we examine the change in investor composition after a
fund joins platforms. If the amplified performance chasing is caused mainly by the entry of
new platform investors into the market, we would expect a spike in retail investors holding
  15
      While the emergence of platforms did help attract new fund investors in China, it has happened mostly
to the money market funds and less to the actively managed equity, mixed, and bond funds. For details of
the recent development of the Chinese mutual fund market, please refer to Jiang (2019).



                                                    20
the fund after its entrance onto platforms. In particular, we use three measures as proxies
for investor composition of a fund: (1) number of investors that hold the fund; (2) average
dollar value held by an investor in a fund; (3) retail ratio, which is the asset fraction of a
fund held by individual investors.
    Table 6 shows the results for investor composition change. We regress semi-annual in-
vestor composition proxies on Platformi,t dummy, Decile 10i,t-1 dummy, and the interaction
of the two. We follow similar specifications as in Table 3. Fund and time fixed effects are
included in the estimation so that the coefficient estimates can be interpreted as change in
investor composition. In columns (3), (5), and (7), we include only the Platformi,t dummy to
examine the change in investor composition when a fund enters the top two platforms. The
coefficient on Platformi,t dummy is insignificant, indicating that joining platforms, by itself,
does not bring new retail investors to the fund. Therefore, the new investors introduced to
the market by platforms are unlikely to fully explain our main results. In columns (2), (4),
and (6), we further add Decile 10i,t-1 dummy and its interaction with the Platformi,t dummy.
We find that conditioning on joining the platform and successfully getting into the top rank,
the number of holders for a top-decile fund increases by 37.1%, the average dollar value held
by each investor drops by 25.9%, and the retail ratio increases by 3.62%.16 This is actually
in support of the "unique features" channel in Section 4.1, that the information structure
on platforms might contribute to the startling increase in flow-performance sensitivity.


4.3     Endogeneity Issues Related to Funds' Entrance
Another potential concern is that funds self-select to enter platforms, and those that en-
dogenously choose to enter happen to have higher flow-performance sensitivity. We conduct
several tests to address this endogeneity issue.
    First, we directly examine the determinants of funds' entrance decisions. As shown in
Appendix Table A1, we find that non-bank-affiliated funds and funds with low retail ratios,
smaller sizes, and longer histories are more likely to enter platforms early. These static
(or highly persistent) fund characteristics, however, are unlikely to drive the results in the
staggered entrance test, as we are measuring the difference in flow-performance sensitivity
for the same funds on- and off-platforms. To further control for fund unobservable static
characteristics, we add fund fixed effect to our baseline specification and cluster standard
errors at both the fund and time levels. The results are reported in row (3) of Panel A

   16
     This increase in retail ratio matches well with our estimate using net flow in Table 3. For example,
consider a fund with assets under management of 100 million, of which 75% is held by retail investors; when
the fund gets into the top rank and is available for sale on platforms, Table 3 suggests that it will attract an
extra quarterly inflow of 7.97%. Assuming all the extra capital inflow is driven by retail investors and lasts for
two quarters, this will lead to an extra increase in retail ratio of 3.44% (= (75+7.97×2)/(100+7.97×2)-75%).


                                                       21
of Table 11. With fund fixed effect, we are utilizing the time-series variation of a fund's
platform exposure to explore the change in flow-performance relationship. The results are
essentially the same as our baseline specification both qualitatively and quantitatively.
   The previous test rules out the possibility that any fund static characteristics can drive
our results. Hence, for the self-selection channel to explain our results, there have to be some
time-varying factors that satisfy the following two criteria simultaneously: (1) it correlates
with investors' flow-performance sensitivity; (2) the change of the factor coincides with
the platform entrance window. Although it is very difficult to completely rule out such
alternatives, we provide analyses on several main concerns below.
   We first examine the exact timing of the change in flow-performance sensitivity. If some
confounding factors affect flow-performance sensitivity around funds' platform entrance time
but do not exactly coincide with fund entrance, one can expect the timing of the change
in flow-performance sensitivity not to be perfectly aligned with the platform entrance time.
On the other hand, if the increase in flow-performance sensitivity is driven by the platform
inclusion event, one can expect the increase in performance chasing to take place right after
the fund is added to the platforms. Accordingly, we investigate the dynamic effect using the
following model specification:


  Flowi,t =  + 1 · Decile10i,t-1 + 2 · Platform(q = -1)i,t + 3 · Platform(q = 0)i,t +
  4 · Platform(q = 1)i,t + 5 · Platform(q  2)i,t + 6 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q = -1)i,t
      + 7 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q = 0)i,t + 8 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q = 1)i,t +
                      9 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q  2)i,t +        j · Controlj
                                                                                i,t-1 + i,t , (2)
                                                                 j


where Platform(q = -1)i,t is a dummy that equals one for the first quarter before fund i enters
platform. Platform(q = 0)i,t and Platform(q = 1)i,t are similarly defined. Platform(q  2)
equals one for the second quarter after inclusion and for the subsequent quarters. The
omitted group is q  -2. The interactions of Platform(q = k )i,t with Decile 10i,t-1 capture
the dynamic impact around the time when a fund enters platforms.
   Table 7 shows that increase in flow-performance sensitivity, captured by the interaction of
Platform dummies with Decile 10i,t-1 , happens exactly after a fund is included by platforms
(q = 0 or q = 1). Taking equity funds as an example, the entrance onto platforms allows
top-decile funds to attract additional 21.69% flow for the first quarter after the fund being
included. The magnitude remains large at 20.83% for subsequent quarters. The coefficient on
the interaction term is small and insignificant for quarter q = -1, indicating that on-platform
and off-platform funds are not significantly different in flow-performance relationship before
the platform entrance event. Hence, the results suggest that entrance onto platforms induces

                                              22
a drastic increase in flow-performance sensitivity and the effect is likely causal.
   In addition, we examine some specific factors that may coincide with funds' entrance
decision. One potential candidate is whether funds strategically time their entrance onto
platforms based on past performance. Funds may choose to enter the platform exactly at
the time when their recent return is good. In addition, knowing that investors prefer funds
with high past returns, platforms may choose to cover top performing funds early on to
promote their business. However, we do not find evidence for this conjecture. As given
in Appendix Table A1, funds with higher recent returns are not more likely to be covered
by platforms early on. Moreover, our regressions estimate the change in flow-performance
sensitivity, which captures investors' differential response to performance. Consider a fund
that expects its performance to be good in the future and chooses to join platforms now;
if platform investors and traditional-channel investors react similarly to a top-performing
fund, there will be no change in flow-performance sensitivity in the whole market.
   Fund marketing effort is another potential candidate (Jain and Wu (2000), Gallaher,
Kaniel, and Starks (2015)). It is possible that a fund increases its spending on marketing
when it gets into the top rank, and this happens to be the time that the fund enters platforms.
Even if platforms have nothing to do with the increased flow, we might still observe a positive
correlation between platform entry and increase in flow-performance sensitivity. Though it is
difficult to completely rule out such alternatives, in the lower panel of Appendix Figure A2,
we plot funds' advertising fees over time. The advertising expenses for bond and mixed funds
are very smooth over time. Unrelated to the platform entrance, there is a temporary increase
in advertising expense for equity funds around the 2015 market crash. Overall, there is little
evidence that change in marketing expense is contributing to our results.


4.4    Time-Varying Market Conditions
Finally, one potential explanation is that the sudden increase in flow-performance sensitivity
is related to the variation in market conditions unrelated to the introduction of platforms.
   To directly address this concern, we conduct a strong robustness test, controlling for
the effect of any unknown changes in market conditions on flow-performance sensitivity. In
particular, we include year dummies and their interactions with Decile 10i,t-1 in the panel
regression so that any changes in the flow-performance relations between the different years
will be absorbed by the interaction terms between year dummies and Decile 10i,t-1 . Even
with such strong controls, we still observe a significant platform effect, captured by the cross
term between Decile 10i,t-1 and the Platform dummy. This result comes purely from the
staggered entrance of funds onto platforms, as reported in row (2) of Panel A Table 11. This



                                              23
result suggests that the change in market conditions cannot fully explain our main result.17
     Second, time-varying market conditions cannot explain the difference in performance
chasing between Howbuy and the whole market. The bottom two graphs in Figure 4 display
the fraction of purchase that goes to the top decile equity and mixed funds on Howbuy and in
the whole market. Although both fractions are time varying, they move in similar directions
most of the time. Moreover, for almost every quarter, the top decile fraction on Howbuy is
larger than that for the whole market, suggesting a larger magnitude of performance chasing
on platforms throughout the sample period.
     Finally, we also conduct tests to address specific concerns related to the abnormal market
conditions. As discussed in Section 2.3, our sample period includes the 2008 global financial
crisis, the 2015 China stock market crash, and a policy change causing a large number of
equity funds switch to mixed funds around 2015Q3. Excluding these periods of unusual
market conditions does not affect our results: First, in our baseline tests in Table 3, we
report the results for the short window that focuses on the two years before (2011­2012) and
two years after (2013­2014) the introduction of platforms. Second, we also exclude the year
2015 for the robustness test reported in row (1) of Panel A of Table 11. Our results remain
similar in these settings.


5        Economic Impact on Fund Managers and Families
Section 3 and Section 4 show that FinTech platforms bring drastic changes to fund investors
through their technological efficiency and information structure. Those performance-chasing
investors on platforms are not using the technological efficiency to help themselves build
more efficient investment portfolios.18 Instead, they pay more attention to the prominent
features, i.e., the performance rank list, in the platform apps. In this section, we further
examine the impact of platform introduction on the production side of the industry. More
generally, what are the economic consequences, both intended and unintended, of this new
and powerful distribution channel on fund managers and fund families?
    17
      Note that part of the change in flow-performance sensitivity over the years can be caused by the platform
effect. Therefore, the coefficient in this setting should be a lower limit for the actual platform effect.
   18
      Performance chasing is not benefiting investors as past return fail to predict future fund return, both
in China and in the US. Jiang (2019) find that fund performance is not persistent in China. We further
confirm this result in our sample in Appendix Table A2.




                                                      24
5.1    Risk Taking by Fund Managers
The flow-performance relation can be thought of as an implicit incentive contract for mutual
fund managers. Fund managers, in their desire to maximize their compensation, have incen-
tives to take actions to increase fund capital inflows. Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996) and
Chevalier and Ellison (1997) argue that mutual funds respond to these implicit incentives,
the convex flow-performance relation, by altering the riskiness of their funds so as to secure
a favorable ranking. In the post-platform era, flow into the top performance decile increases
dramatically. As a result, there may be a substantial change in managerial incentive in this
performance region. Specifically, consider a fund that is close to the top performer list; the
manager has two choices, one is to play it safe and lock in a mediocre inflow, and the other
is to gamble with a probability of capturing a large inflow as a top performer. We posit that,
in the after period, funds that are close to the top performer list have higher incentive to
gamble in order to capture the extremely high inflow induced by the platforms. On the con-
trary, the convexity at the bottom and medium performance deciles does not change much.
Therefore, there is less change in risk-taking behavior for the losing and mediocre funds.

Impact on Fund Portfolio Total Volatility

To examine change in the managers' risk taking behaviors, we adopt a difference-in-difference
methodology, exploiting the differential treatment effects of funds belonging to different decile
groups. Decile 10 funds are the treated funds as they are most affected by the platform-
induced performance-chasing behavior.
   Figure 6 shows the difference in risk taking for winner (Decile 10) and loser (Decile 1)
funds around the performance ranking date for the period before (2008­2012) and after
(2013­2017) the policy change, respectively. At the beginning of each quarter t, we sort all
the funds into deciles based on the past 12-month returns. Then, we follow the standard event
time method and examine the daily return standard deviation for funds in each performance
decile from quarter t - 4 to t + 4. Quarter t = 0 is the quarter immediately after the
performance sorting. We compute the difference in average daily return standard deviation
between Decile 10 and Decile 1, and plot the time-series average and confidence interval of
this difference around t = 0.
   The upper left graph of Figure 6 shows the change in risk taking for equity funds. In the
post-platform period, funds in the top performance decile, relative to the funds in the bottom
performance decile, exhibit increased daily return volatility from quarter t - 3 to quarter
t - 1. This difference gradually declines to zero in the two quarters after the ranking date
of quarter t - 1. The graph suggests that fund managers of top-decile funds increase their
portfolio risks more than the fund managers of bottom-decile funds at least two quarters

                                               25
before they successfully get into the top decile. A potential alternative explanation is that
funds with higher volatility before the ranking date might be more likely to enter the top
rank by accident. However, in the before sample, the difference in volatility is close to 0
from t - 4 to t + 4. This is consistent with the previous results on the change in flow-
performance sensitivity. As the flow-performance relation is relatively flat for the before
sample, the incentive to boost performance is similar for funds in the high-performance and
low-performance ranges.
    The upper right graph of Figure 6 presents the corresponding results for equity funds in
the US as a placebo test. There is no obvious difference between the before and after curves.
Both curves are relatively flat and close to zero around the ranking date. The bottom
two graphs of Figure 6 show the results for China mixed funds and China bond funds,
respectively. The overall pattern for mixed and bond funds is similar to that for equity
funds in China. Overall, the evidence is consistent with our hypothesis: The introduction of
platforms largely increases the flow to top performing funds, and creates additional incentive
for fund managers to take extra risk in order to get into the top decile.19
    We further confirm our results using panel regressions with controls. Since the strength-
ened convex flow-performance relation is mostly driven by performance Decile 10, we create
a dummy variable Decile 10i,t-1 that equals one if a fund i enters the top performance decile
category at the end of quarter t - 1. We regress quarter t + k volatilities on dummy variable
Decile 10i,t-1 and the interaction of Decile 10i,t-1 with dummy variable Aftert , which equals
one for the sample on and after 2013. The model specification is as follows:

 Stdi,t+k = k + 1
                k                             k
                  · Decile 10i,t-1 × Aftert + 2 · Decile 10i,t-1 +             k
                                                                               j Controlj
                                                                                        i,t-1 + i,t+k , (3)
                                                                           j


where Stdi,t+k is the daily fund return standard deviation for fund i at quarter t + k . Coeffi-
cients on Decile 10i,t-1 captures the risk taking behavior of funds in Decile 10, compared to
the risk taking behavior of funds in the other deciles. The coefficient on Decile 10i,t-1 ×Aftert
captures the extra risk taking due to the policy change in 2012. We include controls of fund
size, age, and fees at the end of quarter t - 1. Time fixed effects and fund fixed effects are in-
cluded for all the specifications, which alleviates the concern that changes in risk taking may
be driven by any aggregate market trend or unobserved time-invariant fund characteristic.
    Panel A of Table 8 reports the coefficients on Decile 10i,t-1 ×Aftert and Decile 10i,t-1 .
We can see that top-decile funds increase their daily return volatility by an extra 0.109%
(t-stat =3.26) in quarter t = -1 after the introduction of platforms, which is equivalent to an

  19
     We also report the summary statistics of daily returns in the before and after period in Table A3. We
observe a significant increase in return volatility in the post-platform era, whereas the mean, skewness, and
kurtosis of daily returns do not experience any obvious change.


                                                     26
annualized volatility increase of 1.72%. Consistent with the figure, the increased risk taking
begins at least two quarters before the ranking date (k = -3 and k = -2) and disappears
shortly after quarter k = 0.20 This increase in risk taking is not economically huge when
taking into consideration that the average standard deviation of fund daily return is around
1.5% as shown in Table A3. An extra 10.9 basis points increase in volatility for top-decile
funds relative to the other funds is a reasonable magnitude in terms of change in managerial
risk taking.

Systematic and Idiosyncratic Volatility

There are two ways for fund managers to increase their risk taking. One is to rely on their
own abilities in stock and bond selections and increase their idiosyncratic volatility to get
into the top decile. The other is to load more on systematic risk factors and obtain higher
systematic volatility. To disentangle the two channels, we further decompose daily volatility
into systematic volatility and idiosyncratic volatility based on a two-factor model (with an
aggregate stock market factor and an aggregate bond factor).21
    We replace the total volatility in equation (4) with systematic/idiosyncratic volatility
to obtain the regression results reported in Panel B and Panel C of Table 8, respectively.
An increase in both the dimensions of volatility in the two quarters before the ranking
date for funds in Decile 10 can be observed. The results suggest that both systematic and
idiosyncratic volatilities contribute to the overall increase in managers' risk taking.
    In particular, as shown in Panel C, the coefficients on Decile 10i,t-1 are positive from
k = -3 to k = -1. This suggests that, in the pre-platform period, fund managers in Decile
10 already rely on their own abilities in stock and bond picking to get into the top decile.
The coefficients on Decile 10i,t-1 ×Aftert are also positive from k = -3 to k = -1, indicating
that, due to the added incentive in the post-platform period, fund managers in Decile 10
exert even more effort to boost their idiosyncratic volatility and enhance their probability of
getting into the top decile.
    The results on systematic volatility in Panel B show a different pattern. The coefficients
on Decile 10i,t-1 are negative and mostly insignificant from quarter k = -3 to k = -1. This
suggests that there is no evidence of fund managers in decile 10 taking more systematic
   20
     One potential reason for the rise in volatility after the ranking date is because managers invest in assets
with higher volatility, and these assets will remain in the portfolio for a while after the portfolio ranking.
   21
     For each fund-quarter, we regress daily fund return on contemporaneous daily market factor and daily
bond factor. The systematic volatility is the standard deviation of the fitted return and the idiosyncratic
volatility is the standard deviation of the residual terms. To construct factors, we use value-weighted A share
stock return for market return, ChinaBond composite index return for bond return, and one-year deposit
rate for risk free rate.



                                                      27
risks relative to the other funds before the ranking date in the pre-platform period. On the
contrary, in the post-platform period, fund managers in Decile 10 increase their systematic
volatility relative to the other funds. This is a sign that the fund managers have already
maxed out their own skills and are using leverage to get ahead.


5.2    Disruptions to Fund Families
In this section, we present our investigation of the impact of platforms on the organizational
structure of fund families. Platforms can affect fund families along multiple dimensions.
First, platforms provide a common playing field, and this may expand the degree of compe-
tition from within families to outside families. Related to this shift in industry organization
structure, changes in within-family flow co-movement and the incentives for families to create
star funds may be observed. Second, platforms bring new opportunities to the fund industry.
Families that quickly seize the platform opportunity will grab the market share from those
that are slow in adopting platforms.

Within-Family Flow Competition

Before the introduction of platforms, family affiliation segments the market through its brand
image and free-switching options for funds in the family (Massa (2003), Nanda, Wang, and
Zheng (2004), Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006), etc.). Sheltered under the family umbrella,
individual funds rely largely on the capital attracted through the family brand. As a result,
fund's performance ranking within the family can be an important determinant of flow
(Kempf and Ruenzi (2007)). In the post-platform era, however, platforms act as one big
family, bring down the barriers, and level the playing field for all funds. Performance rank in
the whole fund universe now plays a more important role in attracting flows, which weakens
the role played by families. Therefore, one would expect flow to become less sensitive to a
fund's within-family performance ranking after the fund joins platforms.
   To test this hypothesis, as shown in Table 9, we examine the response of flow to the
performance ranking within each family. We require a family to have at least five funds
and to have existed for at least three years before the introduction of platforms to allow for
meaningful comparison. This reduces our sample slightly from 26,412 fund-quarter observa-
tions to 22,268. Since the average number of funds in a family is 7.70 for the pre-platform
sample, we focus on the performance quintile ranks within each family. We use the same
set of control variables given in Table 3 and further include the family fixed effect in this
specification.
   Column (1) of Table 9 shows the response of fund flow to the within-family quintile rank,
FamilyRanki,t . Column (2) presents the results of fund flow on the Decile 10i,t-1 dummy used

                                              28
in our main analysis as a benchmark. Performance rankings within a family and in the whole
fund universe tend to correlate with each other. To disentangle the two effects, we include
both performance indicators and their interactions with the Platformi,t dummy in column
(3). We find a significant erosion of the effect of within-family quintile rank after a fund joins
platforms. Before a fund joins platforms, both the within-family performance quintile rank
and the universal Decile 10i,t-1 dummy play important roles in bringing flow. Controlling
for the universal top decile indicator, a fund will still enjoy an extra flow of 1.12% (t-stat =
4.60) if its within-family quintile ranking increases by one unit. However, the coefficient on
the cross term between within-family quintile rank and the Platformt dummy is negatively
significant at -1.03 (t-stat = -2.54). In other words, after a fund joins platforms, the same
change in the quintile rank will only bring 0.09% (= 1.12% - 1.03%) of extra flow. The
incremental effect of within-family ranking almost disappears after a fund joins platforms.
On the contrary, the position of a fund in the whole universe becomes more important. A
top-decile fund in the whole fund universe will enjoy an extra flow of 15.85% after it joins
the platforms, which is 2.64 times its off-platform level.

Star Funds from Top Families

So far, we have shown that investors now rely less on family-specific information to evaluate
an individual fund; instead, they evaluate each fund in isolation after the emergence of
platforms. The positive spillover effect within family diminishes and flow is highly sensitive
to the fund's own performance ranking in the whole fund universe. Given this weakening
of connection between funds and families, we can expect families to have lesser control on
funds. As a result, large families would have lower incentive and ability to create "star"
funds by diverting resources to these specific funds in the post-platform period.
   We find that the presence of "star" funds in large families has indeed decreased in the
post-platform period. Panel A of Table 10 presents the proportion of funds from large
families in each performance decile rank for the sample before and after the introduction of
platforms. For each quarter end and each style category, we sort all the funds into deciles
based on the past 12-month returns. We then calculate the fraction of funds that belongs
to the top ten largest families (or top five families or top one family) in each decile. In
the pre-platform period, the fraction of large-family funds in the top performance decile
is significantly larger than that in the bottom performance decile. Taking the largest ten
families as an example, large-family funds account for 36.22% of the best-performing funds
and only 21.38% of the worst-performing funds. However, this pattern is reversed in the
post-platform period. Large-family funds only account for 18.98% of the best-performing
funds, and 23.04% of the worst-performing funds. These findings are consistent with the


                                               29
interpretation that large families attract flows through "star" funds in the pre-platform
period, but fail to or are less inclined to apply this strategy in the post-platform era.

Family Entrance onto Platforms

Finally, platforms may also affect the distribution of family market shares. Platforms have
become one of the leading players in the marketplace for mutual funds. They help divert
flow to better-performing funds on the platform, no matter how big or small, well-known or
invisible. Fund families that embrace the new channel and perform well will capture a sizable
market share, while families that join the platform late or fail to enter the top performer list
will lag behind.
    To get a gut feeling of the market landscape, we first examine the changes in the market
shares of the top families. Panel B of Table 10 exhibits the top ten fund families by market
share before and after the introduction of platforms. The top families' market shares shrink
over time. The largest ten families on average account for 45.63% of the industry for the
pre-platform period, while they only account for 39.65% in the post-platform period.
    Next, we investigate the relation between change in family market share and their en-
trance time onto platforms. Figure 7 plots families' entering time onto Tiantian and their
change in market share from three years before (2010­2012) to three years (2013­2015)
after the introduction of platforms.22 We label the largest 15 families and use different
colors for bank- (blue) and broker-affiliated (red) families. At first glance, it seems that
big families and bank-affiliated families enter the platform late. This is consistent with the
intuition that big families, sitting on a large customer base, may overlook the importance
of platforms. Bank-affiliated families often have their own distribution channels and sticky
capitals, thereby lacking the incentive to join platforms early.23 Moreover, we also observe a
negative relation between the time a fund enters onto the platform and its change in market
share. The fitted line has a slope of -0.129 with a t-stat of -2.81. The largest fund family
in our sample is China Asset Management. It joined Tiantian platform late in December
of 2013 and experienced a decline in its market share during this period, whereas for early
entrants like Fullgoal and China Universal had a positive increase in market share.
    The overall evidence is consistent with our interpretation: Families that were rich in
resources tend to overlook the potential of platforms. The slow response of these families to
join platforms contributes to the decline in their market shares in the post-platform period.
  22
     We choose a three-year window because all the families enter the platform in the three years after the
policy change. The results are qualitatively the same when using two-year or five-year window.
  23
    We conduct analysis on the determinants of funds' and families' entry onto platforms in Appendix Table
A1. The results are consistent with this interpretation.



                                                    30
6        Robustness Check under Alternative Settings
In this section, we discuss alternative channels that are potentially related to our main
results, and conduct further tests to examine the robustness of our findings.
     Excluding 2015: We exclude the year 2015 from our sample, as it involves an un-
usual market crash, and our results remain both economically and statistically significant,
as reported in row (1) of Panel A of Table 11.
     Time-Varying Market Conditions: To control for the impact of time-varying flow-
performance sensitivity due to changes in market conditions, we include year dummies and
all the interactions between the year dummies and Decile 10 dummy in the regression in row
(2) of Panel A Table 11. Our results cannot be explained by changes in market conditions
that may affect flow-performance sensitivity.
     Fund Fixed Effect and Double-Clustered Standard Errors: In our baseline regres-
sion, we follow the standard setting in the literature to estimate flow-performance sensitivity.
Our results are essentially the same when we include fund fixed effect and double-clustered
standard errors at both fund and time level, as shown in row (3) of Panel A Table 11.
     Change in Morningstar Rating: If a fund enters platforms when it receives a better
Morningstar rating, we might mistakenly attribute the flow attracted through Morningstar
rating to platform entrance (Del Guercio and Tkac (2008), Ben-David et al. (2019)). Thus,
as given in row (4) of Panel A Table 11, we also control for Morningstar ratings. We include
dummy variables Ms5star and Ms4star, and their interactions with the Platform dummy.
Ms5star (Ms4star) equals one if the fund Morningstar rating is five (four) star, and zero
                                                              24
otherwise. The results remain the same qualitatively.
     Constant Fund Sample: The number of funds grow gradually during our sample period
(Panel A of Table 1). To show that our results are robust with a constant sample of funds, we
require a fund to exist before 2012 to be included in our analysis in this alternative setting.
The result is close to the baseline result, as reported in row (5) of Panel A Table 11.
     Control for Linkages to Banks/Brokerages: As can be seen in Figure 1, the num-
ber of banks and brokers with a funds distribution license also increased during our sample
period. Moreover, the sales relationship between mutual funds and banks/brokers also in-
creased. To distinguish between the effects of these traditional channels, we further control
for the number of sales relationships between mutual funds and banks/brokers and their
interactions with Decile 10i,t-1 in our analysis. The effect from the platforms remains after
these controls, as shown in row (6) of Panel A Table 11.

    24
      Though not reported in the table, the interactions between platform and Morningstar ratings are not
significant, indicating that the performance ranking rather than the Morningstar rating is playing a major
role.


                                                   31
    Value-Weighted: Another potential concern may be that our results are mainly driven
by small funds. We conduct weighted least squares regressions for our main analysis using
the TNAi,t-1 of each fund as the weight for each observation. The results, as reported in
row (7) of Panel A, are similar to our baseline results.
    Using Performance Rank: We replace the top decile dummy with the performance
decile rank, ranging from one to ten, based on the past twelve months' performance. In row
(8) of Panel A Table 11, the coefficient on the cross term between the performance rank and
the Platform dummy remains significant.
    Using the Number of Platforms: In row (9) of Panel A Table 11, we replace the
Platformi,t dummy with the natural logarithm of the total number of platforms a fund
enters, Log(#Platforms)i,t . The coefficient on the cross term between Decile 10i,t-1 dummy
and Log(#Platforms)i,t is also significant.
    Alternative Performance Horizons: In addition to the Decile 10i,t-1 dummy based
on the past 12 months, we also conduct the same analysis with the Decile 10i,t-1 dummy for
the past 1, 3, 6, 24, and 36 months. These specifications are consistent with return horizons
used in the ranking list provided by the platforms. Panel B of Table 11 reports the panel
regression results following the model specification of Table 3. The results are qualitatively
the same for all return horizons, although the change in flow-performance sensitivity seems
to be more pronounced for the model with past six months than for other return horizons.


7     Conclusions
The success of the platform economy has transformed the way we live, and the emergence
of FinTech platform intermediation for financial products may lead to one of the next dis-
ruptions of the platform economy. Just as other products and services such as retail goods
or taxi rides are important to our daily lives, financial products are of unique importance
because of their impact on the allocation of financial capital in the economy. Financial prod-
ucts are also unique in their acute sensitivity to information and their inherent liquidity,
making their intermediation difficult to control, especially during adverse market conditions.
These considerations, along with the rapid expansion of technology in financial intermedia-
tion over the recent years, make it all the more important for practitioners and policy makers
to understand the economic impact of bringing financial products to large-scale, tech-driven
platforms.
    Our paper contributes to this fast-growing area by providing, for the first time in the
existing literature, empirical evidences on the profound impact of platform distribution on
the asset management industry. FinTech platforms integrate mutual fund investment into


                                              32
our everyday life. Through a few clicks on mobile phones, investors can access the entire
universe of funds. This substantially lowers the barriers for individual investors to invest
in complicated financial products. However, distributional efficiency does not necessarily
translate into allocational efficiency. The amplified performance chasing documented in
our paper is one very important example of the unintended consequences of the platform
economy entering the industry of financial intermediation. Given that there is no evidence of
performance persistence in mutual funds, either in the US or in China, performance-chasing
investors on the platforms are not using the technological efficiency to help themselves build
more efficient investment portfolios.
   Second, we also examine the consequences of platform-induced performance chasing on
fund managers and fund families. We find that improvements in means of connectivity do
not necessarily equate to improvement in means of production. The amplified performance
chasing incentivizes fund managers to increase risk taking to enhance the probability of
getting into the top rank. By documenting the weakening fund-family ties, we also shed
light on how the traditional organizational structures in financial intermediation can be
disrupted by the emergence of the platform economy.
   Effective financial practices and regulations build on clear understanding and reliable
data. Relative to the traditional distribution channels, platform companies, equipped with
superior customer data and advanced analytical technology, do have comparative advantages
in offering financial services to their customers in the new era. The empirical evidences doc-
umented in this paper serves to better inform researchers, practitioners, and policy makers.
In particular, our findings lead us to believe that platform companies need to move be-
yond technology and incorporate insights from finance and economics in the design of their
systems -- to achieve not only technological efficiency but also financial efficiency and to
improve not only means of connectivity but also means of productivity. Consequently, how
to design policies to alleviate the unintended consequences documented in our paper while
maintaining the technological advantages of FinTech platforms presents a challenge as well
as an opportunity for platform companies.




                                             33
References
Barber, B. M., and T. Odean. 2001. The internet and the investor. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 15:41­54.

------. 2002. Online investors: Do the slow die first? The Review of Financial Studies
  15:455­88.

Ben-David, I., J. Li, A. Rossi, and Y. Song. 2019. What do mutual fund investors really care
  about? Working paper.

Bergstresser, D., J. M. Chalmers, and P. Tufano. 2009. Assessing the costs and benefits of
  brokers in the mutual fund industry. The Review of Financial Studies 22:4129­56.

Brown, K. C., W. V. Harlow, and L. T. Starks. 1996. Of tournaments and temptations: An
  analysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry. The Journal of Finance
  51:85­110.

Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru. 2018. FinTech, regulatory arbitrage, and
  the rise of shadow banks. Journal of Financial Economics 130:453­83.

Chalmers, J., and J. Reuter. 2020. Is conflicted investment advice better than no advice?
 Journal of Financial Economics. Forthcoming.

Chevalier, J., and G. Ellison. 1997. Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives.
 Journal of Political Economy 105:1167­200.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and A. Metrick. 2002. How does the internet affect trading? Evidence
 from investor behavior in 401 (k) plans. Journal of Financial Economics 64:397­421.

Christoffersen, S. E., R. Evans, and D. K. Musto. 2013. What do consumers' fund flows
 maximize? Evidence from their brokers' incentives. The Journal of Finance 68:201­35.

Cookson, G., T. Jenkinson, H. Jones, and J. V. Martinez. 2020. Best buys and own brands:
  Investment platforms' recommendations of mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies.
  Forthcoming.

D'Acunto, F., N. Prabhala, and A. G. Rossi. 2019. The promises and pitfalls of robo-advising.
  The Review of Financial Studies 32:1983­2020.

Del Guercio, D., and P. A. Tkac. 2008. Star power: The effect of morningstar ratings on
  mutual fund flow. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43:907­36.

Frost, J., L. Gambacorta, Y. Huang, H. S. Shin, and P. Zbinden. 2019. BigTech and the
  changing structure of financial intermediation. BIS Working paper.

Fuster, A., M. Plosser, P. Schnabl, and J. Vickery. 2019. The role of technology in mortgage
  lending. The Review of Financial Studies 32:1854­99.

Gallaher, S. T., R. Kaniel, and L. T. Starks. 2015. Advertising and mutual funds: From
 families to individual funds. Working paper.

                                             34
Gaspar, J.-M., M. Massa, and P. Matos. 2006. Favoritism in mutual fund families? Evidence
 on strategic cross-fund subsidization. The Journal of Finance 61:73­104.
Geng, Z., and J. Pan. 2019. Price discovery and market segmentation in china's credit
 market. Working paper.
Goldstein, I., H. Jiang, and D. T. Ng. 2017. Investor flows and fragility in corporate bond
 funds. Journal of Financial Economics 126:592­613.
Goldstein, I., W. Jiang, and G. A. Karolyi. 2019. To FinTech and beyond. The Review of
 Financial Studies 32:1647­61.
Gruber, M. J. 1996. Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds. The
  Journal of Finance 51:783­810.
Hau, H., Y. Huang, H. Shan, and Z. Sheng. 2017. FinTech credit, financial inclusion and
  entrepreneurial growth. Working Paper.
Jain, P. C., and J. S. Wu. 2000. Truth in mutual fund advertising: Evidence on future
  performance and fund flows. The Journal of Finance 55:937­58.
Jenkinson, T., H. Jones, and J. V. Martinez. 2016. Picking winners? Investment consultants'
  recommendations of fund managers. The Journal of Finance 71:2333­70.
Jiang, W. 2019. Investment funds in china. The Handbook of China's Financial System
  (Chapter 15) .
Kaniel, R., and R. Parham. 2017. WSJ category kings­The impact of media attention on
 consumer and mutual fund investment decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 123:337­
 56.
Kempf, A., and S. Ruenzi. 2007. Tournaments in mutual-fund families. The Review of
  Financial Studies 21:1013­36.
Massa, M. 2003. How do family strategies affect fund performance? When performance-
 maximization is not the only game in town. Journal of Financial Economics 67:249­304.
Nanda, V., Z. J. Wang, and L. Zheng. 2004. Family values and the star phenomenon:
  Strategies of mutual fund families. The Review of Financial Studies 17:667­98.
Philippon, T. 2018. The FinTech opportunity. Working Paper.
Sirri, E. R., and P. Tufano. 1998. Costly search and mutual fund flows. The Journal of
  Finance 53:1589­622.
Sun, T., Z. Yuan, C. Li, and K. Zhang. 2019. The value of personal data in the internet
  commerce: A high-stake field experiment on data regulation policy. Working paper.
Vallee, B., and Y. Zeng. 2019. Marketplace lending: A new banking paradigm? The Review
  of Financial Studies 32:1939­82.
Wei, S., and C. Yang. 2019. Do internet finance platforms mitigate conflicts of interest? The
 case of mutual fund investment. Working Paper.

                                             35
     Figure 1. Introduction of Platforms
     The upper left graph reports the number of entities in each type of distribution channel: banks, brokers, and FinTech platforms from 2008 through 2019.
     The upper right graph reports the number of actively managed mutual funds on major platforms. The lower left graph shows the coverage of actively
     managed mutual funds on platforms as a fraction of the whole universe of funds. The lower right graph reports the aggregate industry size for actively
     managed equity, mixed, and bond funds. The two vertical lines denote the introduction of Yu'ebao and the entrance of Ant Financial into the platform
     business. Dark (light) shaded areas exhibit two (five) years around the introduction of platforms.


                                                  150
                                                                    Number of Distribution Channels                                         Number of Actively-Managed Mutual Funds on Platforms
                                                            Banks                                                               3000             Shumi+Ant
                                                  135       Brokers                                                                              Tiantian
                                                            Platforms                                                                            Howbuy
                                                  120                      Yu'ebao                                              2500             Tong Huashun

                                                  105                                                                                                           Yu'ebao 
                                                                                                                                2000
                                                   90
                                                   75                                    Ant enters                                                                            Ant enters
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                1500                                           Platforms
                                                                                         Platforms
                                                   60




                                                                                                             Number of Funds
                                                   45                                                                           1000
                                                                                                                                                                                            Brokers
                                                   30




                Number of Distribution Channels
                                                                                                                                      500




36
                                                   15                                                                                                                                        Banks
                                                    0                                                                                      0




                                                    08Q1
                                                    08Q3
                                                    09Q1
                                                    09Q3
                                                    10Q1
                                                    10Q3
                                                    11Q1
                                                    11Q3
                                                    12Q1
                                                    12Q3
                                                    13Q1
                                                    13Q3
                                                    14Q1
                                                    14Q3
                                                    15Q1
                                                    15Q3
                                                    16Q1
                                                    16Q3
                                                    17Q1
                                                    17Q3
                                                    18Q1
                                                    18Q3
                                                    19Q1
                                                    19Q3
                                                                                                                                            08Q1
                                                                                                                                            08Q3
                                                                                                                                            09Q1
                                                                                                                                            09Q3
                                                                                                                                            10Q1
                                                                                                                                            10Q3
                                                                                                                                            11Q1
                                                                                                                                            11Q3
                                                                                                                                            12Q1
                                                                                                                                            12Q3
                                                                                                                                            13Q1
                                                                                                                                            13Q3
                                                                                                                                            14Q1
                                                                                                                                            14Q3
                                                                                                                                            15Q1
                                                                                                                                            15Q3
                                                                                                                                            16Q1
                                                                                                                                            16Q3
                                                                                                                                            17Q1
                                                                                                                                            17Q3
                                                                                                                                            18Q1
                                                                                                                                            18Q3
                                                                                                                                            19Q1
                                                                                                                                            19Q3




                                                        Platform Coverage of Actively-Managed Mutual Funds                                7.0                       Industry Size
                                                  100       Shumi+Ant                                                                            Bond
                                                            Tiantian                                                                      6.5    Mixed
                                                   90       Howbuy                                                                        6.0    Equity         Yu'ebao
                                                            Tong Huashun
                                                   80                                                                                     5.5
                                                                           Yu'ebao                                                        5.0
                                                   70                                                                                                                          Ant enters
                                                                                                                                          4.5                                  Platforms
                                                   60                                                                                     4.0
                                                             Brokers
                                                   50                                                                                     3.5
                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                   40                                                                                     2.5
                                                                Banks                    Ant enters
                                                                                                                   AUM in RMB Trillions




                Fraction of Funds (%)
                                                                                      
                                                   30                                                                                     2.0
                                                                                         Platforms
                                                   20                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                   10                                                                                     0.5
                                                    0                                                                                     0.0




                                                    08Q1
                                                    08Q3
                                                    09Q1
                                                    09Q3
                                                    10Q1
                                                    10Q3
                                                    11Q1
                                                    11Q3
                                                    12Q1
                                                    12Q3
                                                    13Q1
                                                    13Q3
                                                    14Q1
                                                    14Q3
                                                    15Q1
                                                    15Q3
                                                    16Q1
                                                    16Q3
                                                    17Q1
                                                    17Q3
                                                    18Q1
                                                    18Q3
                                                    19Q1
                                                    19Q3
                                                                                                                                                08Q1
                                                                                                                                                08Q3
                                                                                                                                                09Q1
                                                                                                                                                09Q3
                                                                                                                                                10Q1
                                                                                                                                                10Q3
                                                                                                                                                11Q1
                                                                                                                                                11Q3
                                                                                                                                                12Q1
                                                                                                                                                12Q3
                                                                                                                                                13Q1
                                                                                                                                                13Q3
                                                                                                                                                14Q1
                                                                                                                                                14Q3
                                                                                                                                                15Q1
                                                                                                                                                15Q3
                                                                                                                                                16Q1
                                                                                                                                                16Q3
                                                                                                                                                17Q1
                                                                                                                                                17Q3
                                                                                                                                                18Q1
                                                                                                                                                18Q3
                                                                                                                                                19Q1
                                                                                                                                                19Q3
     Figure 2. Flow-Performance Sensitivity, Before and After the Introduction of Platforms
     This figure shows the flow of funds for each performance decile, for the sample period before (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017) the introduction of
     platforms. At the beginning of each quarter t, we sort all funds into deciles based on their past 12-month raw returns. Quarter t flow for each decile is
     the average flow of all funds in that decile. Then, we average the decile flow over time for the before and after period, respectively. The shaded area
     indicates the 95% confidence intervals. The four graphs show the average fund flow for actively managed China equity funds, U.S. equity funds, China
     mixed funds, and China bond funds, respectively.

                                                                 Equity Funds                                                                              US Equity Funds
                                     30       Before                                                                           30       Before
                                              After                                                                                     After
                                     25                                                                                        25
                                     20                                                                                        20
                                     15                                                                                        15
                                     10                                                                                        10
                                      5                                                                                         5




                Quarterly Flow (%)
                                                                                                          Quarterly Flow (%)
                                      0                                                                                         0
                                      5                                                                                         5




37
                                     10                                                                                        10
                                     15                                                                                        15
                                          1   2        3     4      5     6      7     8         9   10                             1   2        3     4       5    6        7   8         9   10
                                                  Decile Rank, Sorted by Past 12-month Returns                                              Decile Rank, Sorted by Past 12-month Returns

                                                                 Mixed Funds                                                                                 Bond Funds
                                     30       Before                                                                           30       Before
                                              After                                                                                     After
                                     25                                                                                        25
                                     20                                                                                        20
                                     15                                                                                        15
                                     10                                                                                        10
                                      5                                                                                         5




                Quarterly Flow (%)
                                                                                                          Quarterly Flow (%)




                                      0                                                                                         0
                                      5                                                                                         5
                                     10                                                                                        10
                                     15                                                                                        15
                                          1   2        3     4      5     6      7     8         9   10                             1   2        3     4       5    6        7   8         9   10
                                                  Decile Rank, Sorted by Past 12-month Returns                                              Decile Rank, Sorted by Past 12-month Returns
     Figure 3. Time-Series Variation of Flow-Performance Sensitivity
     The red line marked with "o" plots the difference between top-decile flow and the average flow; the blue line marked with "x" plots the value-weighted
     average flow of all deciles. The top decile contains funds with top 10% past 12-month returns. The shaded area indicates the 95% confidence intervals.
     The panels correspond to actively managed China equity, U.S. equity, China mixed, and China bond funds, respectively.


                                    80                        Equity Funds                                      35                     US Equity Funds
                                         Top Decile - Average                                                                                             Top Decile - Average
                                    70   Value-Weighted Average Flow                                                                                      Value-Weighted Average Flow
                                                                                                                30
                                    60
                                    50                                                                          25
                                    40
                                                                                                                20
                                    30
                                    20                                                                          15
                                    10
                                                                                                                10
                                     0




               Quarterly Flow (%)
                                                                                           Quarterly Flow (%)
                                    10                                                                           5
                                    20
                                    30                                                                           0




38
                                    40                                                                           5      1995
                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                                                          2015




                                     08Q1
                                     08Q3
                                     09Q1
                                     09Q3
                                     10Q1
                                     10Q3
                                     11Q1
                                     11Q3
                                     12Q1
                                     12Q3
                                     13Q1
                                     13Q3
                                     14Q1
                                     14Q3
                                     15Q1
                                     15Q3
                                     16Q1
                                     16Q3
                                     17Q1
                                     17Q3
                                     18Q1
                                     18Q3
                                     19Q1
                                     19Q3
                                                              Mixed Funds                                  150                              Bond Funds
                                    40   Top Decile - Average                                                        Top Decile - Average
                                         Value-Weighted Average Flow                                                 Value-Weighted Average Flow
                                    30
                                                                                                           100
                                    20
                                                                                                                50
                                    10

                                     0
                                                                                                                 0




               Quarterly Flow (%)
                                                                                 Quarterly Flow (%)




                                    10
                                                                                                                50
                                    20

                                    30                                                                     100




                                     08Q1
                                     08Q3
                                     09Q1
                                     09Q3
                                     10Q1
                                     10Q3
                                     11Q1
                                     11Q3
                                     12Q1
                                     12Q3
                                     13Q1
                                     13Q3
                                     14Q1
                                     14Q3
                                     15Q1
                                     15Q3
                                     16Q1
                                     16Q3
                                     17Q1
                                     17Q3
                                     18Q1
                                     18Q3
                                     19Q1
                                     19Q3
                                                                                                                 08Q1
                                                                                                                 08Q3
                                                                                                                 09Q1
                                                                                                                 09Q3
                                                                                                                 10Q1
                                                                                                                 10Q3
                                                                                                                 11Q1
                                                                                                                 11Q3
                                                                                                                 12Q1
                                                                                                                 12Q3
                                                                                                                 13Q1
                                                                                                                 13Q3
                                                                                                                 14Q1
                                                                                                                 14Q3
                                                                                                                 15Q1
                                                                                                                 15Q3
                                                                                                                 16Q1
                                                                                                                 16Q3
                                                                                                                 17Q1
                                                                                                                 17Q3
                                                                                                                 18Q1
                                                                                                                 18Q3
                                                                                                                 19Q1
                                                                                                                 19Q3
     Figure 4. Purchase Fraction: The Whole Market versus Howbuy Platform
     This figure shows the market share of purchase for each performance decile. At the beginning of each quarter t, we sort funds into deciles based on
     past 12-month return. Market share of purchase for each decile in quarter t is calculated as the total purchase amount for funds in that decile divided
     by the aggregate purchase amount across all deciles. The upper two graphs present the average market share of purchase for each decile in the before
     (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017) period for equity and mixed funds respectively. The solid lines represent the average fractions using the whole market;
     the dotted lines represent the results using data from Howbuy. The shaded area in the upper two graphs indicates the 95% confidence intervals. The
     lower two graphs exhibit the time series of the market share of purchase for decile 10 funds. The blue line marked with "o" represents the whole market
     and the red line marked with "x" represents the Howbuy platform.

                                                                Before vs. After, Equity Funds                                                                 Before vs. After, Mixed Funds
                                            60        Before                                                                              60        Before
                                                      After                                                                                         After
                                                      Howbuy (2015-2018)                                                                            Howbuy (2015-2018)
                                            50                                                                                            50

                                            40                                                                                            40

                                            30                                                                                            30




                         Market Share (%)
                                                                                                                       Market Share (%)
                                            20                                                                                            20




39
                                            10                                                                                            10

                                             0                                                                                             0
                                                 1     2        3     4      5     6      7     8         9   10                               1     2        3     4      5     6      7     8         9   10
                                                           Decile Rank, Sorted by Past 12-month Returns                                                  Decile Rank, Sorted by Past 12-month Returns

                                        100                Market Share in Purchases, Equity Funds                                    100                Market Share in Purchases, Mixed Funds
                                                       Top Decile, Howbuy                                                                            Top Decile, Howbuy
                                            90         Top Decile, All                                                                    90         Top Decile, All
                                            80                        Before   After                                                      80                        Before   After
                                            70                                                                                            70
                                            60                                                                                            60
                                            50                                                                                            50
                                            40                                                                                            40




                     Market Share (%)
                                                                                                                   Market Share (%)




                                            30                                                                                            30
                                            20                                                                                            20
                                            10                                                                                            10
                                             0                                                                                             0
                                                     2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Figure 5. Amplified Flow-Performance Sensitivity for Front-Page Funds
This figure shows the flows to the Top X funds before and after a fund enters platforms. The flows to the
Top X funds are estimated in a regression setting similar to the one in Table 5. The only difference is that
we further divide the top 20 funds into 10 equal groups (Top 1­2, 3­4, etc.). The "Others" and the "Bottom
100" groups are defined in the same way as in Table 5. Since the "Bottom 100" is omitted in the regression
estimation, the flows shall be interpreted benchmarking to "Bottom 100" group. The upper panel reports
the flows to the Top X funds. The orange and blue bars denote the flows when they are off- and on-platforms
respectively. The lower panel reports the on- and off-platform difference for each Top X funds group, and
the corresponding 95% confidence intervals.

                                  50                             Flow to Top X Funds
                                                                                              Off-Platform
                                  45                                                          On-Platform

                                  40
                                  35
             Quarterly Flow (%)




                                  30
                                  25
                                  20
                                  15
                                  10
                                   5
                                   0
                                                -2

                                                -4

                                                -6

                                                -8

                                               -10


                                       To 2

                                       To 4

                                       To 6

                                       To 8

                                       To 0
                                                  0
                                                 rs
                                             1-1

                                             3-1

                                             5-1

                                             7-1

                                             9-2

                                             0-5
                                              he
                                            p1

                                            p3

                                            p5

                                            p7

                                           p9




                                           Ot
                                          p1

                                          p1

                                          p1

                                          p1

                                          p1

                                          p2
                                          To

                                          To

                                          To

                                          To

                                        To

                                       To




                                                       On- and Off-Platform Flow Difference
                                   50

                                   40
             Quarterly Flow (%)




                                   30

                                   20

                                   10

                                       0

                                   10
                                            -2

                                                 -4

                                                       -6

                                                            -8

                                                                   -10


                                                                      To 2

                                                                      To 4

                                                                      To 6

                                                                      To 8

                                                                      To 0
                                                                               0
                                                                              rs
                                                                           1-1

                                                                           3-1

                                                                           5-1

                                                                           7-1

                                                                           9-2

                                                                           0-5
                                                                            he
                                           p1

                                                 p3

                                                      p5

                                                            p7

                                                                 p9




                                                                         Ot
                                                                        p1

                                                                        p1

                                                                        p1

                                                                        p1

                                                                        p1

                                                                        p2
                                           To

                                                To

                                                      To

                                                           To

                                                                 To

                                                                      To




                                                                         40
     Figure 6. The Impact on Standard Deviation, Before and After the Introduction of Platforms
     This figure shows fund daily return standard deviation by performance decile rank, for the sample before (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017) the
     introduction of platforms. At the beginning of each quarter t, we sort all funds into deciles based on the past 12-month return from quarter t - 4 to
     quarter t - 1. Fund performance deciles are obtained at the end of quarter t - 1, indicated by a dotted vertical line. We then examine the difference in
     daily return standard deviation between Decile 10 and Decile 1 funds from t - 4 to t + 4. The shaded areas denote the 95% confidence intervals. The
     panels correspond to actively managed China equity, U.S. equity, China mixed, and China bond mutual funds, respectively.

                                                                                     Equity Funds                                                                             0.4                US Equity Funds
                                                               0.25                                               Before                                                                                                        Before
                                                                                                                  After                                                                                                         After
                                                                                                                                                                              0.3
                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                              0.2

                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
                                                               0.05
                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                               0.05                                                                                                           0.1

                                                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                                               0.15




                 Difference in Total Volatility (%)
                                                                                                                                        Difference in Total Volatility (%)




41
                                                                                                                                                                              0.3

                                                               0.25                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                      4   3   2      1      0      1      2   3            4                                                        4   3   2      1      0      1      2   3            4
                                                                              Quarters Around Event Quarter                                                                                 Quarters Around Event Quarter

                                                                0.7                  Mixed Funds                                                                             0.30                   Bond Funds
                                                                                                                  Before                                                                                                        Before
                                                                0.6                                               After                                                      0.25                                               After
                                                                0.5                                                                                                          0.20
                                                                0.4                                                                                                          0.15
                                                                0.3
                                                                                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                0.0
                                                                0.1                                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                                                             0.10




                          Difference in Total Volatility (%)
                                                                                                                               Difference in Total Volatility (%)




                                                                0.2
                                                                0.3                                                                                                          0.15
                                                                0.4                                                                                                          0.20
                                                                      4   3   2      1      0      1      2   3            4                                                        4   3   2      1      0      1      2   3            4
                                                                              Quarters Around Event Quarter                                                                                 Quarters Around Event Quarter
Figure 7. Entering Time and Changes in Market Share for Fund Families
This graph shows the entering time of families onto Tiantian platform and the changes in their market
shares. Change in family market share is calculated as the average family market share in the three years
after (2013­2015) the introduction of platforms minus the average market share in the three years before
(2010­2012). The graph includes the largest 50 fund families in our before sample, and we further label the
names of the largest 15 families in the graph.

                                          1.8                   Change in Family Market Share
                                                Bank-affiliated
                                          1.4   Broker-affiliated
                                                Independent
                                          1.0
             Change in Market Share (%)




                                                     Fullgoal                                       Share = 0.176 - 0.129   · Time
                                                                                         ICBC CS                  (-2.81)
                                          0.6
                                                                China Universal         Yin Hua
                                                                                                                             Harvest
                                          0.2                             Peng Hua

                                          0.2                    Rong Tong
                                                                                              Hua An
                                                                    Southern                                                BCM Schroder
                                          0.6
                                                                                  GF                                               ChinaAMC
                                          1.0                                                                   E Fund
                                                                               Bosera                                    Dacheng
                                          1.4
                                          1.8
                                           12M05
                                           12M06
                                           12M07
                                           12M08
                                           12M09
                                           12M10
                                           12M11
                                           12M12
                                           13M01
                                           13M02
                                           13M03
                                           13M04
                                           13M05
                                           13M06
                                           13M07
                                           13M08
                                           13M09
                                           13M10
                                           13M11
                                           13M12
                                           14M01
                                           14M02
                                                                                        Enter Month




                                                                                        42
     Table 1. Summary Statistics
     Panel A shows the size of the actively managed mutual fund industry year by year. We report the average number of unique funds (#Funds), aggregate
     assets under managements (AUM) in billion-yuan, fund quarterly returns (Ret%) in percent, cross-sectional standard deviation of fund quarterly returns
     (StdRet%) by averaging across four quarters each year for equity, mixed, and bond funds, respectively. Panel B reports the summary statistics for
     the variables in our sample. Log(Size) is the natural logarithm of fund's total net assets (TNA) at each quarter end. Age is the number of months
     since a fund's inception. MRet(t-1,t-4) is the average monthly fund return in the past twelve months. Flow is fund's quarterly flow, calculated as
     T N At -T N At-1 (1+Rett )
             T N At-1           . Subscript t indexes the quarter. We winsorize flow at the 2% and 98% levels. Annual management fee, subscription fee, and
     redemption fee are calculated by aggregating different fund share classes and are reported in percentage points. We compute the mean, first quartile (Q1),
     median, third quartile (Q3), and standard deviation for each variable quarter by quarter, and report the time-series averages of the quarterly statistics
     for the five years before (2008­2012) and five years after (2013­2017) the introduction of the platforms. The last two columns report the differences in
     the mean statistics for the before and after sample and the corresponding t-statistics. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
     respectively.


                                                                  Panel A. Size of Mutual Fund Industry, by Year




43
                                             Equity                                      Mixed                                   Bond
                          Year   #Funds   AUM     Ret%    StdRet%        #Funds     AUM       Ret%    StdRet%      #Funds   AUM       Ret%   StdRet%
                          2007    55      323.3    22.7     6.2             80       468.1    20.4     8.0           10       23.1    4.5      3.2
                          2008    72      376.3   -15.6     3.9              97      488.0    -13.6    5.1           16       50.7     1.9     1.4
                          2009    111     723.3    14.3     4.4             121      692.7     12.3     5.2          20       32.1    1.0      1.4
                          2010    143     810.4     1.3     3.8             134      690.8      1.5     4.3          40       59.0    1.6      1.5
                          2011    185     730.0    -6.7     3.1             156      601.4     -5.7    3.2          72        68.4    -0.7     1.7
                          2012    220     636.9     1.5     3.3             167      529.6      1.0     2.7          85       90.4    1.8      1.3
                          2013    270     669.3     3.8     5.5             187      531.4      3.1     4.7         124      130.2    0.1      2.0
                          2014    326     617.1     6.1     6.6             210      477.1      5.2     5.7         185      131.4    5.0      5.2
                          2015    186     358.9    12.7     8.8             432      760.2      9.8    10.7         308      321.6    2.7      3.8
                          2016    42       38.0    -2.2     4.0             712      905.7     -3.0    4.8          409      650.7    -0.0     2.0
                          2017    123     166.0     3.6     5.3            1,020    1,292.2     2.8    4.7          468      529.1     0.4     1.2
                          2018    178     175.7    -7.0     4.9            1,418    1,229.9    -4.6    5.0          649      721.4    0.9      2.0
                          2019    225     210.5    11.1     5.5            1,763    1,373.2     8.0    6.5          946     1,703.9    1.5     1.9
                                                           Panel B. Summary Statistics

                                                  Before                                    After                         Difference
                                 Mean     Q1      Median    Q3     Std.    Mean     Q1      Median    Q3      Std.     Mean        t-stat
     Equity   Log(Size)          21.84   21.35     21.93   22.62   1.07    20.25    19.17   20.36    21.36    1.46    -1.59 ***   (-10.64)
              Age                57.51   34.08     47.33   71.70   31.45   55.56    35.55   49.13    70.03    26.38   -1.96        (-0.87)
              MRet(t-1,t-4)       0.34   -0.10      0.35    0.77    0.67    1.43    0.81     1.43     2.06     1.08    1.09        (1.43)
              Flow               -2.41   -6.48     -2.59    0.02   11.09   -0.45   -13.41   -7.22     0.14    31.96    1.97        (1.23)
              Management fee      1.49    1.50      1.50    1.50    0.06    1.46    1.50     1.50     1.50     0.15   -0.03 ***    (-3.49)
              Subscription fee    1.10    1.05      1.10    1.16    0.12    1.09    1.01     1.10     1.17     0.14   -0.01 ***    (-3.93)
              Redemption fee      0.16    0.12      0.13    0.13    0.20    0.30    0.18     0.29     0.35     0.22    0.14 ***    (3.54)

     Mixed    Log(Size)          21.65   21.05     21.94   22.61    1.30   20.58    19.61   20.80    21.67    1.42    -1.07 ***   (-9.83)
              Age                63.26   45.38     65.00   79.35   21.22   81.49    47.38   78.68    114.38   38.69   18.23 ***   (6.99)




44
              MRet(t-1,t-4)       0.33   -0.18      0.31    0.82    0.82    1.23    0.65     1.23      1.85    0.98    0.90       (1.30)
              Flow               -1.54   -5.00     -2.69   -0.69   11.71   -1.84   -12.48   -6.63     -2.42   31.70   -0.30       (0.24)
              Management fee      1.47    1.50      1.50    1.50    0.13    1.43    1.49     1.50     1.50     0.18   -0.03 ***   (-3.66)
              Subscription fee    1.13    1.00      1.12    1.31    0.25    1.07    0.98     1.11     1.19     0.24   -0.05 ***   (-6.12)
              Redemption fee      0.23    0.13      0.13    0.27    0.23    0.30    0.13     0.14     0.37     0.35    0.07 ***   (6.36)

     Bond     Log(Size)          20.25    19.32    20.25   21.20    1.20   20.01    19.06   20.06    21.02    1.33    -0.24 **    (-2.23)
              Age                49.19    33.13    40.54   59.67   23.18   55.65    34.80   47.88    68.23    28.04    6.46 ***    (4.33)
              MRet(t-1,t-4)       0.30     0.12     0.30    0.48    0.26    0.58    0.35     0.54     0.78     0.50    0.28        (1.67)
              Flow                2.03   -16.03    -5.42   13.42   26.67    2.84   -20.82   -5.86    11.57    45.07    0.81        (0.15)
              Management fee      0.64     0.60     0.62    0.70    0.06    0.66    0.60     0.70     0.70     0.11    0.01 ***    (3.36)
              Subscription fee    0.24     0.00     0.23    0.39    0.23    0.34    0.17     0.36     0.51     0.21    0.11 ***    (9.08)
              Redemption fee      0.05     0.00     0.01    0.05    0.12    0.11    0.00     0.02     0.05     0.26    0.06 ***   (10.34)
     Table 2. Fund Flows and Returns in Each Performance Decile
     This table reports the average fund flow and return for each performance decile, before and after the introduction of platforms. At each quarter end
     for each style category, we sort all funds into deciles based on the past 12-month return (MRet(t-1,t-4) ). We then compute the quarterly average flow
     (Flow ), average past 12-month return (MRet(t-1,t-4) ), cross-sectional standard deviation of flows (StdFlow ) and cross-sectional standard deviation of
     returns (StdMRet ) for each performance decile. We compute the statistics quarter by quarter and report the time-series averages for the five-year sample
     before (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017) the introduction of platforms. t-statistics are reported in parentheses.


                                                Decile 1 (Loser)   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4   Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10 (Winner)

                                       Before        -3.18          -3.16      -4.54      -3.78      -3.60      -3.04      -2.81      -2.45       0.54            1.88
                                                    (-3.47)        (-3.67)    (-3.55)    (-4.93)    (-4.28)    (-2.22)    (-2.74)    (-1.94)     (0.34)          (1.34)
                       Flow            After         -3.64         -10.39      -9.02      -3.37      -1.83      -2.55      -4.76       0.73      10.84           19.65
                                                    (-2.30)        (-4.43)    (-5.78)    (-1.01)    (-0.51)    (-0.51)    (-2.88)    (0.30)      (2.51)          (4.47)
                                       Before         7.00          8.41        8.15      7.25       7.44        9.88      8.03       12.23      14.02           13.52
              Equity   StdFlow
                                       After         18.71          15.30      14.61      23.38      27.54      24.06      17.94      24.53      36.67           39.18
                                       Before        -0.86          -0.36      -0.11      0.09       0.26        0.43      0.60        0.78       1.01           1.49
                       MRet(t-1,t-4)
                                       After         -0.58           0.41       0.79      1.04        1.31       1.53      1.78        2.07       2.53           3.31
                                       Before         0.32           0.09       0.07      0.06       0.05        0.05      0.05        0.06       0.09           0.30
                       StdMret
                                       After          0.69           0.17       0.09       0.07      0.07        0.07       0.08       0.09       0.15            0.48




45
                                       Before        -1.73          -3.10      -2.04      -2.05      -2.96      -3.01      -1.71      -1.93       1.84            1.21
                                                    (-1.12)        (-4.45)    (-2.02)    (-1.84)    (-4.23)    (-5.66)    (-1.55)    (-2.71)     (1.03)          (0.99)
                       Flow            After          1.92          -4.15      -4.92      -4.78      -5.02      -4.97      -4.01      -2.07       0.28            9.51
                                                    (0.30)         (-4.42)    (-3.13)    (-3.56)    (-2.78)    (-2.15)    (-3.29)    (-1.01)     (0.14)          (4.19)
                                       Before        11.53          5.79        7.71      7.90       6.96        6.56      8.96       9.45       15.40           14.08
              Mixed    StdFlow
                                       After         34.47          25.64      24.46      24.43      24.25      25.36      26.70      29.40      31.46           39.24
                                       Before        -1.10          -0.46      -0.18      0.03       0.21        0.40      0.60       0.82        1.16           1.84
                       MRet(t-1,t-4)
                                       After         -0.53           0.27       0.64      0.90        1.12       1.34      1.57        1.85       2.19           2.96
                                       Before         0.45           0.11       0.07      0.06       0.06        0.06      0.06       0.08        0.14           0.41
                       StdMret
                                       After          0.52           0.14       0.08       0.07      0.07        0.06       0.07      0.08        0.13            0.51

                                       Before        -2.25           3.07      0.51       -3.30      -2.93       0.54       1.92       2.15       6.50           15.41
                                                    (-0.59)         (0.57)    (0.10)     (-1.30)    (-0.47)    (0.13)      (0.77)     (0.43)     (0.88)          (1.80)
                       Flow            After          5.50           0.55      -2.11      -1.81      -1.01      -1.88       2.25       7.94       8.92           10.21
                                                    (1.12)          (0.11)    (-0.55)    (-0.52)    (-0.20)    (-0.50)     (0.59)     (1.78)     (1.91)          (2.12)
                                       Before        24.05          31.19      23.66      22.93      20.11      23.76      22.77      23.86      25.22           29.25
              Bond     StdFlow
                                       After         48.10          43.63      43.05      37.82      41.94      40.60      39.80      45.94      43.08           46.65
                                       Before        -0.15           0.02       0.11       0.19       0.26       0.34       0.41       0.48       0.58           0.77
                       MRet(t-1,t-4)
                                       After         -0.23           0.22       0.35       0.43       0.50       0.58       0.66       0.78       0.96           1.52
                                       Before         0.09           0.04       0.03       0.02       0.02       0.02       0.03       0.03       0.05           0.08
                       StdMret
                                       After          0.38           0.05       0.03       0.02       0.02       0.02       0.03       0.04       0.07            0.39
Table 3. Staggered Entrance onto Platform and Flow-Performance Sensitivity
This table examines the flow-performance sensitivity utilizing the staggered entrance of funds onto platforms.
The model specification is:

Flowi,t =  + 1 · Decile10i,t-1 + 2 · Platformi,t + 3 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platformi,t +                 j · Controlj
                                                                                                                i,t-1 + i,t ,
                                                                                                 j


where Flowi,t is fund i's flow for quarter t. Decile 10i,t-1 is a dummy that equals one if fund i belongs to
the top performance decile based on the 12-month cumulative return up to the end of quarter t - 1 in its
style group, and zero otherwise. Platformi,t is a dummy that equals one if fund i is available for sale as of
the beginning of quarter t through the two major platforms: Ant Financial and Tiantian. We control for
Log(Size)i,t-1 , the natural logarithm of funds TNA at the end of quarter t - 1, Log(Age)i,t-1 , the natural
logarithm of the number of months since fund inception at quarter t - 1, Flowt-1 , the fund flow in the
previous quarter, and fund management fees, subscription fees, and redemption fees in all specifications.
We report the estimations using the long window and short window. The long window includes the sample
in the five years before (2008­2012) and five years after (2013­2017) the introduction of platforms. The
short window includes the sample in the two years before (2011­2012) and two years after (2013­2014). In
the "All" column, we pool funds from all styles together in the regression, while the decile 10 dummies are
still obtained within each style. We include time fixed effects for all the specifications, and further include
style fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the fund level. t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                              Staggered Entrance onto Platforms

                                              [-5,5]                                            [-2,2]
                          Equity      Mixed            Bond         All      Equity     Mixed            Bond       All
                           (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)              (7)       (8)
     Decile10             6.985***    6.127***    14.383***     8.132***    7.606***   4.555***       8.422***    6.742***
                           (6.03)       (4.71)       (4.79)       (8.32)      (5.67)      (3.16)       (2.92)      (6.57)
     Decile10×Platform   16.964***   11.399***       -5.101     7.966***   18.158***   15.625***      22.710**   18.850***
                           (3.75)       (5.34)       (-1.26)      (4.72)      (2.61)      (2.74)       (1.98)      (4.16)
     Platform              -3.097       1.759         1.432       -0.702      -4.915       0.98       10.187**      0.895
                           (-1.07)      (1.29)       (0.67)      (-0.63)     (-1.18)      (0.24)       (2.08)      (0.34)
     Log(Size)           -2.987***   -3.949***     -6.073***   -4.260***   -2.046***   -1.536***     -4.663***   -2.488***
                           (-9.17)    (-14.21)      (-11.96)    (-21.06)     (-5.13)     (-5.35)       (-6.48)     (-9.64)
     Log(Age)              -0.513     1.715***        0.867     1.019**      2.343**    3.089***       3.124*    3.712***
                           (-0.72)      (2.62)       (0.63)       (2.10)      (2.53)      (3.78)       (1.71)      (5.82)
     Flowt-1             0.065***       0.014       0.030***   0.031***     0.104***     0.067**     0.085***    0.086***
                           (3.23)       (1.35)       (2.87)       (4.51)      (3.52)      (2.46)       (4.29)      (5.89)
     Management Fee        -5.901      3.837**    -16.326***       1.16       -2.339      3.617         1.349       3.061
                           (-0.74)      (2.26)       (-2.87)      (0.68)     (-0.33)      (1.59)       (0.14)      (0.95)
     Subscription Fee      -2.957       -0.927      -6.918**     -1.991*      -4.063       -0.14       -3.583      -1.371
                           (-0.89)     (-0.67)       (-2.58)     (-1.72)     (-1.14)     (-0.09)       (-1.07)     (-0.98)
     Redemption Fee         1.704     3.193***       -2.023     2.259***      -0.202       -1.11       -2.534      -1.054
                           (1.05)       (2.88)       (-0.97)      (2.65)     (-0.13)     (-0.91)       (-0.62)     (-1.02)
     Time FE                  Y           Y             Y           Y            Y           Y            Y           Y
     Style FE                 N           N             N           Y            N           N            N           Y
     Observations           6,705      12,941         6,766       26,412       4,000      2,876         1,863       8,739
     R2                     0.079       0.065         0.123       0.066       0.084       0.086         0.144       0.071




                                                               46
     Table 4. Purchase Fraction: The Whole Market versus Howbuy
     This table reports the purchase fractions for each performance decile rank for the whole market ("All") and for Howbuy, respectively. We compute the
     fractions within each fund style as follows: For each quarter, the fraction of purchase for each decile is computed as the amount of purchase of all funds
     in that decile divided by the total amount of purchase of all funds in that quarter. The time-series average of purchase fractions for the whole market
     in the pre- and post-platform periods are reported. "After-Before" denotes the difference between the two sample periods, and t-stats are reported in
     parentheses. The data for purchase on Howbuy is available from 2015 through 2018. The fraction of purchase on Howbuy is computed in the same way
     as the fractions for our whole sample. "Howbuy-All" reports the differences between the average purchase fractions on Howbuy and the average purchase
     fractions for the whole market during the same sample period.


                                                                                  Purchase Fraction (in %)

                                                           Decile 1   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4   Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10

                                  All Before (2008-2012)    5.14       5.33       7.00       7.84       7.74       8.49       8.15       10.81      15.71      23.79
                                  All After (2013-2017)     5.03       3.03       4.48       3.05       5.54       8.51       7.42        8.97      17.47      36.50
                                  After-Before              -0.11      -2.30      -2.52      -4.79      -2.20       0.02      -0.73      -1.84       1.76      12.71
                                                           (-0.11)    (-2.26)    (-1.97)    (-4.91)    (-1.67)     (0.01)    (-0.61)    (-1.37)     (0.80)     (4.00)
                         Equity
                                  All (2015-2018)           4.60       3.56       5.08       2.79       4.89        9.01      7.65       8.61       16.19      37.61
                                  Howbuy (2015-2018)        4.92       2.91       4.58       2.29       2.75       10.52      4.37       7.26       11.02      49.37




47
                                  Howbuy-All                 0.32      -0.65      -0.50      -0.50      -2.14       1.51      -3.27      -1.35      -5.17      11.76
                                                            (0.19)    (-0.63)    (-0.23)    (-0.58)    (-1.73)     (0.35)    (-2.52)    (-0.59)    (-1.60)     (1.69)

                                  All Before (2008-2012)    10.98      8.71       5.47       6.34       6.78       8.81       8.12       11.78      13.36      19.65
                                  All After (2013-2017)     7.66       6.29       6.21       6.23       5.34       7.31       9.82       9.78       13.90      27.46
                                  After-Before              -3.32      -2.42       0.73      -0.11      -1.44      -1.50       1.70      -2.00       0.54       7.81
                                                           (-1.87)    (-1.49)     (0.61)    (-0.11)    (-1.67)    (-1.13)     (1.07)    (-1.47)     (0.28)     (2.60)
                         Mixed
                                  All (2015-2018)           8.59       7.39       7.00       6.05       5.82       6.14       7.32       9.86       12.80      29.02
                                  Howbuy (2015-2018)        7.22       5.72       7.87       4.47       5.30       3.64       6.76       9.54       10.00      39.50
                                  Howbuy-All                -1.38      -1.68       0.87      -1.58      -0.52      -2.51      -0.56      -0.32      -2.80      10.47
                                                           (-0.66)    (-1.11)     (0.33)    (-1.40)    (-0.23)    (-2.21)    (-0.24)    (-0.08)    (-1.42)     (2.35)

                                  All Before (2010-2012)    8.57       5.87       14.85      8.40       6.23       11.44      10.21      10.70      10.27      13.46
                                  All After (2013-2017)     6.08       9.46       8.06       9.47       9.66       8.92       10.76      10.76      11.35      15.48
                                  After-Before              -2.49       3.59      -6.79       1.07       3.44      -2.53       0.55       0.07       1.08       2.02
                                                           (-1.82)     (2.63)    (-2.50)     (0.59)     (3.16)    (-1.27)     (0.29)     (0.03)     (0.53)     (0.69)
                          Bond
                                  All (2015-2018)           6.07       8.35       7.56       9.43       9.00       7.86       10.32      12.41      11.28      17.72
                                  Howbuy (2015-2018)        2.82       8.00       8.19       7.64       9.71       2.87       10.16      17.03      8.82       24.76
                                  Howbuy-All                -3.25      -0.35       0.62      -1.78       0.71      -4.99      -0.16       4.62      -2.45       7.04
                                                           (-2.39)    (-0.12)     (0.19)    (-0.62)     (0.21)    (-5.83)    (-0.04)     (0.91)    (-0.97)     (1.21)
Table 5. Staggered Entrance and Front-Page Funds
This table shows the panel regression results using the Top X fund dummies instead of the top decile dummy
in Table 3. To mimic investors' choice on the performance rank list, we estimate the regressions using all
fund units, without aggregating different share classes to the fund level. We divide all fund units in the
same style into five ranking groups: Top 10, Top 11-20, Top 21-50, Bottom 100, and others. We then create
dummy variables that equal to one if a fund's past 12-month return falls into the ranking category, and zero
otherwise. The regression setting is similar to the one in Table 3. We regress quarterly flow on last quarter
end Top X fund dummies, the platform dummy, and the interactions between the two. Group "Bottom 100"
is omitted because of multicollinearity. We include as controls last quarter end fund Log(Size), Log(Age),
Flow, and Fees. In the "All" column, we pool funds from all styles together in the regression, while the rank
dummies are still obtained within each style. The sample is from 2008 through 2017. Standard errors are
clustered at the fund level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                        Dep. Var.: Next Quarter Flow

                                               Equity         Mixed      Bond          All
                        Top 10×Platform      19.319***     30.088***     10.006    19.037***
                                               (3.26)         (3.98)     (0.96)      (4.34)
                        Top 11-20×Platform   21.403***       10.703*      0.965    10.613***
                                               (3.51)         (1.87)     (0.12)      (2.78)
                        Top 21-50×Platform   14.707***       8.429**      3.416     8.021***
                                               (4.25)         (2.37)     (0.73)      (3.61)
                        Others×Platform        -0.401         1.504       0.143       0.699
                                               (-0.18)        (0.65)     (0.06)      (0.57)
                        Top 10               15.257***      4.555***   14.210***   10.912***
                                               (6.25)         (2.66)     (5.28)      (7.92)
                        Top 11-20             7.231***       2.755*    14.956***    7.533***
                                               (4.49)         (1.70)     (4.35)      (5.73)
                        Top 21-50             5.385***      3.487***   13.504***    6.749***
                                               (5.67)         (3.43)     (7.03)      (8.75)
                        Others                  0.637       -3.385**    8.088***    2.078***
                                               (0.92)        (-2.11)     (4.91)      (2.91)
                        Controls, Time FE         Y             Y           Y           Y
                        Observations            8,892        18,855      15,210      42,957
                        R2                      0.064         0.062       0.098       0.053




                                                         48
Table 6. The Impact on Fund Turnover and Investor Composition
This table reports the change in fund turnover and investor composition after a fund enters onto platforms.
Fund turnover is measured as the sum of purchase and redemption amount in quarter t divided by the
average fund TNA in quarter t and t - 1. Log(#Holders) is the natural logarithm of the number of investors
that hold the fund. Log(HolderDollarValue) is the natural logarithm of the average dollar value held by an
investor of a fund. RetailRatio (%) is the fraction of a fund held by individual investors. In columns (1) and
(2), the dependent variable is fund turnover. Decile 10i,t-1 is a dummy that equals one if fund i belongs to
the top performance decile based on the 12-month return up to the end of quarter t - 1. Platformi,t is a
dummy that equals one if fund i is available for sale as of the beginning of quarter t through the two major
platforms: Ant Financial and Tiantian. We further control for fund's Log(Size), Log(Age), Flow, and Fees
in quarter t - 1. In columns (3) to (8), we merge the semi-annual investor composition data in each June
and December with the control variables in the closest previous quarter: Platformi,t is a dummy that equals
one if a fund is available on platforms in quarter t - 1 (e.g., March when the investor composition data is in
June). Time fixed effects and fund fixed effects are included in all specifications. The sample is from 2008
through 2017. Standard errors are clustered at the fund level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                          Fund Turnover           Log(#Holders)        Log(HolderDollarValue)      Retaio Ratio (%)

                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)
   Platform             -0.019        -0.027    -0.008        -0.036    0.042        0.065*      -0.006         -0.373
                        (-0.75)      (-1.04)    (-0.25)      (-1.24)    (1.16)        (1.78)     (-0.01)        (-0.39)
   Decile10                         0.176***               -0.079***               0.147***                   -3.824***
                                      (6.51)                 (-2.88)                  (6.27)                    (-4.10)
   Decile10*Platform                 0.113**               0.371***                -0.259***                   3.626***
                                      (2.59)                  (8.76)                 (-6.17)                    (2.80)
   Log(Size)           -0.085***   -0.097***   0.408***     0.396***   0.387***     0.392***     -9.722***    -9.723***
                         (-5.82)     (-6.37)     (19.54)     (19.24)     (17.87)     (18.00)      (-18.75)     (-18.56)
   Log(Age)               0.054       0.053     0.585***   0.574***    -0.513***   -0.506***       -1.632       -1.711
                         (0.79)       (0.80)      (9.82)      (9.76)     (-9.04)     (-8.98)       (-0.78)      (-0.83)
   Flowt-1             0.187***    0.163***    -0.050***   -0.057***    0.172***    0.172***     -3.014***    -2.925***
                         (6.33)       (5.94)     (-4.08)     (-4.79)     (10.84)     (10.93)       (-7.49)      (-7.30)
   Management Fee        -0.051       -0.077    0.734***    0.707***    -0.465**    -0.460**        7.891        8.069
                         (-0.47)     (-0.72)      (3.98)      (3.89)     (-2.28)     (-2.27)       (1.45)       (1.49)
   Subscription Fee     -0.346**    -0.337**     -0.444*     -0.435*      0.349       0.345     -24.830***   -24.792***
                         (-2.65)     (-2.66)     (-1.94)     (-1.93)      (1.17)      (1.16)       (-4.49)      (-4.48)
   Redemption Fee        -0.101       -0.086    0.516***    0.534***   -0.707***   -0.713***     16.689***    16.661***
                         (-1.54)     (-1.38)      (2.79)      (2.99)     (-2.69)     (-2.75)       (2.98)       (2.99)
   Time FE                  Y            Y          Y           Y           Y           Y             Y            Y
   Fund FE                  Y            Y          Y           Y           Y           Y             Y            Y
   Observations          24,110      24,110       13,427      13,427     13,427      13,427        13,427       13,427
   R-squared              0.432        0.441      0.955       0.956       0.853       0.853         0.786        0.786




                                                           49
Table 7. Dynamic Effect of Platform Entrance
In the table, we examine the dynamic effect of entering platforms on the flow-performance relationship
around the quarter when a fund is added to the two major platforms. The model specification is:

  Flowi,t =  + 1 · Decile10i,t-1 + 2 · Platform(q = -1)i,t + 3 · Platform(q = 0)i,t + 4 · Platform(q = 1)i,t
+ 5 · Platform(q  2)i,t + 6 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q = -1)i,t + 7 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q = 0)i,t
+ 8 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q = 1)i,t + 9 · Decile10i,t-1 × Platform(q  2)i,t +                j · Controlj
                                                                                                             i,t-1 + i,t ,
                                                                                            j


where Platform(q = 0)i,t is a dummy that equals one for the quarter when fund i is first available for sale
through the two platforms. Platform(q = -1)i,t is a dummy variable that equals one for the first quarter
before fund i enters platforms. Platform(q = 1)i,t is defined similarly. Platform(q  2) equals one for the
second quarter after inclusion and for the subsequent quarters. The omitted group is q  -2. We include
Platform(q = -1)i,t , Platform(q = 1)i,t , Platform(q  2), and their interactions with Decile 10i,t-1 to
examine the dynamic impact. The control variables are the same as those in Table 3. In the "All" column,
we pool funds from all styles together in the regression, while the decile 10 dummies are still obtained within
each style. The sample is from 2008 through 2017. Standard errors are clustered at the fund level. t-statistics
are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.



                                            Dep. Var.: Next Quarter Flow

                                                   Equity      Mixed         Bond        All
                        Decile10                  6.697***    5.184***     16.816***   8.178***
                                                    (5.66)      (4.50)        (5.25)     (8.30)
                        Platform(q=-1)×Decile10      4.168      6.587        -13.883      0.092
                                                    (0.78)      (1.20)       (-1.62)     (0.02)
                        Platform(q=0)×Decile10       4.413    17.526***     -15.121*      5.132
                                                    (0.66)      (2.76)       (-1.79)     (1.26)
                        Platform(q=1)×Decile10     21.691**    13.389*        -0.467   13.027**
                                                    (2.22)      (1.77)       (-0.04)     (2.43)
                        Platform(q2)×Decile10     20.832***   11.792***       -7.138   7.933***
                                                    (3.36)      (5.45)       (-1.55)     (4.24)
                        Platform(q=-1)                0.08      -0.492        3.132       2.368
                                                    (0.02)     (-0.19)        (0.72)     (1.19)
                        Platform(q=0)                 1.07      0.473         3.879      2.502
                                                    (0.27)      (0.21)        (1.01)     (1.39)
                        Platform(q=1)               -0.128      3.425         5.169     3.774**
                                                    (-0.03)     (1.46)        (1.44)     (2.04)
                        Platform(q2)                 -6.43      1.649         1.129      -1.455
                                                    (-1.50)     (1.03)        (0.47)    (-1.12)
                        Controls                       Y          Y              Y          Y
                        Time FE                        Y          Y              Y          Y
                        Style FE                       N          N              N          Y
                        Observations                 6,705      12,941         6,766     26,412
                        R2                           0.083      0.065         0.124      0.067




                                                        50
Table 8. The Impact on Managerial Risk Taking
This table shows the managerial risk taking behavior when a fund gets into the top performance decile. The
model specification is as follows:

        Stdi,t+k = k + 1
                       k                            k
                         · Decile10i,t-1 × Aftert + 2 · Decile10i,t-1 +                k
                                                                                       j Controlj
                                                                                                i,t-1 + i,t+k ,
                                                                                 j


where Stdi,t+k is fund i's daily return standard deviation in quarter t + k . Decile 10i,t-1 is a dummy that
equals one if fund i belongs to the top performance decile based on the 12-month return up to the end of
quarter t - 1. Aftert is a dummy variable that equals one for the sample in and after 2013. Panel A reports the
panel regression estimates with fund total volatility as the dependent variable. We further decompose total
volatility into systematic volatility and idiosyncratic volatility based on a two-factor model (an aggregate
stock market factor and an aggregate bond factor). We replace the total volatility in the regression with
systematic/idiosyncratic volatility, and report the results in Panel B and C, respectively. We include controls
of quarter t - 1 end fund's Log(Size), Log(Age), Flow, and Fees. Time fixed effects and fund fixed effects are
included for all the specifications. Only the coefficient estimates for Decile 10i,t-1 and its interaction with
Aftert are reported. The sample period is from 2008 through 2017. Standard errors are double clustered at
fund and time levels. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                  A. Total Volatility

                                 k = -3     k = -2     k = -1       k=0       k=1          k=2      k=3
               Decile 10×After   0.082**    0.105***   0.109***    0.070**    0.017       -0.009    -0.017
                                  (2.39)     (3.32)     (3.26)      (2.44)    (0.93)      (-0.40)   (-0.78)
               Decile 10          -0.008     -0.022     -0.018      0.013     0.022*       0.027     0.026
                                 (-0.32)     (-0.86)    (-0.74)     (0.61)    (1.70)      (1.49)    (1.41)

                                               B. Systematic Volatility

                                 k = -3     k = -2     k = -1       k=0       k=1          k=2      k=3
               Decile 10×After    0.049     0.067**    0.077**     0.057*      0.01       -0.006    -0.014
                                 (1.43)      (2.12)     (2.30)     (1.82)     (0.59)      (-0.24)   (-0.70)
               Decile 10         -0.023      -0.044    -0.043*     -0.007     0.004         0.01     0.012
                                 (-0.88)    (-1.61)    (-1.71)     (-0.33)    (0.38)      (0.57)    (0.72)

                                              C. Idiosyncratic Volatility

                                 k = -3     k = -2     k = -1       k=0       k=1          k=2      k=3
               Decile 10×After   0.037**    0.046**     0.036*      0.019      0.001       -0.015   -0.006
                                  (2.18)     (2.51)     (1.84)     (1.00)     (0.09)      (-0.79)   (-0.34)
               Decile 10         0.040***   0.051***   0.058***   0.050***   0.040***     0.037**    0.025
                                  (3.45)     (4.26)     (4.95)     (4.37)     (4.56)       (2.48)   (1.52)




                                                         51
Table 9. Within-Family Ranking
This table reports the panel regression estimates for the sensitivity of fund flow to past performance ranking,
both within fund families and across fund families. We include funds in families with at least five funds and
require the families to exist at least three years before the introduction of platforms. We follow similar model
specification as in Table 3. Decile10i,t-1 is a dummy that equals one if fund i belongs to the top performance
decile based on the twelve-month cumulative return up to the end of quarter t - 1. The performance deciles
are formed within each fund style. FamilyRank is the past 12-month-return quintile rank among the funds
in the same fund family. Platformi,t is a dummy that equals one if a fund is available for sale through the
major two platforms: Ant Financial and Tiantian. We include controls of quarter t - 1 end fund's Log(Size),
Log(Age), Flow, and Fees. Time fixed effects, family fixed effects, and style fixed effects are included for all
the specifications. The sample is from 2008 through 2017. Standard errors are clustered at the fund level.
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.


                                             Dep. Var.: Next Quarter Flow

                                                               (1)          (2)        (3)
                          FamilyRank                       1.583***                 1.122***
                                                            (6.86)                     (4.60)
                          Decile10                                      7.784***    5.992***
                                                                         (7.01)        (5.10)
                          FamilyRank×Platform                 -0.277                 -1.033**
                                                              (-0.70)                 (-2.54)
                          Decile10×Platform                             8.213***     9.853***
                                                                           (4.30)      (4.93)
                          Platform                           -0.697        -1.905      -0.086
                                                             (-0.44)      (-1.46)     (-0.05)
                          Log(Size)                        -5.238***    -5.378***   -5.370***
                                                            (-21.62)     (-22.09)    (-22.12)
                          Log(Age)                         1.942***     2.231***    2.247***
                                                             (3.59)        (4.23)      (4.23)
                          Flowt-1                          0.041***     0.035***     0.035***
                                                             (5.41)        (4.64)      (4.61)
                          Management Fee                    3.430**         2.054       2.133
                                                             (1.97)        (1.16)      (1.21)
                          Subscription Fee                  -2.087*       -2.217*     -2.046*
                                                             (-1.70)      (-1.83)     (-1.68)
                          Redemption Fee                    2.547**      2.623***    2.707***
                                                             (2.57)        (2.71)      (2.76)
                          Time FE, Style FE, Family FE          Y             Y           Y
                          Observations                       22,268        22,268      22,268
                          R2                                  0.067        0.074        0.074




                                                         52
     Table 10. Star Funds and Top Families
     Panel A reports the fraction of funds in the Top fund families for each performance decile. Each quarter end for each style category, we sort all funds
     into deciles based on the past 12-month return (MRett-1,t-4 ). We then calculate the fraction of funds in the decile that belongs to the top ten families
     (or top five families or top one family) in that quarter. The differences between the before (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017) sample are reported. The
     bottom two rows report the differences between Decile 10 and Decile 1, and the corresponding t-statistics. Panel B reports the ten largest fund families
     for the sample before and after the introduction of platforms. We report the average total net assets (in billion-yuan) of actively managed funds for
     each family, number of actively managed funds in the family, and the average market share. The average statistics for the rest of fund families are also
     reported.

                                                                A. Fraction of Large Family Funds in Each Performance Decile

                                     Top Ten Largest Families                                  Top Five Largest Families                 China Asset Management (Top One)

                     Decile Rank      Before      After     Difference     t-stat     Before       After       Difference     t-stat     Before     After       Difference    t-stat

                      Decile 1         21.38      23.04       1.65         (0.58)       8.73       11.17         2.44        (1.62)      0.75        1.21         0.46        (1.17)
                      Decile 2         29.10      22.25      -6.86 ***     (-2.95)     13.15       10.53        -2.62 *      (-1.70)     3.32        2.32        -1.01        (-1.20)
                      Decile 3         30.32      22.65      -7.68 ***     (-2.85)     13.19       11.17        -2.02        (-0.98)     3.00        2.91        -0.10        (-0.13)
                      Decile 4         23.94      23.91      -0.03         (-0.02)      9.68       11.24         1.56        (1.17)      2.80        3.28         0.48        (0.60)
                      Decile 5         28.14      22.33      -5.81 **      (-2.47)     11.50       10.44        -1.05        (-0.62)     3.70        2.60        -1.10        (-1.14)
                      Decile 6         33.46      20.89     -12.56 ***     (-6.93)     15.78       10.21        -5.57 ***    (-3.55)     3.43        2.82        -0.62        (-0.69)
                      Decile 7         32.65      22.33     -10.32 ***     (-5.24)     14.04       10.23        -3.81 ***    (-2.69)     4.26        3.07        -1.19        (-1.34)




53
                      Decile 8         27.40      24.60      -2.79         (-1.00)     11.33       10.39        -0.94        (-0.50)     3.96        2.17        -1.79        (-1.59)
                      Decile 9         33.10      20.73     -12.37 ***     (-5.35)     16.88        9.54        -7.34 **     (-4.47)     6.08        1.82        -4.25 ***    (-3.36)
                      Decile 10        36.22      18.98     -17.24 ***     (-6.96)     25.77        8.41       -17.36 ***    (-6.13)     11.10       0.78       -10.32 ***    (-5.64)

                     Decile 10-1     14.84***     -4.06      -18.89 ***              17.04***      -2.76*      -19.80 ***               10.35***    -0.43        -10.78 ***
                                      (3.98)     (-1.54)    (-4.14)                   (5.42)       (-1.80)    (-5.66)                    (5.31)    (-1.16)      (-5.44)


                                                                                     B. Largest Ten Fund Families

                                                           Before (2008­2012)                                                           After (2013­2017)
                    Largest 10                 Fund name                  TNA ($B)    #Funds      Share                     Fund name                 TNA ($B)      #Funds     Share

                       1          China Asset Management                   105.32      13.25      8.01%      China Asset Management                     92.92        21.45     5.92%
                       2          Bosera Asset Management                   76.54       10.8      5.82%      E Fund Management                          84.35        26.70     5.37%
                       3          Gf Fund Management                        69.17       7.3       5.26%      Harvest Fund Management                    69.45        27.50     4.42%
                       4          Harvest Fund Management                   59.07      11.35      4.49%      China Southern Asset Management            60.61        25.75     3.86%
                       5          China Southern Asset Management           58.51      11.85      4.45%      Bosera Asset Management                    57.89        28.15     3.69%
                       6          E Fund Management                         56.75      10.55      4.32%      Gf Fund Management                         57.34        22.95     3.65%
                       7          Dacheng Fund Management                   53.33       9.6       4.06%      ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management        55.12        25.80     3.51%
                       8          Hua An Fund Management                    40.83       7.85      3.11%      China Universal Asset Management           53.86        20.85     3.43%
                       9          Invesco Great Wall Fund Management        40.44       8.25      3.08%      Fullgoal Fund Management                   48.86        25.45     3.11%
                       10         Fullgoal Fund Management                  39.95        9.6      3.04%      Bank Of China Investment Management        42.10        21.20     2.68%

                                  The Largest Ten Fund Families             59.99       10.0     45.63%      The Largest Ten Fund Families              62.25         24.6    39.65%
                                  The Rest Fund Families (N=50)             14.29        4.6     54.37%      The Rest Fund Families (N=92)              10.30         8.84    60.35%
Table 11. Alternative Specifications
This table shows various robustness tests. We follow specifications similar to the ones in Table 3. The
sample period is from 2008 through 2017. Panel A shows the panel regression estimations under alternative
specifications. In model (1), we report the regression estimates by excluding the whole year of 2015. In
model (2), we create a dummy variable for each year, DYear(t = k ), that equals one for year k and zero
otherwise. We control for DYear(t = k ) and Decile 10i,t-1 ×DYear(t = k ). In model (3), we include fund
fixed effects, and double cluster the standard errors at fund and time level. In model (4), we control for
morningstar ratings. We include dummy variable Ms5star and Ms4star, and their interactions with the
Platform dummy. Ms5star (Ms4star) equals one if the fund morningstar rating is five (four) star, and zero
otherwise. In model (5), we restrict the sample to funds with inception year before 2012. In model (6),
we control for Log(#Bank)i,t-1 and Log(#Brokers)i,t-1 , and the interactions between them and the Decile
10i,t-1 dummy. Log(#Bank)i,t-1 is the natural logarithm of the number of banks in which a fund is available
for sale at quarter t - 1, and Log(#Brokers)i,t-1 is defined similarly. In model (7), we estimate weighted
least squared regressions, using the TNAi,t-1 of each fund as the weight for each observation. In model
(8), we replace the Decile 10i,t-1 dummy with the performance decile rank variable that ranges from one to
ten. In model (9), we replace the Platformi,t dummy with the natural logarithm of the number of platforms
that a fund is available for purchase in quarter t - 1. Panel B shows the sensitivity of flow to past returns
at different horizons. We replace past 12-month return Decile 10i,t-1 dummy with Decile 10i,t-1 dummies
based on past 1, 3, 6, 24, and 36 months returns, respectively. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                 A. Alternative Specifications

                                                                 Decile10×Platform        Decile10       N       R2

               (1). Exclude 2015                                        8.377***          10.610***    22,708   0.069
                                                                          (8.87)            (6.08)
               (2). Control Dummies of Year×Decile 10                    6.598**          12.905***    26,412   0.067
                                                                          (2.13)            (4.32)
               (3). Fund Fixed Effects+Double Clustered S.E.            10.742***          8.231***    26,412   0.176
                                                                          (6.29)            (6.01)
               (4). Control for MorningStar 5 & 4 ratings               7.889***           7.525***    26,412   0.067
                                                                          (4.70)            (7.58)
               (5). Inception < 2012                                    8.493***          6.485***     18,925   0.058
                                                                          (4.42)            (7.64)
               (6). Control Bank & Broker                               7.841***            5.210*     26,412   0.067
                                                                          (3.45)            (2.01)
               (7). Value-Weighted                                      8.584***           3.512***    26,412   0.222
                                                                          (5.47)            (3.59)
               (8). Replace Decile 10 with Rank12m                      0.579***           0.881***    26,412   0.064
                                                                          (3.43)            (9.25)
               (9). Replace Platform with Log(#Platforms)               4.444***           4.876***    26,412   0.177
                                                                          (7.76)            (3.11)


                                              B. Different Past Return Horizons

                       Past 1 Month    Past 3 Months    Past 6 Months       Past 12 Months     Past 24 Months     Past 36 Months
                            (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)
   Decile10              5.507***         6.441***           8.058***          8.132***              4.466***           4.747***
                          (5.06)           (6.38)             (7.88)            (8.32)                (5.34)             (5.03)
   Decile10×Platform     4.233**          6.751***          12.171***          7.966***              4.409***           4.310**
                          (2.40)           (3.93)             (6.79)            (4.72)                (2.75)             (2.57)
   Controls, Time FE         Y                Y                  Y                 Y                     Y                  Y
   Obs.                   26,412           26,412             26,412            26,412                26,412             26,412
   R2                      0.060            0.063              0.071             0.066                 0.059              0.059

                                                              54
Appendix A

Table A1. Determinants of Entrance onto Platforms
This table reports the cross-sectional determinants regression for funds and families' entrance onto platforms.
Column (1) and (2) includes all the funds with inception dates before the end of 2012. Column (3) and
(4) includes all the families with inception dates before the end of 2012. D(Enter2013Q1) is a dummy
variable that equals one if the fund or family enters onto Tiantian platform on or before March 31, 2013.
Log(Enter months) is the natural logarithm of the number of months from March 2012 to the time when
the fund enters Tiantian. Bank-affiliated is a dummy variable that equals one if the controlling shareholder
(>30% ownership) is a bank, and Broker-affiliated is defined similarly. We also include control variables of
RetailRatio (%), which is the fraction of a fund held by individual investors at the end of June 2012, past
12-month return by the end of June 2012 (MRett-1,t-4 ), Log(Size), Log(Age), Flow, and Fees at the end of
June 2012. Control variables for families are constructed as the value-weighted average of all funds within the
family. We include style fixed effect for fund specifications. t-statistics are adjusted using heteroscedasticity-
robust standard errors and are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.

                                             Funds                                 Family
                              D(Enter2013Q1)    Log(Enter months)   D(Enter2013Q1)    Log(Enter months)

                                   Logit               OLS               Logit               OLS
                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
          Bank-affiliated        -1.773***           0.574***            -2.073               0.586*
                                   (-4.78)             (6.48)            (-1.51)              (1.72)
          Broker-affiliated        -0.028               0.089             0.867                -0.04
                                   (-0.13)             (1.51)            (0.92)              (-0.24)
          RetailRatio            -0.021***           0.005***          -0.127***            0.019**
                                   (-3.80)             (3.44)            (-3.06)              (2.52)
          Log(Size)              -0.261***           0.107***           -1.381**             0.200*
                                   (-2.87)             (4.55)            (-2.49)              (1.88)
          Log(Age)                0.745**            -0.210***           5.369*               -0.334
                                   (2.57)              (-2.76)           (1.95)              (-0.81)
          Flowt-1                  0.788*            -0.187***            0.414                 -0.4
                                   (1.91)              (-3.07)           (0.17)              (-0.94)
          MRett-1,t-4               0.187              -0.044             3.05*                -0.25
                                   (0.85)              (-0.70)           (1.94)              (-1.31)
          StdM ret,t-1,t-8        -10.981              -1.279            94.222              -15.971
                                   (-0.73)             (-0.31)           (0.92)              (-0.80)
          Management Fee           -1.024               0.091            9.616*               -1.174
                                   (-0.62)             (0.24)            (1.80)              (-1.05)
          Subscription Fee         -0.388                0.03            -3.281                0.503
                                   (-0.70)             (0.21)            (-0.78)              (0.67)
          Redemption Fee            0.453              -0.172             4.302             -1.193**
                                   (0.92)              (-1.35)           (1.23)              (-2.06)
          Style FE                    Y                   Y                 N                    N
          Observations               457                 457                60                   60
          R2                        0.115               0.18              0.396                0.358




                                                        55
Table A2. Predicting Future Fund Return with Flow and Current Return
This table shows the panel regression estimates of how past flow (or past return) predicts funds' future
performance. The model specification is:

     Reti,t+k =  + 1 · Platformi,t + 2 · Flowi,t (or Ret12mi,t ) × Platformi,t +                     k · Controlk + i,t ,
                                                                                                 k


where Reti,t+k refers to fund i's quarterly return (%) in quarter t + k (k = 1, 2, 3). In columns (1) to (3), we
regress future fund returns in quarter t +1, t +2, t +3 on the Platformi,t dummy, and the interaction between
the platform dummy and quarter t fund flow. In columns (4) to (6), we regress future fund returns on the
Platformi,t dummy, and the interaction between the platform dummy and fund's past-12-month return up
to quarter t end. We include controls of fund's Flow, Ret12m, Log(Size), Log(Age), and Fees at the end of
quarter t. Time fixed effects and style fixed effects are included for all specifications. The standard errors are
double-clustered at the fund level and the time level. The sample period is 2008 through 2017. t-statistics
are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                        Dep. Var.: Future Quarterly Return

                                       1st Qtr.   2nd Qtr.       3rd qtr.   1st Qtr.   2nd Qtr.      3rd qtr.
                                         (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)

                   Flow*Platform       -0.252      0.327         -0.127
                                       (-0.48)     (0.63)        (-0.23)
                   Ret12m*Platform                                           0.535      -0.23         0.012
                                                                            (0.73)     (-0.42)       (0.03)
                   Platform             0.006     -0.048         -0.001     -0.456      0.155        -0.013
                                       (0.03)     (-0.27)        (-0.00)    (-0.85)    (0.35)        (-0.04)
                   Ret12m               0.297     -0.102         -0.144     -0.072      0.056        -0.152
                                       (0.32)     (-0.15)        (-0.41)    (-0.14)    (0.14)        (-0.49)
                   Flow                 0.052     -0.103         -0.128     -0.106      0.131        -0.224
                                       (0.06)     (-0.17)        (-0.33)    (-0.14)    (0.25)        (-0.67)
                   Log(Size)           -0.090     -0.082         -0.088     -0.094     -0.080        -0.088
                                       (-0.69)    (-0.88)        (-1.25)    (-0.71)    (-0.84)       (-1.23)
                   Log(Age)            -0.167     -0.003         -0.106     -0.158     -0.009        -0.105
                                       (-0.53)    (-0.01)        (-0.44)    (-0.49)    (-0.03)       (-0.43)
                   Management Fee       0.384     -0.767         -1.641      0.420     -0.785        -1.639
                                       (0.49)     (-0.80)        (-1.39)    (0.52)     (-0.82)       (-1.39)
                   Subscription Fee     0.120      0.239          0.170      0.095      0.249         0.170
                                       (0.51)     (0.88)         (0.51)     (0.40)     (0.92)        (0.51)
                   Redemption Fee      -0.496     -0.442         -0.599     -0.482     -0.448        -0.600
                                       (-0.92)    (-0.85)        (-1.09)    (-0.91)    (-0.87)       (-1.09)
                   Time FE, Style FE      Y          Y              Y          Y          Y             Y
                   Observations        26,356     26,277         26,190     26,356     26,277        26,190
                   R-squared            0.596      0.604          0.609      0.597      0.604         0.609




                                                            56
     Table A3. Distribution of Fund Daily Return
     This table shows the distribution of fund daily returns conditional on the performance decile rank. Each quarter t - 1 end for each style category, we sort
     all funds into deciles based on the past 12-month return (MRett-1,t-4 ). We then compute the daily average returns (Dret), daily return autocorrelation
     (AR1), standard deviation (Std), skewness (Skew), and kurtosis (Kurt) of daily fund returns in quarter t. We compute the statistics for each quarter
     and each decile, and then average the estimates over time for the before (2008­2012) and after (2013­2017) sample separately. "Decile 10-1" report the
     difference between Decile 10 and 1. The differences of "Decile 10-1" between after and before are reported in the last two columns, with t-statistics
     reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                       Daily return distribution by performance decile rank

                                 Decile 1   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4   Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10   Decile 10-1   t-stat      After-Before
                        Before    -0.029     -0.020     -0.020     -0.018     -0.023     -0.022     -0.017     -0.022     -0.020     -0.014       0.016       (1.26)
                 Dret                                                                                                                                                   0.010       (0.34)
                        After      0.068     0.063       0.076      0.072     0.075       0.059      0.070     0.084       0.087      0.093        0.025      (0.98)
                        Before     0.028      0.026      0.027      0.021      0.021      0.025      0.023      0.026      0.017      0.038        0.011      (1.66)
                 AR1                                                                                                                                                    0.006       (0.42)
                        After      0.023     0.000       0.010      0.013     0.020       0.011      0.023     0.029       0.018      0.040        0.017      (1.26)
                        Before     1.551      1.552      1.524      1.543      1.547      1.494      1.488      1.503      1.506      1.517       -0.034      (-0.79)
                 Std                                                                                                                                                    0.137 **    (2.17)
                        After      1.448     1.444       1.451      1.432     1.475       1.485      1.475     1.485       1.525      1.551        0.104       (2.2)




        Equity
                        Before    -0.075     -0.076     -0.073     -0.064     -0.062     -0.084     -0.068     -0.059     -0.061     -0.073        0.002      (0.09)
                 Skew                                                                                                                                                   -0.058      (-0.52)
                        After     -0.419     -0.409     -0.439     -0.464     -0.466     -0.648     -0.460     -0.457     -0.477     -0.474       -0.055      (-0.52)
                        Before     0.598      0.522      0.522      0.524      0.563      0.508      0.556      0.479      0.499      0.607        0.009      (0.07)
                 Kurt                                                                                                                                                   -0.026      (-0.06)




57
                        After      1.429     1.539       1.335      1.566     1.482       2.649      1.186     1.233       1.316      1.412       -0.017      (-0.04)

                        Before    -0.008     -0.012     -0.016     -0.018     -0.016     -0.015     -0.018     -0.014     -0.015     -0.016       -0.008      (-0.36)
                 Dret                                                                                                                                                   0.014       (0.41)
                        After      0.059     0.054       0.041      0.049     0.052       0.055      0.064     0.066       0.072      0.065        0.006      (0.23)
                        Before     0.027      0.028      0.030      0.031      0.030      0.029      0.039      0.033      0.030      0.045        0.017      (2.25)
                 AR1                                                                                                                                                    0.008       (0.69)
                        After      0.013     0.024       0.035      0.019     0.028       0.028      0.026     0.026       0.028      0.039        0.026      (2.97)
                        Before     1.225      1.247      1.331      1.296      1.292      1.281      1.313      1.331      1.269      1.140       -0.086      (-0.56)
                 Std                                                                                                                                                    0.563 **    (2.30)
                        After      0.975     1.047       1.135      1.185     1.192       1.246      1.290     1.316       1.357      1.452        0.477       (2.5)




        Mixed
                        Before    -0.118     -0.091     -0.087     -0.105     -0.085     -0.110     -0.078     -0.091     -0.063     -0.097        0.020      (0.49)
                 Skew                                                                                                                                                   -0.142 *    (-1.89)
                        After     -0.384     -0.419     -0.441     -0.424     -0.429     -0.452     -0.460     -0.450     -0.401     -0.506       -0.121      (-1.94)
                        Before     0.735      0.563      0.542      0.547      0.664      0.742      0.543      0.547      0.567      0.884        0.149       (0.6)
                 Kurt                                                                                                                                                   -0.718      (-1.52)
                        After      2.090     1.687       1.853      1.630     1.747       1.536      1.493     1.469       1.240      1.521       -0.569      (-1.41)

                        Before    0.014      0.011      0.016      0.014      0.019      0.017      0.014      0.014      0.010      0.016        0.002       (0.26)
                 Dret                                                                                                                                                   0.004       (0.26)
                        After      0.021     0.023       0.021     0.027      0.025      0.025      0.028      0.028      0.032      0.027         0.006      (0.49)
                        Before     0.039      0.077      0.051     0.061      0.081      0.076      0.064       0.090     0.066      0.093         0.054      (1.65)
                 AR1                                                                                                                                                    -0.074 **   (-2.29)
                        After      0.095     0.099       0.112     0.095      0.125      0.120      0.108      0.097      0.092      0.075        -0.020      (-1.27)
                        Before     0.222      0.223      0.208     0.219      0.212      0.206      0.204       0.229     0.224      0.225         0.003      (0.08)
                 Std                                                                                                                                                    0.100       (0.89)
                        After      0.329     0.195       0.176     0.182      0.182      0.200      0.209      0.265      0.305      0.432         0.103      (1.25)




        Bond
                        Before     0.167     -0.228      0.173     0.000      0.219       0.121     0.100      0.064       0.137     0.121        -0.046      (-0.17)
                 Skew                                                                                                                                                   0.136       (0.55)
                        After     -0.279     -0.172     -0.274     -0.249     -0.281     -0.298     -0.281     -0.360     -0.273     -0.189        0.090       (0.9)
                        Before     2.536      2.872      2.232     1.557      2.139      1.398      2.207       1.827     2.954      1.414        -1.122      (-1.48)
                 Kurt                                                                                                                                                   0.090       (0.12)
                        After      3.490     3.476       3.703     3.014      3.227      3.281      3.381      3.259      2.751      2.458        -1.032      (-2.72)
     Figure A1. Information Display: FinTech Platforms vs. Online Broker
     This figure shows the display of information on the FinTech platforms in China and a typical online brokerage firm in the US. The left three figures
     in Panel A are screenshots from the Ant Financial Platform. Specifically, the figures show the front page of Alipay, the performance rank list, and the
     detailed information for a specific fund on Alipay. The last figure shows a performance rank list on the Howbuy platform, with the screenshot taken on
     the same day. Panel B shows a screenshot from Charles Schwarb OneSource, an online brokerage firm in the US, in comparison.

                                                                                         Panel A:
               Shanghai                               Fund Ranking List                               China Asset Market Select Mixed Fund                                             Performance Ranking List

                                                 Performance Rank                               Daily Return                                 NAV (07-03 Update)            Equity       Mixed           Bond     MMF       Index

                                                 Equity                        NAV   12m Ret                                                                               Fund Name                       NAV   12m Ret
                                                                                                                                           MS Rating
                                                                                                                                                                             Fullgoal Internet Equity...
                                                 Fullgoal Internet Equity...

                                                                                                 Performance Trendline                            NAV                        GF Diversified Emerging...




58
                                                 GF Diversified Emerging...
                                                                                                     Fund                  Peer Mean                   CSI300
                                                                                                                                                                             GF Medical Equity...

                                                 GF Medical Equity...
                                                                                                                                                                             ICBC Frontier Medical...


                                                 ICBC Frontier Medical...                                                                                                    BY Medical Health ...


                                                                                                                                                                             Central Europe Medical...
                                                 BY Medical Health ...

                                                                                               Past              Past               Past         Past 12m       Past 36m     TrueValue Medical...
                                                                                               1m                3m                 6m
                                                 Central Europe Medical...
                                                                                                 Historical Performance                        Historical NAV                FS Cinda New Energy...

                                                                                               Horizon                              Return                  Peer Ranking
                                                 TrueValue Medical...
                                                                                                                                                                             ICBC Medical Health...
                                                                                               Past Week


                                                 FS Cinda New Energy...                                                                                                      Central Europe Medical...
                                                                                               Past Month

                                                                                                            Open to buy Open to Sell (Subscription fee 0.15%)

                                                 ICBC Medical Health...                                                                                                    Day      Week     Month Quarter Annual      More
                                                                                               BBS            Brand     Watchlist
                                                                                                                                       Auto Invest              BUY
Panel B:




  59
Figure A2. Retail Ratio and Advertising Expenses around the Entrance
The upper panel of this figure shows funds' retail ratio over time. Funds report retail ratio on a semi-annual
basis. We report the cross-sectional average retail ratio for each style of funds. The lower panel of this
figure shows funds' time-series advertising expenses. Funds report operating expense on a semi-annual basis.
We calculate advertising expense as total operating expense subtracting management expense, custodian
expense, transaction expense, and interest expense. The annualized advertising expense ratio is calculated
as advertising expense scaled by average TNA, AdvertiseEXP% = AdvertiseEXP  2/((TNAt + TNAt-1 )/2).
We calculate the cross-sectional average expense ratio for each style of funds.The shaded area indicates the
95% confidence intervals.


                                                                                         Retail Ratio
                                                                                                                            Bond funds
                                                    100                                                                     Equity funds
                                                                                                                            Mixed funds
                                                     90
                                                     80
                   Retail Ratio (%)




                                                     70
                                                     60
                                                     50
                                                     40
                                                     30
                                                     20
                                                     10
                                                           08Q2
                                                                  09Q2
                                                                         10Q2
                                                                                11Q2
                                                                                       12Q2
                                                                                              13Q2
                                                                                                     14Q2
                                                                                                            15Q2
                                                                                                                   16Q2
                                                                                                                          17Q2
                                                                                                                                 18Q2
                                                                                                                                        19Q2



                                                    0.35                          Advertising Expenses
                                                                                                                            Bond funds
                                                                                                                            Equity funds
                                                    0.30                                                                    Mixed funds
               Annualized Advertising Expense (%)




                                                    0.25

                                                    0.20

                                                    0.15

                                                    0.10

                                                    0.05

                                                    0.00
                                                           08Q2
                                                                  09Q2
                                                                         10Q2
                                                                                11Q2
                                                                                       12Q2
                                                                                              13Q2
                                                                                                     14Q2
                                                                                                            15Q2
                                                                                                                   16Q2
                                                                                                                          17Q2
                                                                                                                                 18Q2
                                                                                                                                        19Q2




                                                                                               60
