                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE LOCAL RESIDENTIAL LAND USE REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT
                      ACROSS U.S. HOUSING MARKETS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM A NEW WHARTON INDEX



                                      Joseph Gyourko
                                      Jonathan Hartley
                                       Jacob Krimmel

                                     Working Paper 26573
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26573


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




We appreciate the excellent work of Laura Gooderis and her colleagues at the International City
Managers Association (ICMA) for helping implement the new survey used in this paper. Ingrid
Ellen and participants in presentations at the 2019 NBER Summer Institute and at the Wharton
School's Urban Lunch group provided valuable comments on an initial draft of this paper. We
also benefited from the superb research assistance of Diane Ding, Anna Gao, Xinyu Ma and Sean
McCulloch. Finally, we appreciate the financial support of the Research Sponsors Program of the
Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joseph Gyourko, Jonathan Hartley, and Jacob Krimmel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Local Residential Land Use Regulatory Environment Across U.S. Housing Markets:
Evidence from a New Wharton Index
Joseph Gyourko, Jonathan Hartley, and Jacob Krimmel
NBER Working Paper No. 26573
December 2019
JEL No. R1,R14,R31,R52

                                         ABSTRACT

We report results from a new survey of local residential land use regulatory regimes for over
2,450 primarily suburban communities across the U.S. The most highly regulated markets are on
the two coasts, with the San Francisco and New York City metropolitan areas being the most
highly regulated according to our metric. Comparing our new data to that from a previous survey
finds that the housing bust associated with the Great Recession did not lead any major market that
previously was highly regulated to reverse course and deregulate to any significant extent.
Moreover, regulation in most large coastal markets increased over time.


Joseph Gyourko                                  Jacob Krimmel
University of Pennsylvania                      University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School of Business                  jkrimmel@wharton.upenn.edu
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

Jonathan Hartley
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
jhartley@hks.harvard.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26573
    I.        Introduction

         High house prices, especially in America's larger coastal markets, have spawned growing

concerns about housing affordability for middle class, not just low income, households. The

potential role of local residential land use restrictions in helping to generate such high prices is

an issue of growing importance in the public and academic spheres. In the public arena, this led

to a host of proposed policy responses, including a recent Presidential Executive Order

establishing a White House Council on Eliminating Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing. 1

Regionally, this has been a topic of public debate in California especially, with recent proposed

legislation that would have restricted localities from stopping residential construction in certain

circumstances. In addition, the rise of a Yes In My Back Yard (YIMBY) political movement is a

relatively new development in various parts of the country ranging from California and Oregon

to Minnesota. 2 The academic literature on the topic also has grown substantially in recent years. 3

         There are many challenges to producing convincing analysis of the impact of the local

regulatory environment, but such research always starts with how to measure restrictiveness. 4 In


1
  See https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-establishing-white-house-council-
eliminating-regulatory-barriers-affordable-housing/ for the text of the order.
2
  Last year saw the writing of a California state bill (SB 827) that would have limited the ability of localities to stop
denser developments involving multifamily-type construction. For one of many analyses of this effort, which did
not pass or even make it out of committee, see the Vox article at https://www.vox.com/cities-and-
urbanism/2018/2/23/17011154/sb827-california-housing-crisis. See the July 5, 2017, article in The Atlantic for
more on the new YIMBYism movement. Entitled "From `Not in My Backyard' to `Yes in My Backyard'", it may
be accessed at https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2017/07/yimby-groups-pro-development/532437/. The
Oregon state legislature recently passed a bill to effectively ban single-family zoning in Oregon neighborhoods. See:
https://www.oregonlive.com/politics/2019/06/bill-to-eliminate-single-family-zoning-in-oregon-neighborhoods-
passes-final-legislative-hurdle.html. In late 2018, the Minneapolis City Council voted to eliminate single-family
zoning, and in its stead, permit up to three housing units on each site. On this, see
https://nytimes.com/2018/12/13/us/minneapolis-single-family-zoning.html.
3
  For example, see Albouy and Ehrlich (2018), Emrath, (2016), Gedal and Ellen (2018), Jackson (2016, 2018), Lin
and Wachter (2019), and Turner, et. al. (2014) for some recent efforts. Gyourko and Molloy (2015) provide the
most recent scholarly literature review, with Glaeser & Gyourko (2018) describing how a restrictive supply side of
housing markets appears to be affecting home prices in coastal markets especially.
4
  Prior efforts to measure the degree of regulatory restriction include Linneman, et. al. (1990), Glickfield and Levine
(1992), Pendall, Puentes and Martin (2006), Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) and Glaeser and Ward (2009). For
other recent efforts on measuring restrictiveness, see the Terner Center's California Land Use data
(http://californialanduse.org/index.html) and Brueckner and Singh (2018).


                                                                                                                       2
this paper, we report results from a new survey of the residential land use regulatory environment

in more than 2,450 primarily suburban communities across a wide array of metropolitan areas

throughout the country. We construct a measure of regulatory restrictiveness called the Wharton

Residential Land Use Regulatory Index (WRLURI). To distinguish the new index from the first

Wharton survey conducted over a decade ago, we refer to the new measure as WRLURI2018 and

the previous index as WRLURI2006.

       Our index methodology provides a convenient way to rank individual communities and

markets in terms of their regulatory restrictiveness. The index is standardized so that it has a

mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1, where a higher value implies more regulation.

However, it does not reveal what regulation actually exists in places with different index value

ranks. To provide a translation from index value to actual regulatory environment, we group

communities by where they rank in the overall distribution of WRLURI2018 values. For

example, we consider those in the bottom quartile of the WRLURI2018 distribution to be lightly

regulated. Being relatively lightly regulated by our metric does not imply that the jurisdiction is

unregulated or characterized by a near absence of residential land use controls restricting supply.

Among this subset of communities, two entities (usually a local planning commission and a local

council) typically are required to approve any project that needs rezoning. Even for projects not

requiring a variance to the zoning code, it is not uncommon for lightly-regulated communities to

require the approval of two local entities in order for the development to proceed. Density

restrictions also are omnipresent. Ninety-four percent of the communities in the bottom quartile

of the WRLURI2018 distribution have some type of minimum lot size requirement in at least

one of their neighborhoods, with the typical minimum being less than one-half acre. It also takes

a meaningful amount of time to get a proposal through the approval process even in these




                                                                                                      3
relatively lightly-regulated communities. The average time span between submitting a project

for approval and receiving a decision is 3.4 months, which amounts to 111 days assuming thirty

days per month.

       Highly-regulated places (which we define as those with index values in the top quartile of

the WRLURI2018 distribution) tend to be more regulated on multiple dimensions. Thus, they

are not at the top of the rankings because they are extremely restrictive in only one or two facets

of regulation. These places tend to have at least three different entities that must approve (and,

thus, can veto) a project. Density restrictions are more severe on average, as the modal

community among this group reports a 2+ acre minimum lot size restriction in at least one of its

neighborhoods. In addition, there is a more intense level of involvement in the regulatory

process reported on the part of public and local officials in the places we rate as the most highly

regulated. These jurisdictions are also likely to have open space requirements and exaction fee

programs imposed on builders. Project review delay times are more than double those found in

the lightly-regulated areas. The average project review time is 8.4 months, or 252 days

presuming 30-day months. There also is a thick upper tail, with some communities reporting 18-

24 month review times (which we confirmed are not data error from misreporting in the survey).

       The average regulatory environment looks like the mean of the lightly- and highly-

regulated ones. Hence, there is no place (on average) where residential development is simple

and quick in the sense that projects are reviewed quickly by a single entity that has final approval

rights. The local residential regulatory environment now is a complex one, even among the

communities that are not relatively highly regulated by our measure.

       For the 44 metropolitan areas (technically, core-based statistical areas or CBSAs) in

which there were at least ten communities responding to our survey, we report market-wide




                                                                                                      4
regulatory index values, which are the simple means of the individual communities'

WRLURI2018 values. The San Francisco and New York City CBSAs are the most highly

regulated markets in the country by this metric, with each having a WRLURI2018 value that is

more than one standard deviation above the national average. In addition, there is a clear

regional pattern to the CBSA-level results (see Figure 1 and Table 5 below). Nine of the top 10

markets in terms of measured regulatory strictness are situated along the northeast coast (from

Boston down through Washington, D.C.) or the west coast of the country (Seattle, Portland

(OR), San Francisco and Los Angeles). The most lightly regulated among the group of larger

metropolitan areas tend to be declining markets in the so-called Rust Belt region (e.g., Cleveland,

OH, Grand Rapids, MI, Cincinnati, OH, Detroit, MI, and St. Louis, MO). These markets tend to

have WRLURI2018 values that are about one-quarter to one-third of a standard deviation below

the national mean. 5 The interquartile range of this group contains a wide array of markets across

the rest of the country. Markets with WRLURI2018 index values within one-tenth of a standard

deviation from zero include Houston, TX, Columbus, OH, San Antonio, TX, and Pittsburgh, PA.

By definition, these markets have the average residential land use regulatory climate according to

our measure.

         The 2018 survey allows us to paint a broad picture of the current regulatory environment.

However, the cross section cannot tell us how the regulatory environment changed over time--

either in aggregate or for certain markets or regions. To document changes, we exploit data from

our 2006 Wharton survey (Gyourko, Saiz, Summers (2008)) and measure changes in responses

across the two instruments. Depending upon the specific question, there typically are from 750-

900 communities that answered it in both surveys. The number that fully answered both surveys


5
  Given that the index is standardized with a mean of zero and standard deviation of 1, this implies that communities
in many smaller markets make up the bulk of places with even lower WRLURI2018 index values.


                                                                                                                    5
is just over 500. We believe this is the first consistent nationwide data to document changes in

residential land use regulation at the local jurisdiction level.

        Based on how the same community answered identical questions across both surveys, we

reach the following conclusions about how the residential land use regulatory environment has

and has not changed since the first Wharton survey:

        (1) The fundamental nature of the local regulatory environment has not changed much.

            That is, there is no evidence that broad strategies for regulating the development

            process or specific tools have been abandoned by many or most communities; nor do

            we see evidence of radically new methods in use. What existed near the start of the

            century is still there in basic form.

        (2) There is no evidence that the Great Recession and its concomitant housing bust led

            most (or even many) local communities to adopt a new perspective that fostered

            widespread declines in regulatory intensity. The intensity of involvement in the

            regulatory process by local officials and the broader community is down on average,

            but that change is modest, and it could be due to when the surveys were taken (i.e.,

            the first one just before the peak of the biggest housing boom in the post-war era; the

            second over a decade later and well into the recovery following the global financial

            crisis). In any event, the Great Recession clearly did not lead to general declines in

            regulatory intensity. Of course, there are individual communities who lessened local

            regulation by abandoning certain policies or enforcing them more leniently.

            However, at the housing market or CBSA-based level, there are no cases in which a

            previously highly-regulated area reversed course and became lightly-regulated on

            average (in absolute or relative terms). In fact, the regulatory burden increased at




                                                                                                     6
           least modestly in the big metropolitan areas on both coasts, and those areas already

           were relatively highly regulated according to the first Wharton survey.

       (3) In terms of the regulatory process, the number of entities needed to approve projects

           requiring a zoning variance is increasing in the typical place. This makes the process

           more cumbersome and increases the potential for projects to be vetoed. Density

           controls are also used more widely and are more severe on average. The use of

           minimum lot sizes to control density is now almost omnipresent. And, it is no longer

           uncommon to see one acre (or greater) minimums in suburban areas; this was much

           rarer in the 2006 data. Other regulations investigated (e.g., open space requirements

           and affordable housing programs) do not show such big increases in aggregate, but

           there also is no evidence they are declining--either in usage or strictness of

           enforcement. The one exception involves impact fees on developers. The aggregate

           propensity for communities to impose them fell by one-third, from about 75% in the

           2006 survey to 50% in 2018.

       The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section describes how we construct the

aggregate regulatory index for each place, building up from a dozen subindexes that measure

different components of the local regulatory environment. Section III then reports results. This

section describes the distribution across individual communities throughout the nation and then

reports on market-level variation across space. We also translate what the index numbers mean

in terms of actual regulation in place. Section IV describes how the regulatory environment has

changed over time. Section V briefly summarizes and concludes.




                                                                                                   7
   II.      Index Creation

         A key reason it is so difficult to accurately measure the restrictiveness of the local

regulatory environment is because there are many different ways that regulation can affect

supply. The most direct mechanism is via a hard cap on permitting or building of new housing

units. However, communities also can influence supply in indirect ways by enacting policies

that raise costs via delay in evaluating project proposals, imposing expensive design or density

restrictions, etc. To help describe such a complex regulatory environment, our survey asks a

series of questions focused on the process of local regulation, as well as a few specific ways in

which builders are constrained by rule or law. As with the 2006 survey, the questions fall into

one of three categories. The first asks about the general nature or characteristics of the

regulatory process. These include specific queries about who is involved in the process (e.g.,

local council, state legislature, local citizens, etc.) and how important these actors are. The

second set of questions asks about the overarching rules of the process by which the housing

market is regulated. These queries identify whether there are any explicit caps on permitting or

construction, as well as the nature of density restrictions such as minimum lot size regulations.

The survey also includes inquiries about other rules such as affordable housing requirements,

impact fees and exactions. This section also asks about the typical time lag between when a

project is proposed by a builder and when the local government provides a response to the

application. The third and final set of questions asks about outcomes, such as changes in the cost

of lot development, as well as the number of re-zoning permits applied for by developers. The

complete 2018 survey instrument is reproduced in Appendix 1; that for the 2006 survey follow

in Appendix 2.




                                                                                                    8
II.A. Subindex Creation

           Using individual community responses to each survey question, we create a dozen

separate indexes that capture the different components of the local regulatory environment. Each

subindex is described just below, with Appendix 3 providing a detailed mapping of each

underlying question to the subindex in which it is used. These subindexes are then used to create

our summary measure of regulatory stringency, the WRLURI2018 index.

      1. Local Political Pressure Index (LPPI)

           This subindex quantifies the degree to which various actors are involved in the local

residential development process. The underlying data largely come from responses to Question

3 on our survey, which asks the following: "In your community, how involved are the following

in affecting residential building activities and/or growth management procedures?" Respondents

then rate the importance of various actors--such as a local council or managers, local

community pressure or other listed entity--on a 1 to 5 scale, with 1 indicating the actors have no

involvement and 5 indicating they are "Very Involved." To these scores, we add the number of

land preservation and conservation-related ballot initiatives approved by the municipality

between 2008 and August 2018. The ballot initiatives measure is based on the Trust for Public

Land Landvote database. 6

           Scores are summed as follows:

      (1) LPPI = LocalCouncil + Community Pressure + Other + BallotInitiatives,

so that the range of answers is from a low of three (1 + 1 + 1+ 0, if the community responded

that no local council was involved in the process, community pressure was not relevant, that

there was no other group we did not list in Question 3, and there were no relevant ballot



6
    To access the database, see: https://tpl.quickbase.com/db/bbqna2qct?a=dbpage&pageID=8.


                                                                                                     9
initiatives over the past decade) to 15 plus the number of ballot initiatives (5 + 5 + 5 +

#BallotInitiatives).

       Note that a high score for this subindex (or for the next two) does not necessarily indicate

a desire for a more restrictive regulatory environment. It probably does reflect a relatively high

level of existing restrictiveness, but a high degree of public and local official involvement could

arise from a desire to lighten the regulatory burden, not only to make it more restrictive.

   2. State Political Involvement Index (SPII)

       The State Political Involvement Index (SPII) is based on the answer to a single question

asking how involved is the state legislature in influencing residential building activities and/or

growth management procedures. Thus,

   (2) SPII = StateLeg.

Because this is a component of Question 3 described above with respect to the LPPI, its answers

also range from 1 (no involvement) to 5 (very involved).

   3. Court Involvement Index (CII)

       This is the final index regarding the actors involved in the local residential land use

process. The CII is the sum of the reported local and state courts' involvement in affecting

residential building activities and/or growth management (the sums of questions 3d and 3e,

respectively). That is,

   (3) CII = LocalCourt + StateCourt.

The potential range of values is from 2-10, with a value of two indicating that both local and

state courts are not at all involved in the regulatory process, and a score of ten indicating that

they are heavily involved. As with the first two subindexes, a higher degree of court

involvement does not necessarily imply they are trying to make the local regulatory environment




                                                                                                     10
more restrictive. Increased court involvement could arise from a desire to lighten the regulatory

burden or re-zone municipalities for higher density. That said, Ganong and Shoag's (2017)

measure of land use regulations, which counted the number of land use legal cases by state, was

strongly positively correlated with the WRLURI2006 index, so more court involvement well

may be indicative of a more restrictive regulatory environment.

    4. Local Project Approval Index (LPAI)

        Question 4 of our survey asks for a different type of information on the process of

regulatory control--namely, who must approve different types of projects before they can be

built and whether approval requires a supermajority vote in favor. This subindex pertains to

projects that do not require any variance to the current zoning code (i.e., they are `by right'

because they do not violate any current rule or law).

        The question asks which of nine entities have to approve a project before any housing can

be built. Eight specific entities listed include: the local planning commission; local zoning

board; local council, managers, or commissioners; the county board of commissioners; the

county zoning board; an environmental review board; a public health office; or a design review

board; the ninth is `Other' in case there is another group we did not list that is relevant. 7 Thus,

    (4) LPAI = LocalPlan + LocZone + LocCouncil + CountyComm + CountyZone + Environ

        + PubHealth + Design + Other.

        Response values for each entity range from 0-2. A zero indicates the entity does not have

to approve the project. A value of one indicates that the entity does have to approve, but may do

so by a simple majority vote. A value of 2 indicates that the entity must not only formally

approve the project, but must do so by a supermajority vote of its decision makers. Hence, the


7
 There were other relevant entities. For example, the California Coastal Commission often was listed by
communities in the major coastal metropolitan areas of that state.


                                                                                                          11
possible range of values for this index runs from 0-18. A value of zero indicates that there is no

entity required to approve a `by right' project, while a value of 18 would indicate that each of the

eight listed entities, plus another listed by the respondent, must approve with a supermajority in

favor.

    5. Local Zoning Approval Index (LZAI)

    The LZAI is created exactly as described above for the LPAI, except it pertains specifically

to projects that do require some type of variance or change to the local zoning code (see the

second half of Question 4 from the survey). Thus,

    (5) LZAI = LocalPlan + LocZone + LocCouncil + CountyComm + CountyZone + Environ +

         PubHealth + Design + Other,

with the range of possible outcomes the same as for the LPAI subindex.

    6. Local Assembly Index (LAI)

         The LAI uses the final piece of data generated from Question 4. That question also asks

whether a town meeting is required to approve any type of proposed residential project. Rather

than include this information as a component of the LPAI and LZAI indexes just described, we

use it to create a separate index to capture whether the local regulatory environment requires

some type of direct democracy involvement of the local population. Thus,

    (6) LAI = TownMeet,

with the index values ranging from 0-2. 8

    7. Supply Restrictions Index (SRI)




8
 We do not sum across the types of projects in the creation of this index. If any type of project approval requires
some type of town meeting, the subindex takes on a value of 1 or 2 (if supermajority approval is required), and a
value of 0 if no town meeting is required.


                                                                                                                      12
       The Supply Restrictions Index reflects the extent to which there are explicit annual caps

on the supply of new housing. Question 8 of the survey asks whether (in a simple `yes or no'

sense) the respondent community places annual limits on the total allowable number of permitted

units, total number units constructed, units per dwelling or the aggregate number of buildings

constructed. More specifically, the question asks whether there are limits for the following:

building permits for single family homes or multifamily units; the number of single family

homes or multifamily units authorized for construction; the number of multifamily units

buildings authorized for construction; and the number of units in multifamily dwellings. The

SRI is the simple sum of the number of limits on building permits, construction, or number of

dwellings and units and is constructed as follows:

   (7) SRI = SFPermits + MFPermits + SFConst + MFConst + MFBuild + MFUnitsDwell.

Hence, its value ranges from a low of zero to a high of six.

   8. Density Restriction Index (DRI)

       One way to constrain housing supply is to impose density restrictions. Question 7 of the

survey asks whether the community has any minimum lot size requirement at all, and if so, the

size of the largest minimum required in any neighborhood within the jurisdiction. Specifically,

respondents were asked to indicate whether their largest minimum required that homes be built

on less than one-half acre of land, from 0.5-1.0 acres, from 1-2 acres or from 2+ acres.

       The DRI subindex takes on values ranging from 0-4 and is constructed as follows:

   (8) DRI = 0 if there is no minimum lot size regulation anywhere in the jurisdiction
    = 1 if there is a minimum, but it is no larger than 0.5 acres
    = 2 if there is a minimum, and the largest one is from 0.5-1.0 acres
    = 3 if there is a minimum, and the largest one is from 1.0-2.0 acres
    = 4, if there is a minimum, and the largest one is for more than 2 acres.

   9. Open Space Index (OSI)




                                                                                                 13
       Question 9 of the survey asks about different types of regulations that communities might

impose on developers in return for the right to build. One is whether residential real estate

developers are required to provide some type of space for the community to use (or pay a fee in

lieu of providing such space). This could reflect an explicit open space requirement or some

mandate that space be provided for a specific community use. For simplicity, we call this the

Open Space Index, with OSI measured as 0-1 dummy where a value of one indicates that some

type of dedicated space is required to be provided (or a financially equivalent fee paid). Thus,

   (9) OSI = 1 if some type of mandatory space provision is required; =0 otherwise.

   10. Exactions Index (EI)

       Question 9 also asked whether the community required developers to pay any type of

impact fee or the allocable share of the costs of infrastructure. The EI also is a 0-1 variable and

is measured as follows:

   (10)        EI = 1 if an impact fee exists and =0 otherwise.

   11. Affordable Housing Index (AHI)

       The final component to Question 9 asks whether developers were required to "Include

affordable housing, however defined, in their projects" in order to be able to build in the

jurisdiction. We interpret an answer in the affirmative to indicate that there exists some

affordable housing requirement in the municipality. This also is a 0-1 variable such that

   (11)        AHI = 1 an affordable housing program exists and =0 if not.

   12. Approval Delay Index (ADI)

       The final subindex used in creating our aggregate index is a measure of permit approval

delay. The survey asks about project review time in several places (including questions 16, 17,

18, 20, and 22). The Approval Delay Index (ADI) combines the average review time for




                                                                                                   14
residential projects, rezoning requests involving multiple unit types and subdivision requests into

a single metric. The ADI is calculated in several steps. First, we compute the simple averages of

review time (reported in months) for:

       (1) by-right single-family unit projects and by-right multifamily unit projects

            ((sfprojrev + mfprojrev)/2) from Questions 16a and 16b);

       (2) not by-right single-family unit projects and not by-right multifamily unit projects

            ((nsfprojrev + nmfprojrev)/2) from Questions 17a and 17b);

       (3) application for and issuance of a building permit for development of less than 50

           single-family units, 50 or more single-family units, and multi-family units

           ((sfl50 + sfm50+ mf)/3) from Questions 20a, 20b, and 20c);

       (4) application for subdivision approval and issuance of a building permit for

           development of less than 50 single-family units, 50 or more single-family units, and

           multi-family units ((subsfl50 + subsfm50 + submf)/3) from Questions 22a, 22b, and

           22c).

We then take the average of these four numbers to arrive at the number of months involved in the

Approval Delay Index (ADI). More specifically,

   (12)        ADI= {((sfprojrev + mfprojrev)/2) + ((nsfprojrev + nmfprojrev)/2) +

               ((sfl50 + sfm50 + mf)/3) + ((subsfl50 + subsfm50 + submf)/3)}/4.

This average across such a wide range of potential projects is used because we believe it helps

reduce potential measurement error in this variable.



II.B. Creating the Aggregate Index (WRLURI2018)




                                                                                                  15
        Factor analysis is used to create the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index.

Specifically, we select the first factor from each subindex to create an aggregate WRLURI2018

value for each jurisdiction. 9 As with the previous Wharton index, we employ this methodology

to construct a single measure by which localities can be ranked based on the restrictiveness of

their regulatory environments. We also standardize the WRLURI2018 measure such that the

sample mean is 0 and its standard deviation is 1, with lower (higher) values of the index

reflecting a less (more) restrictive regulatory regime in the community.

        Table 1 shows the weights, or factor loadings, of each subindex in the aggregate index, as

well as the correlation with the aggregate index. 10 Note that the Court Involvement Index, State

Political Involvement Index, and Local Political Involvement Index have the highest factor

loadings and almost the same strong correlation with the aggregate index, while the Density

Restriction Index and Supply Restriction Index have the lowest factor loadings and weakest

correlations with WRLURI18. This indicates that there is relatively high variation across

communities in the different political and court involvement indexes, but not as much in the

supply and density restriction measures. That implies the former set of subindexes are more

influential in determining rankings of communities in terms of overall restrictiveness, but it does

not mean they necessarily are the most influential in determining the absolute level of

restrictiveness in a community.



III.   Results

III.A. Inside Versus Outside Metropolitan Areas



9
  Stata's PCA routine is used to extract the principal component from each subindex.
10
   The factor loadings are the weights applied when multiplying by each of the subindexes (which are themselves
standardized in the principal component analysis) to generate the WRLURI2018 index as a linear combination of the
twelve subindexes.


                                                                                                              16
         Our full sample contains complete subindex and aggregate index data on 2,472

communities across the nation. 11 Information on the distribution of WRLURI2018 values for

this sample are reported in the first column of Table 2. As noted above, the mean index value for

the full sample is zero with a standard deviation of one by construction (see the first and second

rows). 12 More detail on the full distribution is provided in the remaining rows of the column.

The interquartile range runs from -0.68 to 0.62, so the middle fifty percent of communities have

aggregate index values within seven-tenths of a standard deviation from the sample mean.

         The second column reports index values for the 2,233 communities that lie within any

core-based statistical area (CBSA) in the nation. Given that they represent 90 percent of the

sample, their distribution looks much like that for the full sample. This is not the case for the

239 communities outside of CBSAs. Their mean WRLURI2018 value is 0.3 standard deviations

below that for the metro area sample, and the median community outside a metropolitan area has

an index value of -0.51, which puts it one-half of a standard deviation below the full sample

mean. While the average community outside of any CBSA is much less regulated by our

measure, this does not hold for its entire distribution. The top tail of the non-CBSA sample--

from the 90th percentile and above--is nearly as highly regulated as the most regulated

jurisdictions within metropolitan areas. That said, the remainder of this paper focuses on results

for communities located within a CBSA.



11
   This includes cases in which we allocated answers. This was done for Questions 3,4,8 and 9 as follows. For
example, Question 3 asks about the intensity of involvement in the regulatory process by six possible actors. If all
subparts of the question were left blank, we left the responses as missing. However, if the locality indicated some
type of involvement for one or more (but not all) of the actors, we used those responses and imputed a response of
"No Involvement" (i.e., =1) for the other actors listed. Thus, we never impute any positive involvement and only
impute no involvement when a question is at least partially answered. Allocation flags for these cases will be
included in the publicly posted data so that researchers may see which observations were affected.
12
   All results in the main body of the paper are based on equal weighting of all relevant survey respondents. We
investigated different weighting schemes that are discussed in Appendix 4. Weighting does not affect any major
conclusion reported in the paper.


                                                                                                                   17
III.B. What Does It Mean to be Lightly, Moderately and Highly Regulated in the U.S.?

       Table 3 reports subindex and census information on communities within CBSAs. The

first column reports this information for the 559 places in the bottom quartile of the

WRLURI2018 distribution. These places have index values that are over -0.64 standard

deviations below the global mean. For each subindex, the mean value across individual places in

the bottom quartile is reported. Analogous information is then reported in the middle column of

Table 3 for the 1,116 places with WRLURI2018 values within the interquartile range of that

index. The third and final column reports information on the 558 places in the top quartile of the

WRLURI2018 distribution.

       Index values provide a convenient way to rank communities by their degree of regulatory

restrictiveness, but they do not convey what it means to have a low, average or high degree of

regulation in the country. Consequently, we describe in Table 4 what the underlying regulatory

environment contains for communities with index values representative of those reported in the

different columns of Table 3. For example, the first row in the middle column of Table 3

indicates that the average LPPI value for communities with WRLURI2018 values within the

interquartile range of the distribution equals 8.61. As described above, that figure is the sum of

responses to three questions that are themselves part of Question #3 in the 2018 survey (plus a

count of recent ballot initiatives). The top cell of the middle column of Table 4 then describes

what those numbers mean in terms of the underlying political environment in which regulatory

decisions are being made. A LPPI=8.61 is consistent with the underlying community having

what it reported as high involvement from its local political officers (on a local council or

commission), moderate involvement in terms of community pressure, little to no other type of




                                                                                                   18
local political involvement and no special ballot initiatives regarding the regulatory or growth

management process.

         A number of interesting results and patterns can be gleaned from Tables 3-4. First, being

lightly-regulated (more formally, being in the bottom quartile of the WRLURI2018 CBSA-based

distribution) does not mean these communities are unregulated or unrestricted. It is true that the

underlying local and state political and legal environments are not ones in which there is intense

involvement by politicians, judges or citizens. Thus, there is little evidence of pressure from the

community to ratchet up regulation in these places. Not surprisingly, these places typically do

not have public meeting requirement either. The LAI value of 0.33 indicates that only one-third

of them do.

         However, this less intense degree of local involvement does not mean the development

approval process is especially simple or easy. Even for projects that do not require any rezoning,

the mean LPAI of 1.67 indicates that many of these `lightly-regulated' places have multiple

entities that must approve the application. The modal response (at 32%) reports two such

entities; 58% of this group of respondents note that a local planning commission must give its

blessing, with 42% indicating that a local council must do so. For projects that do require some

type of zoning change, the LZAI value of 2.28 indicates that at least two entities are required for

approval; 73% of these respondents note the local planning commission's approval is

mandatory; 69% note the same for a local council, with 51% claiming that a local zoning board

approval is required; no other entity listed in the underlying question (#4) has more than a 6%

share.

         Having less than the average degree of regulation also is associated with density controls.

Density restrictions in the form of minimum lot size requirements exist in 94% of this group of




                                                                                                   19
communities. The most common size is for less than one-half acre per lot, although the mean

subindex value of 1.92 implies that many of this (relatively) less-regulated group have larger

minimum lot sizes.

       Density restrictions may be omnipresent, but formal limits or caps on permitting or

developing any type of residential property are not. The SRI value of 0.04 is the mean across six

different 0-1 answers for the presence of such rules, which indicates that virtually none of this

group reported any formal supply restriction.

       Being relatively lightly regulated also means that jurisdictions are not likely to have an

open space requirement (OSI), mandatory exactions fees (EI), or an affordable housing program

(AHI). Affordable housing programs are especially rare among this group, as its mean of 0.02

indicates that only 2% of, or 1-in-50, communities imposes any type of requirement pertaining to

such housing. Open space requirements and exactions are more common, but only one-third

report having the former and only one-fifth report the latter.

       Finally, the typical time delay between submitting an application for a project and

hearing a decision from the government is 3.7 months among this group of communities. That

works out to 111 days presuming 30 days per month.

       A second noteworthy pattern in the data is that to be more regulated implies stricter

controls across the board, not just in one or two dimensions. This is indicated by the fact that all

subindex values rise as one moves from left to right across Table 3. Table 4 then explains that

places in the top quartile of the WLRURI2018 distribution report a high level of involvement by

local public officials; 90% indicated more than moderate levels of such involvement with over

two-thirds claiming a `very high' degree of involvement; 55% of this group also reports greater

than moderate levels of community pressure; and 1-in-5 reported at least one other important




                                                                                                    20
player in the local regulatory process. On average, these communities report more involvement

by their state legislatures and their court systems, too. Thus, the underlying political and legal

environment in which the regulatory process is managed is more intense than in lightly regulated

places (with `average' places in between).

       The same holds true for every other dimension by which we measure the degree of

regulation. This is the only group for which the typical community has an open meeting

requirement (LAI=0.60). Formal restrictions on supply still are quite rare even for this highly

regulated group, but there are more entities that must approve (and thus, can veto) any given

project. At least three entities must approve a project that does not require any zoning change

(LPAI=3.22), while nearly four are typically required to approve anything that requires some

type of variance (LZAI=3.69). On average, density controls are much more extreme for this

group of communities, too. The modal community on this issue has a 2+ acre minimum lot size

restriction; 66% of this group reports a minimum of over one-half acre somewhere within its

jurisdiction. Three-quarters of this group of the most highly-regulated places also have a formal

open space requirement (OSI=0.76) and they typically impose exaction fee regimes on

developers (EI=0.75). Less than half have an affordable housing program, but the slightly more

than one-third that do (AHI=0.36) is more than triple the share in the interquartile range, and is

18 times greater than in the most lightly-regulated communities. Project review times are more

than twice as long compared to the lightly-regulated places, at 8.4 months or 252 days.

       What differentiates an average from a lightly-regulated community in the United States is

a somewhat higher intensity of involvement at the local and state political level, modestly more

entities required to approval any type of project, modestly more stringent density controls in the

form of larger minimum lot sizes, the widespread presence of open space requirements and




                                                                                                     21
exaction fees, along with about 40 more days needed to get a decision on a project application.

Thus, there is a fairly extensive regulatory framework in the places we rate as average in terms of

overall strictness.

        Finally, the data reported at the bottom of Table 3 show that the degree of regulation is

increasing in local income, house value, and educational achievement of the population.

However, the more tightly-regulated places in our sample do not have a higher share of white

residents; in fact, they are five percentage points lower in white resident share. Finally, they are

larger in terms of population and land area, as well as in terms of population density, but no

causal relation between regulation and any of these variables is implied, of course.



III.C. Regulatory Intensity Across Housing Markets

        Table 5 reports WRLURI2018 values for the 44 CBSAs with at least ten individual

community responses to our survey. These are simple averages across each community within

the relevant CBSA. These areas contain 150,827,922 people according to 2017 estimates from

the American Community Survey (ACS). This is about 49% of the total population within

CBSAs. This list also contains the 16 most populous metropolitan areas in the country, so the

larger urban areas are well represented, but many less populated ones are not. 13

        The geographic concentration along the coasts of the most highly-regulated housing

markets is obvious from the first eight names. The San Francisco CBSA has the most regulated

housing market in the country by our measure. 14 It and the New York City CBSA are the only



13
   The 17th and 18th ranked CBSAs are San Diego-Carlsbad (population 3,283,665; six of its communities responded
to our survey) and Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater (population 2,978,209; eight of its communities responded to
our survey), respectively.
14
   The San Francisco CBSA does not include the San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara CBSA. There were only six
communities from that latter market which responded to our survey. Their average WRLURI2018 value was 0.92,
so this CBSA would rank 4th if included separately.


                                                                                                             22
ones that have index values more than one standard deviation above the sample mean. Others in

the top quartile of the WRLURI2018 distribution include the Providence (RI), Washington, DC,

Seattle, Los Angeles, Riverside-San Bernardino, Miami (FL), and Phoenix markets. The

Portland (OR) and Madison (WI) markets are also of note, as they have WRLURI2018 values

within four-one hundredths of a standard deviation of the cutoff for the top quartile. Figure 1's

plot highlights the strong regional pattern. Three groups of markets are presented: the top 11 (in

red), the middle 22 (in blue) and the bottom 11 (in green). 15

         One other noteworthy pattern in the local market data is the high share of individual

communities in coastal markets especially that are themselves very highly regulated by our

measure (i.e., in the top quartile of the distribution of WRLURI18 values). Table 6 reports these

shares for the same 44 CBSAs. If a market is in the top quartile of this group, it is likely that at

least 50% of the responding communities within its metropolitan borders are themselves highly

regulated. And, in the San Francisco and New York City CBSAs, the shares are three-quarters

and two-thirds, respectively. Thus, the most intensely regulated CBSAs are not so because of a

few ultra-restrictive outlier communities; rather there seems to be a high average level of

regulation with a tight variance.

         Among the markets in the interquartile range of this table, the share of highly-regulated

communities averages from one-quarter to one-third. One can readily find individual

jurisdictions that do not strictly regulate the supply of housing in these areas And, in the bottom

quartile of these markets by WRLURI2018 values, the typical share is even lower--in the 10%-



15
   Appendix 5 reproduces the rankings from our 2008 paper (WLURI2006) for comparison purposes. A quick
perusal shows broad persistence in relative rankings in the sense that if a market was in the top third or one-half of
the sample in the first survey, it is highly likely to be relatively highly ranked in the latest survey. However, there
are some material moves individually, with the jump of various west coast markets towards the very top of the
rankings. Regionally, that is the biggest change across the market-wide rankings over time.



                                                                                                                      23
20% range. Thus, there always are some highly-regulated jurisdictions within any metropolitan

housing market that are themselves lightly regulated on average. However, one of the

differences between lightly- and highly-regulated CBSAs appears to be the ease with which a

typical household could find a community that does not strictly regulate the supply side of the

market within its own borders.



    IV.       How Has the Regulatory Environment Changed Over Time?

          Because altering policy involves a formal legal process, we would not expect the

regulatory environment to exhibit substantial high frequency change on a monthly or annual

basis. But a decade-plus span seems long enough to see alterations if desired by the local

populace or political leadership. Most of the survey responses are from 12-14 years apart, as the

first Wharton survey was sent out in late 2004, with the last round of responses received as late

as 2006. The second survey was conducted entirely within calendar year 2018. 16

          This time span provides the opportunity to answer important questions. One is whether

the Great Recession precipitated a broad change in attitude across American housing markets

that led to less restrictive local residential land use regulation environments. A related question

is whether there are specific places, or perhaps more importantly overall housing markets, that

once strictly regulated the supply side of the housing market, but have since reversed course and

undone such regulation.




16
   In this section, we use data on all responses to questions, even if the locality did not fully answer all questions so
that we could not calculate an aggregate WRLURI2018 value for the place. The full underlying sample contains
observation on 2,844 communities, 372 of which did not respond to one or more questions used in our aggregate
index creation. The final dataset that we will post contains all 2,844 observations on communities who responded
partially or in total to our survey.


                                                                                                                        24
         We measure change in the local regulatory environment by comparing answers to a

variety of questions that are identical (or close to identical) across the two surveys. Moreover,

we have the ability to see whether changes are due to selection effects from a different set of

communities responding to each survey. In addition to the full sample of respondents who

answered a given year's survey, we typically have from 750-900 communities that answered any

given question in both surveys, with about 500 having answered all questions fully across both

surveys.

         We start by examining the responses to a series of questions that help us identify whether

the strictness of different local regulations themselves changed over time. Our first case

discussed below involves whether there was a change in the number of entities needed to

approve a project that requires rezoning. In addition to reporting the full range of answers to this

question based on the cross section of communities that responded in each respective year, we

also report responses from the smaller panel of communities that answered the question in both

surveys. We then compute whether the number of entities required for project approval changed

across surveys by subtracting the number from the 2006 survey from that reported in the 2018

survey (for those who answered both surveys, obviously). Hence, positive (negative) values

reflect increases (decreases) in the number of entities required for approval, with no change

differencing out to zero. We then classified the full range of possible responses into declines, no

change and increases. 17

         Each of the nine panels in Figure 2 reports these three pieces of information in chart form

on a particular feature of the regulatory process. Before delving into the individual regulations



17
  Specifically, if intensity of regulation increased by any amount over time, the change was coded as a +1 in Figures
2-4 below; analogously, if intensity of regulation decreased by any amount over time, the change was coded as a -1;
no change was coded as a zero.


                                                                                                                  25
themselves, it is noteworthy that the distributions of responses reported in the first column (based

on all respondents to any survey), as well as those in the second column (based only on the

smaller number of communities that answered both surveys), always look quite similar. This is

comforting because it suggests that there are not strong selection effects in who answered the

underlying questions in both surveys that could bias our conclusions.

        The data reported in the top panel of Figure 2 on the number of entities that must approve

a project requiring rezoning are drawn from answers to the first part of Question 4 from the 2018

survey and the answers to Question 2 from the 2006 survey. Researchers using the survey

response data should take care in making this comparison because the 2018 survey asked about

more entities that might have approval rights (9 in 2018 versus 6 in 2006). Hence, we

standardize on the six entities about which we asked in both surveys. 18 Regardless of the

sample, the share of communities reporting that there was only one entity required to approve the

project fell by about ten percentage points, with a similar fall for those claiming two entities

were required. These 20 share points are shifted up the distribution, with the bulk of the change

(from 16-19 points depending upon the sample) observed on a sharply increased share of places

saying that by 2018 three entities were required to approve any project requiring rezoning.

Among the group that answered both surveys (middle column), in 2006 slightly more

communities reported only one entity required for approval than reported three were needed;

just over a decade later, the share reporting three was nearly four times that reporting only one.

This is further reflected in third plot in the panel which shows that 45% of communities that

responded to both surveys increased the number of entities required for project approval versus

only 15% that lowered the number.


18
  These entities were the Local Planning Commission, Local Council, County Board, Environmental Review Board,
Public Health Board, and Design Review Board.


                                                                                                          26
        The next panel of Figure 2 shows the same type of shift did not occur for "by right"

projects (those not needing rezoning). 19 As discussed earlier in the paper, the modal number of

entities required to approve this type of project is two, and the share of communities requiring

three did not change much. The share of those who increased the number required is greater than

those who decreased the number, but only by 3 percentage points (34% versus 31%; see the

final plot in the second panel).

        The next two panels show that the scope and scale of density controls in the form of

minimum lot sizes increased materially since the first survey. Minimum lot size restrictions

were widespread at the time of the first survey, with 84% of communities having them in at least

one neighborhood. That share is now 94%, so they have become virtually omnipresent across

America. 20 Perhaps more striking is the increase in the size of the largest minimum lot size

regulation within a given jurisdiction. The fourth panel of Figure 2 shows that the share of

communities experiencing an increase in their largest minimum lot size was double that which

saw a decline (41% versus 20%, with the rest unchanged; see the third plot in the panel). 21 The

modal minimum still is under one-half acre, but the share with a larger minimum increased from

39% in the 2006 survey to 52% in the 2018 survey (for the smaller set of cities that answered

both surveys; the increase is even greater using the changes reported by the two cross sections).

While over half of communities now have a density control requiring at least one-half acre lot

sizes somewhere in their jurisdictions, over one-third have a 1-acre+ minimum (35% in 2018

versus 25% in 2006; see the middle panel).




19
   These results compare and contrast responses to the second part of Question 4 in 2018 and Question 3 from the
2006 survey.
20
   These data are from Question 7a in 2018 and Question 6 in 2006.
21
   These data are from Question 7b in 2018 and Question 6 in 2006.


                                                                                                                   27
           The rest of the results reported in Figure 2 do not show widespread increases in adoption

of other regulations or increases in the strictness with which a regulation is imposed. That said,

with one exception (the use of impact fees which is discussed below), there is no evidence that

the typical community is abandoning these other regulations or reducing their severity. One

clear example of this pattern involves the use of open space requirements. 22 The fifth panel of

Figure 2 shows almost no change in the percentage of communities that have such programs. It

still is the case that the typical community has such a requirement, as from 57%-59% of

communities report having it depending upon the underlying sample and survey year. However,

over two thirds did not change their policy on this issue between the survey years; and of the

30% that did, one-half imposed a new open space program and one-half eliminated one that was

in existence before 2018.

           There is a similar pattern for affordable housing programs, although they have never been

widespread (panel 6). 23 The share of communities reporting having one is never above 20% in

any year or sample, and it has declined slightly over time. Over four-fifths of communities

report no change over time on this policy issue. Of the 17% that did change, slightly more than

one-half reported abandoning the policy. Overall, affordable housing initiatives remain fairly

rare and tend to be confined to larger cities or smaller suburbs in very high cost housing markets.

           The one case for which we see a clear drop in the use of a regulation involves imposing

exactions on homebuilders (i.e., impact fees to pay for allocable shares of infrastructure-related

costs). The results plotted in the seventh panel of Figure 2 show nearly a 25-percentage point

drop in the use of such fees, from just over three-quarters of communities in 2006 to barely one-




22
     These results compare responses to Question 9b from the 2018 survey and Question 6 from the 2006 survey.
23
     These results compare responses to Question 9a in the 2018 survey and Question 6 in the 2006 survey.


                                                                                                                28
half in the 2018 survey. The final plot in this panel shows that more than four times as many

communities dropped this type of program than implemented it between our surveys.

       The eighth panel reports results for hard caps on permitting or development. These data

are from Question 8 in 2018 and Question 5 in 2006. For this regulation, we created an

aggregate variable that is coded as a 1 if a community had any one of the six possible supply

caps in a given survey year. The change up or down is computed as the net change after

summing across all categories. These types of regulation have been and remain extremely rare.

No more than 4%-8% of communities have any one of the six types of restrictions posed in the

survey questions. And, there is little change in whether they are in use over time.

       The ninth and final panel reports results for changes in review times. The underlying

data are from two different pairs of questions: (a) Question 20 in 2018 and Question 12 in 2006,

which ask about the typical review times for different types of single- and multifamily projects

that need rezoning, but are not part of a subdivision development; and (b) Question 22 in 2018

and Question 13 in 2006, which ask for the same information about projects that are part of a

subdivision development. For consistency, we report findings for all six different types of

projects: (a) <50 unit single family developments requiring rezoning, but not in a subdivision

development; (b) >50 unit single family developments requiring rezoning, but not in a

subdivision development; (c) multifamily development requiring rezoning, but not a subdivision

development; and (d)-(f) which are the analogous versions of (a)-(c), each involving a

subdivision.

       These results indicate that there is relatively little change in the reported delays for

different types of projects. This is the case for the typical single- or multi-family project that is

not part of a subdivision development, where average review times of 4-5 months hold in both




                                                                                                    29
surveys. 24 The share of communities reporting increases in review times are slightly greater than

those reporting declines, but only by 2-3 percentage points. Those gaps are a bit larger (5-6

points) if a project is part of a subdivision, so the evidence for a modest increase in review times

is stronger there. Average review times across the different types of subdivision projects

increased by 10%-15% across the two surveys. The final plot in this panel, which reports the net

change in whether review times fell, stayed the same, or increased across all six options shows

that a slightly greater share of communities experienced some increase in review times than did

those who reported shorter time (45% versus 39%). As suggested above, this difference is

driven by rising review times for subdivisions.

         A handful of other questions allow us to see whether the intensity of involvement by

local and state actors changed over time. The very different points in the business and housing

cycle at which the surveys were conducted might lead one to suspect a sharp drop in interest over

time on the part of the public, public officials and the courts. The 2006-7 responses come just

before the peak of what we now know to be the greatest housing boom in the post-World War II

era, so it is not unreasonable to believe that local officials and populaces were especially

concerned then about a variety of issues ranging from affordability to external effects from high

rates of new construction in many markets. While some of the results reported in Figure 3 are

consistent with this story, even the decline in community pressure depicted in that figure's

second panel is modest. Overall, the findings on this part of the regulatory environment are one

of continuity.



24
  These questions are not identical across surveys, so some caution in interpreting the results is in order. In the first
survey, we just asked about each product type. In the 2018 survey, we asked about `by right' and `not by right'
projects within each product type. Our conclusion is based on averaging the results for `by right' and `not by right'
responses for single-family and multi-family, respectively, and then comparing those results to the 2006 numbers.
Essentially, we are presuming the 2006 results are an average of review times for `by right' and `not by right'
projects within each product type.


                                                                                                                      30
        There are two identical questions in each survey's LPPI subindex. One asks about the

extent of involvement by a local council or managers; the other is about the degree of community

involvement. There is only one common question across surveys in the SPII index--regarding

the degree of involvement of the state legislature. The CII subindexes are the same across

surveys, with two questions asked about the level of the local and state courts's involvement in

the regulatory process. 25

        The top panel of Figure 3 indicates that it was, and remains, typical for some type of local

council to be fairly heavily involved in the regulatory process. However, the share reporting the

highest level of involvement has declined over time: the share of communities answering that

involvement was heavier than average fell from 85% to 72% across the full samples of the two

surveys, and from 87% to 74% in the subset of 814 communities for which we have answers to

this particular query in both surveys. This pattern also is consistent with the third figure in that

panel showing one-third of communities reporting declines in the intensity of involvement versus

one-fifth reporting increases; the modal response was for no change (44%).

        The second panel shows that heavy involvement by local pressure groups still is not a

truly widespread phenomenon across the nation, and its perceived importance has declined

modestly over time. In the first survey, just over 40% of communities responded that local

pressure groups exhibited higher than moderate degrees of involvement. In the 2018 survey, this

share falls by 10-12 percentage points to just under 30%, regardless of the sample considered.

As noted above, this could be due to the very different points in the cycle at which the two




25
  The underlying data are from Question 3 in the 2018 survey and from Question 1 in the 2006 survey. The specific
question is "In your community, how involved are the following in affecting residential building activities and/or
growth management procedures?" Respondents were then asked to evaluate the role of each of the five actors noted
above.


                                                                                                               31
surveys were conducted. The share of decliners also modestly exceeds increasers for this

variable, too, as indicated by the third plot in this panel.

         There is very little change over time in the distribution of intensity of involvement by the

state legislature or either of the state or local court systems (see the next three panels of Figure

3). There is virtually no change in the typical response or in the interquartile range of responses

over time for these variables. In the typical community, the state legislature is not viewed as

intensely involved; the 75th percentile response reports only a moderate level of involvement.

This has not changed over time and holds for the subset of places that responded to both surveys.

The state and local court systems are considered even less involved on average, and there is no

change over time in the distribution of responses for either court system. It also is common for

communities to respond that there was no change in the typically low level of court involvement

over time. 26 In sum, much of the evidence suggests relatively little change in the nature of local

or state political and legal involvement in the regulatory process, with some communities

indicating a modest decrease in participation by the public and its elected officials.

         To develop additional metrics of how the two parts of the regulatory environment

changed, we aggregate across the different items plotted in Figures 2 and 3. The first plot in

Figure 4 shows the distribution of what we term the Regulation Change Index. This captures the

net change over time in the nine facets of regulation investigated in Figure 2. 27 This starts as the

simple sum of the change in the response values for each of the nine underlying questions to

arrive at a net change. Thus, if five of the questions indicated an increase in strictness of

regulation, while three indicated a decrease in strictness, and one was unchanged, the Regulation


26
   While this is true in aggregate, there is some interesting regional variation, with California communities in
particular noting a marked increase in involvement by the state legislature, as well as the courts.
27
   The last index reported in the final panel of Figure 2, which sums across the six different review time variables, is
used in the creation of this index.


                                                                                                                      32
Change Index would have a net value of +2 (5-3+0=2). For the purposes of this plot, we

considered all net negative (positive) values as indicative of a decline (increase) in regulatory

strictness, with a zero indicating no change. The shares of communities in each category are

reported in the bar charts in Figure 4.

       The top chart shows that 49% of communities reported a net increase in regulatory

strictness versus 33% that reported a decline (with 18% being unchanged in net terms). Of the

nearly one-half of communities with positive net changes in their Regulation Change Index, 34%

(or 13% of all communities in the sample) increased by one regulation on net; the other 66%

(25% of the total) increased by two or more. The most likely regulations to be newly-

implemented or strengthened are increases in the number of entities required to approve a project

needing rezoning (63% of those with net positive changes reported such an increase), increases

in project review times (also 63%), and more entities required to approve `by right' projects not

needed rezoning (54%). Note that these are all related to the regulatory process, rather than

formal policy requirements. With regard to the latter, roughly one-quarter of this group adopted

minimum lot sizes anew or imposed a larger minimum since the first survey. The other

regulations were more rarely increased. If one of these communities decreased a regulation, it

was likely to be in the form of reduced project review times (25%) or eliminating impact fees

(20%). By definition among this group, such a change was more than counterbalanced by

increases in other regulations.

       Of the one-third of all communities whose Regulation Change Index declined on net, the

most likely reasons were falls in review times (73% of that subsample) or a decline in the

number of entities required to approve a `by right' project. No other policy was eliminated or




                                                                                                    33
loosened by more than one-half of these communities, although impact fees were eliminated by

44% of this group. 28

         The bottom chart in Figure 4 reports what we call the Political/Legal Change Index. This

captures the net change in intensity of involvement across the five underlying questions

described in Figure 3. It is calculated in the same way as the Regulation Change Index, so that if

two of the questions indicated increases in intensity, two indicated decreases, and one was

unchanged, the net change reflected in the Political Change Index is zero (2-2+0=0). As above,

we then consider all net negative (positive) values to be indicative of a decline (increase) in the

intensity of involvement by political/legal actors, with a value of zero indicating no change.

         The pattern here is almost opposite of that for the Regulation Change Index. Half of the

communities in the panel that answered both surveys reported a net decline in intensity of

involvement according to our Political/Legal Change Index. Of this group, 29% (14% of all

communities) decline by one on net. The likelihood of decline was similar across all five

potential factors (from 49% to 60% of any given factor showed a drop in intensity of

involvement among this group of communities). Of the roughly one-third that did experience a

net increase in their Political/Legal Change Index, the most likely reason was to have reported an

increase in community pressure (62% of this subsample).

         We are now in a position to answer the first question posed at the beginning of this

section: did the Great Recession set the stage for a new attitude towards residential building that

resulted in lower regulatory barriers on average? No, it did not. Moreover, in a couple of

important areas, many (but certainly not all) local regulatory regimes were strengthened over the

past decade. On average, the approval process became more cumbersome, as reflected in the


28
  Of this group with net declines in their Regulation Change Index, 29% fell by one on net; naturally, the other
71% declined by more.


                                                                                                                   34
number of bodies with veto rights over projects, and land use policy became more stringent, as

evidenced by increasing density controls on the intensive and extensive margins (i.e., more

extensive adoption of minimum lot sizes and increases in minimums among places that had them

before). More communities reported declines in intensity of involvement by local officials than

reported increases, but even so, roughly three-quarters of all places still face what they label as

`higher than average' involvement by those officials. It also is the case that there has not been a

sea change in terms of community pressure: moderate involvement is still the norm. On net, the

local regulatory environment looks to be somewhat more restrictive now than it was just before

the housing bubble burst, although there do not appear to have been truly major changes in its

nature. There is some interesting regional variation in these outcomes, but the pattern is broad in

the sense it characterizes most of the country, not just the northeastern and west coasts of the

nation. We turn to that evidence in the next subsection.

       Before doing so, we note one other matter raised by these findings. By our metric, about

one half of all communities in the Regulation Change Index increased regulation, one-third

decreased, while only 18 percent showed no net change. This raises the question of where are the

communities located that changed their regulatory environment? Are all the `increasers' in the

highly regulated coastal markets? Are the `decreasers' concentrated in the slow-growing parts of

the country in the so-called Rust Belt? No, they are not; they are everywhere as the plots in

Figure 5 show. The top chart identifies (in orange) every CBSA in our sample that contains at

least one community that experienced a net increase of +1 or more in its Regulation Change

Index. These areas certainly include virtually everywhere along the so-called Acela Corridor

running from Boston to Washington, D.C. on the east coast and each of the big metropolitan

areas along the west coast. However, they encompass many areas in between (as well as north




                                                                                                      35
and south), including many CBSAs located in the Rust Belt. The bottom chart then plots CBSAs

with at least one respondent community that had a net decrease of -1 (or more) in its Regulation

Change Index. `Decreasers' are everywhere, too. The plots are not identical, but they look quite

similar. Even in the most highly (lightly) regulated housing markets in the country, a small

number of its communities became less (more) strictly regulated over time.



IV.A. Variation in the Regulatory Environment Across Time and Space

       Because changes in the degree of regulation can only be measured within the set of

communities that answered both surveys, we are left with a very small number of places per

market to measure the degree of change at the CBSA level. Among the largest metropolitan

areas, Chicago had the largest number of communities that responded to both surveys--45, but

not all of them answered each question fully. Dallas was next at 29, with Los Angeles at 21 and

Detroit at 20. Other than the New York CBSA, no other market had more than 14 respondents to

both surveys. Given such small numbers, one community changing implies large percentage

impacts in most housing markets.

       Because this could be due to simple measurement error or noise with respect to one or

two communities, we choose to combine CBSAs that themselves are similar and report aggregate

results for those regions. We create our own regional groupings because the Census definitions

end up combining markets that are quite different from one other for the purposes of this paper

(e.g., the Modesto and San Francisco CBSAs are in the same state, but their metropolitan areas

could not be more different from a land use regulation perspective). Our eight synthetic regions

are as follows:

       (a) West Coast: includes every CBSA that physically touches the Pacific coast, plus
           Portland, OR; there are 11 CBSAs in our sample in this region;



                                                                                                  36
         (b) East Coast: includes six CBSAs that touch the Atlantic Ocean, ranging from
             Washington, D.C. to Portland, ME;

         (c) Sunbelt: includes 75 CBSAs from the 11 states of the old Confederacy plus, Arizona,
             Kentucky, New Mexico and Oklahoma;

         (d) Midwest: includes 37 CBSAs in Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri,
             Nebraska, North Dakota or South Dakota;

         (e) Rustbelt: includes 28 CBSAs in Indiana, Michigan, Ohio or Wisconsin;

         (e) Northeast-Not Coastal: includes 30 CBSAs in Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland,
             Massachusetts, Maine, New York (other than the New York City CBSA which is in
             East Coast), and Pennsylvania;

         (g) Mountain: includes 14 CBSAs in Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Utah or Wyoming;

         (h) West Coast-Not Coastal: includes 17 CBSAs in the states of California, Oregon and
             Washington that do not physically touch the Pacific Ocean.


         Table 7 reports the share of communities in each region by whether their Regulation

Change Index had a net increase, decrease or stayed the same. Column 1's figures illustrate that

the increasing degree of regulation documented above is fairly widespread geographically. Five

of our eight regional areas, including the geographically broad-based and heavily populated

Sunbelt region, report more than half their communities saw net increases in our Regulation

Change Index. No more than one-third experienced net declines, and the share is closer to or

less than one-fifth in the West Coast and East Coast regions specifically. Only in the lightly-

populated Mountain region did the share of communities whose Regulation Change Indexes

declined on net exceed those that increased. Responses were quite balanced among places

within Midwest and Rustbelt region CBSAs, so there is no evidence of any meaningful reduction

on average in regulatory strictness even in those areas with lower economic growth in recent

years.




                                                                                                  37
        The analogous data in Table 8 show that the aggregate decline in the Political/Legal

Change Index is also widespread geographically. Only in the West Coast and West Coast-Not

Coastal regional areas is the share of communities with negative net changes in this subindex not

greater than the share with positive net changes. The share with negative net changes is above

50% in the East Coast, Midwest, Rustbelt and Mountain areas, and it is at 49% in the Northeast-

Not Coastal and Sunbelt regions. Lower political and legal pressure points did not translate into

materially less strict regulation in most parts of the country.

        There is no evidence that markets (or regional groupings of markets with our limited

data) that formerly were highly regulated have become less so over time. In fact, the coastal

regions have tended to become even more regulated over time. And, it is arguable that the

overall degree of regulation has increased on average even in Sunbelt markets. The only region

where regulation appears to have declined on net is in the Mountain region, but its markets were

not highly regulated according to our previous survey.



   V.      Conclusion

        The regulatory environment for housing is complex and varied across markets. Explicit

limits on the number of units that can be supplied in a jurisdiction within a given time period are

quite rare, and are present in only 6% of the communities responding to our new survey. Local

governments do care about this process, however, as evidenced by the fact that 74% of the

jurisdictions within a CBSA answered that their local government was more than moderately

involved in the regulatory process. Local governments typically have multiple entities (review

boards and the like) that must approve any project, including ones that will provide housing very

similar to that which already exists in the community. More than two project-approving entities




                                                                                                 38
is now the norm across the country. Density restrictions have spread everywhere, and it is no

longer uncommon to see a one acre+ minimum lot size restriction in at least one neighborhood

within a community. The range of regulatory tools include impact fees (i.e., exactions) and

space dedications by developers, along with affordable housing requirements in some places

(about 14% of the communities in our survey). Significant regulatory delays in project approval

remain the norm across communities. All-in-all, our new survey paints a picture of high

potential regulatory costs.

       That raises the critical question of how impactful local housing development regulation is

on prices and quantities in different markets. On Monday, January 15, 2020, we will post the

underlying data so that researchers may use it to try to answer that and other questions.




                                                                                                39
Selected References
Albouy, D., & Ehrlich, G. (2018). Housing productivity and the social cost of land-use restrictions.
Journal of Urban Economics, 107, 101-120.
Been, V., & Ellen, I. G., & Gedal, M., & Glaeser, E., & McCabe, B. J., (2016). Preserving history or
restricting development? The heterogeneous effects of historic districts on local housing markets in New
York City. Journal of Urban Economics, Elsevier, vol. 92(C), pages 16-30.
Brueckner, J. K., & Singh, R. (2018). Stringency of Land-Use Regulation: Building Heights in US Cities.
Emrath, P. (2016). Government Regulation in the Price of a New Home. Special Study for Housing
Economics, National Association of Home Builders, Washington, DC.
Ganong, P., & Shoag, D. (2017). Why has regional income convergence in the US declined?. Journal of
Urban Economics, 102, 76-90.
Gedal, M., & Ellen, I. G. (2018). Valuing urban land: Comparing the use of teardown and vacant land
sales. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 70, 190-203.
Glaeser, E., & Gyourko, J., (2018). The Economics Implications of Housing Supply. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 32 (1): 3-30.
Glaeser, E., and Ward, B. (2009). The Causes and Consequences of Land Use Regulation: Evidence
from Greater Boston, Journal of Urban Economics, 65: 265-278.
Glickfield, M., & Levine, N. (1991). Growth controls: regional problems--local responses. Cambridge,
MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
Gyourko, J., & Molloy, R. (2015). Regulation and housing supply. In Handbook of regional and urban
economics (Vol. 5, pp. 1289-1337). Elsevier.
Gyourko, J., Saiz, A., & Summers, A. (2008). A new measure of the local regulatory environment for
housing markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index. Urban Studies, 45(3), 693-729.
Jackson, Kristoffer (2016). Do land use regulations stifle residential development? Evidence from
California cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 91, 45-56.
Jackson, Kristoffer. (2018). Regulation, land constraints, and California's boom and bust. Regional
Science and Urban Economics, 68, 130-147.
Lin, D., & Wachter, S. M. (2019). The Effect of Land Use Regulation on Housing Prices: Theory and
Evidence from California. Available at SSRN 3363947.
Linneman, P., Summers, A., Brooks, N., & Buist, H. (1990). The state of local growth
management. Wharton Real Estate Center Working Paper, 81.
Pendall, R., Puentes, R., & Martin, J. (2006). From traditional to reformed: A review of the land use
regulations in the nation's 50 largest metropolitan areas.
Turner, M. A., Haughwout, A., & Van Der Klaauw, W. (2014). Land use regulation and welfare.
Econometrica, 82(4), 1341-1403.




                                                                                                        40
Figure 1: Regional Variation in Land Use Regulation




                                                      41
Figure 2: Changes in Regulatory Restrictions, 2006-2018

   All Communities Answering a Survey                       Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                          the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                            Increasing (1)
Panel 1 ­ # of Approvals for Project Requiring Rezoning




Panel 2 ­ # of Approvals for Project not Requiring Rezoning ("By Right")




                                                                                                                  42
Figure 2 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey                   Communities Answering              Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                      the Question in Both Surveys         Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                              Increasing (1)
Panel 3 ­ Adoption of Minimum Lot Size, 0 = No Requirement 1= Requirement




Panel 4 ­ Increase in Top Minimum Lot Size, 0 = No Requirement, 1 = Less then 0.5 Acres,
2 = 0.5 to 1 Acre, 3 ­ 1 to under 2 Acres, 4 = more than 2 Acres




                                                                                                                    43
Figure 2 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey                   Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                      the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                        Increasing (1)
Panel 5 ­ Open Space Requirement for Builders, 0 = Not Required, 1 = Required




Panel 6 ­ Affordable Housing Requirements, 0 = Not Required, 1= Required




                                                                                                              44
Figure 2 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey                    Communities Answering         Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                       the Question in Both Surveys    Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                          Increasing (1)
Panel 7 ­ Exaction / Impact Fee Requirements, 0 = Not Required, 1 = Required




Panel 8 ­ Hard Caps on Permitting of Building, 0 = No Hard Caps on any Building Type
to 6 = Hard Caps on All Building Types Surveyed




                                                                                                                45
Figure 2 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey             Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                  Increasing (1)
Panel 9 ­ Project Review Times, in Months
Single Family less than 50 Units, Rezoning




Single Family greater than 50 Units, Rezoning




                                                                                                        46
Figure 2 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey             Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                  Increasing (1)
Multi Family, Rezoning




Single Family less than 50 Units, Subdivision




                                                                                                        47
Figure 2 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey                Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                   the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                     Increasing (1)
Single Family greater than 50 Units, Subdivision




Multi Family, Subdivision




                                                                                                           48
Figure 2 (cont'd.)
                     Net Change across Six Review Time Questions




                                                                   49
Figure 3: Changes in Political or Legal Involvement, 2006-2018

   All Communities Answering a Survey                    Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                       the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                         Increasing (1)
Political Entity 1 ­ Local Council, Managers, or Commissioners
1 = Not Involved, 5 = Very Involved




Political Entity 2 ­ Community Pressure
1 = Not Involved, 5 = Very Involved




                                                                                                               50
Figure 3: Changes in Political or Legal Involvement, 2006-2018 (cont'd.)

    All Communities Answering a Survey                 Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                     the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                       Increasing (1)
Political Entity 3 ­ State Legislature
1 = Not Involved, 5 = Very Involved




Political Entity 4 ­ Local Courts
1 = Not Involved, 5 = Very Involved




                                                                                                             51
Figure 3: Changes in Political or Legal Involvement, 2006-2018 (cont'd.)

   All Communities Answering a Survey                  Communities Answering        Share Decreasing (-1),
                                                     the Question in Both Surveys   Staying the Same (0),
                                                                                       Increasing (1)
Political Entity 5 ­ State Courts
1 = Not Involved, 5 = Very Involved




                                                                                                             52
Figure 4: Aggregate Change in Regulation Strictness and in the Underlying Political/Legal Environment

                                                        Regulation Change Index




                                                      Political / Legal Change Index




                                                                                                        53
Figure 5: Where Are the Communities that Increased or Decreased Their Degree of Regulation?

                             CBSAs With at Least One Community Whose Regulation Change Index Rose




                            CBSAs With at Least One Community Whose Regulation Change Index Declined




                                                                                                       54
       Table 1: WRLURI2018 and Its Components
               (Full Sample: nobs=2,472)



              Factor Loadings   Correlation with WRLURI
CII                0.42                   0.62
SPII               0.41                   0.59
LPPI               0.40                   0.58
EI                 0.28                   0.41
ADI                0.28                   0.41
LPAI               0.29                   0.42
LZAI               0.27                   0.39
OSI                0.24                   0.35
AHI                0.27                   0.39
LAI                0.17                   0.24
SRI                0.12                   0.17
DRI                0.09                   0.14




                                                          55
Table 2: WRLURI2018 Summary Statistics for Communities Inside and Outside CBSAs



                                                                         Metro Area
                                                        Full Sample                   Non-Metro Area Sample
                                                                          Sample
Mean                                                        0.00            0.03              -0.30
Standard Deviation                                          1.00            0.98               1.15
Minimum                                                    -2.64           -2.64              -2.55
1st percentile                                             -2.04           -1.94              -2.26
10th percentile                                            -1.21           -1.17              -1.60
25th percentile                                            -0.68           -0.64              -1.09
50th percentile                                            -0.08           -0.03              -0.51
75th percentile                                             0.62            0.64               0.32
90th percentile                                             1.31            1.33               1.23
99th percentile                                             2.67            2.58               2.75
Maximum                                                     4.86            3.94               4.86

Local Traits
Median Family Income (2010)                               62,259           64,429            41,801
Median House Value (2010)                                217,140          227,206            122,236
Percent College Graduates (2010)                         30.64%           31.89%             18.87%
Percent Poverty (2010)                                   13.04%           12.45%             18.64%
Percentage White (2010)                                  77.79%           77.55%             80.08%
Population (2010)                                         23,909           25,950             4,748
Land Area in Square Miles (2010)                          20.76            20.98              18.74
Population Density Per Square Mile (2010)                 1,792            1,890               883
Nobs                                                      2,472             2,233             239




                                                                                                              56
                                          Table 3: Variation Across the WRLURI2018 Distribution
                                                          (CBSA Sample; n = 2,233)
                                                                                  Average Regulation:
                                                   Lightly-Regulated:                                     Highly-Regulated:
                                                                                   Interquartile Range
                                                    Bottom Quartile                                         Top Quartile
                                                                                -0.642 < WRLURI 2018 <
                                                  WRLURI 2018  -0.64                                     WRLURI 2018  0.64
                                                                                          0.637
Subindex
Local Political Pressure Index(LPPI)                       6.85                          8.61                   9.83
State Political Involvement Index(SPII)                    1.44                          2.17                   3.05
Court Involvement Index(CII)                               2.30                          3.11                   4.48
Local Assembly Index(LAI)                                  0.33                          0.44                   0.60
Local Project Approval Index(LPAI)                         1.67                          2.24                   3.22
Local Zoning Approval Index(LZAI)                          2.28                          2.79                   3.69
Density Restriction Index(DRI)                             1.92                          2.13                   2.48
Supply Restrictions Index(SRI)                             0.04                          0.11                   0.36
Open Space Index(OSI)                                      0.32                          0.64                   0.76
Exactions Index(EI)                                        0.20                          0.56                   0.75
Affordable House Index(AHI)                                0.02                          0.10                   0.36
Approval Delay Index(ADI--months)                          3.7                           5.0                     8.4

Local Traits
Median Family Income (2010)                              55,817                         63,790                74,235
Median House Value (2010)                                172,576                       215,782                304,262
Percent College Graduates (2010)                         27.76%                        31.78%                 36.18%
Percent Poverty (2010)                                   14.55%                        12.23%                 10.80%
Percentage White (2010)                                  80.67%                        77.24%                 75.07%
Population (2010)                                        19,622                         21,885                40,335
Land Area in Square Miles (2010)                          21.43                         18.77                  24.96
Population Density Per Square Mile (2010)                 1,671                         1,883                  2,118
Nobs                                                       559                           1,116                  558




                                                                                                                              57
Table 4: What Does It Mean to be Lightly, Moderately or Highly Regulated?
Lightly Regulated                      Moderately Regulated                              Highly Regulated
WRLURI 2018  -0.64                     -0.642 < WRLURI 2018 < 0.637                      WRLURI 2018  0.64
LPPI=6.85                              LPPI=8.61                                         LPPI=9.83
Moderate levels of involvement by      High involvement of local political officials--   High level of involvement by local public
local political officials is common    council, managers, commissioners; 80% of          officials--90% report more than moderate levels of
among this group of places; the        these communities report greater than             involvement, with over two-thirds reporting very
modal response is for moderate         moderate involvement                              high involvement
involvement (34%); but 47% report
higher than moderate involvement       Moderate level of community pressure; 43%         Moderate level of community pressure; 34% report
                                       report moderate involvement; only 27%             average involvement on a 1-5 scale; but 55% report
Community pressure is not high, as a report more than moderate involvement               greater than average involvement
modal 37% report somewhat less
than moderate pressure, with another No other significant local political actor is       1-in-5 highly regulated communities reports at
21% reporting no meaningful            involved in the regulatory process; only 11%      least one other important player in the local
pressure                               report another such actor and only 2% report      regulatory process; this certainly is well under
                                       any type of ballot initiative                     half, so it is not typical; however, it is double the
No other significant local political                                                     level of the places in the interquartile range and 3+
actor is involved; only 6% report any                                                    times the level reported by lightly-regulated places
such actor.
SPII=1.44                              SPII=2.17                                         SPII=3.05
Nearly two-thirds (64%) of             State legislature is only modestly involved in    Moderate involvement of the state legislature is the
respondents report no meaningful       the regulatory process; almost one-quarter of     mode of this group of places
involvement in the regulatory          respondents claimed no meaningful
process by the state legislature; only involvement at all
6% report moderate levels of
involvement (or higher)
CII=2.30                               CII=3.11                                          CII=4.48
86% of respondents report no           Neither state nor local courts are major          Court involvement in the regulatory process is
effective involvement by either the    players in the regulatory process; just over      greater for this group, but it still is less than
local or state court system.           one-half of this group indicated no               moderate on average; 70% of respondents report
                                       meaningful role for the court system              having less than moderate involvement for either
                                                                                         court system




                                                                                                                                                 58
Table 4 Continued
Lightly Regulated                       Moderately Regulated                               Highly Regulated
WRLURI 2018  -0.64                      -0.642 < WRLURI 2018 < 0.637                       WRLURI 2018  0.64
LAI=0.33                                LAI=0.44                                           LAI=0.60
Only one-third of this group reported   The typical town in this group does not have       Only in the most highly-regulated places does the
a town meeting option.                  some type of open meeting requirement; that        typical community have a public (or town) meeting
                                        said, the actual share who does is 45%, so it is   requirement (60% do)
                                        not uncommon
LPAI=1.67                               LPAI=2.24                                          LPAI=3.22
The modal response (at 32%) reports At least two distinct entities are required to         At least three entities are required to approve a
two entities are required to approve a approve projects that do not require any            project that does not require rezoning among this
project that does not require any       change in zoning--i.e., they are "by right";       highly-regulated group of places; local planning
zoning changes; 58% note a local        (60% of respondents indicated a local              commissions and local councils are mentioned by
planning commission must be             planning commission was required to approve        well over half the respondents; 40% note that a
involved; the next highest share, at    projects; 59% said a local council or              local zoning board's approval is required, with all
42%, is for a local council.            commission was required; the next largest          six other entities listed in the underlying question
                                        response rate was for the local zoning board at    being mentioned by at least 10% of this group
                                        33%, with 12% naming a design review
                                        board).
LZAI=2.28                               LZAI=2.79                                          LZAI=3.69
The mode here is also for two           For projects needing rezoning, 84% said the        Nearly four entities are required to approve a
entities (43%); 73% of respondents      local planning commission had to give              project that requires rezoning; local planning
note that local planning commission approval; 81% stated the local council had to          commissions and local councils are involved in
approval is required; 69% note the      do so; 53% noted a local zoning board had          80+% of respondents; the analogous number for
same for a local council, with 51%      approval rights. A design review board was         local zoning boards is 54%; all six other entities are
claiming local zoning board approval the next most cited body at 11%                       required in at least 10% of respondents, with
is required; no other entity listed has                                                    design review boards being reported in over one-
more than a 6% share                                                                       quarter
DRI=1.92                                DRI=2.13                                           DRI=2.48
Density restrictions are wide spread    Density restrictions in the form of minimum        All but 2% of these communities have some type
even among the most lightly-            lot sizes are omnipresent; 95% of places have      of minimum lot size requirement; the modal
regulated communities in the U.S.;      a minimum in at least one neighborhood; it         community has at least one neighborhood with a
94% of this group reports having        typically is less than 0.5 acres for a lot, but    2+ acre minimum
some type of minimum lot size           55% of the group have a minimum greater
requirement; the most common size       than one-half acre.
is for less than one-half acre per lot



                                                                                                                                                    59
Table 4 Continued
Lightly Regulated                       Moderately Regulated                            Highly Regulated
WRLURI 2018  -0.64                      -0.642 < WRLURI 2018 < 0.637                    WRLURI 2018  0.64
SRI=0.04                                SRI=0.11                                        SRI=0.36
Virtually none of this group reported   Formal limits or hard caps on permitting or     Formal limits on permitting or construction are rare
any type of formal limit or cap on      building of any type are rare; only 1-3% of     among this group, too; only 1-in-20 have any such
permits or building of single-family    this group has any such requirement             limit.
or multifamily housing
OSI=0.32                                OSI=0.64                                        OSI=0.76
The typical lightly-regulated           Open space requirements are the norm for this   Three-fourths of these communities have open
community does not have an open         group of communities, with 64% reporting        space requirements
space requirement (32% of this          them
group does)
EI=0.20                                 EI=0.56                                         EI=0.75
Exaction fees are imposed in only       Exaction fees are more common than not,         Three-fourths of these communities have exaction
20% of this group of communities        with 56% of communities reporting them          fee programs
AHI=0.02                                AHI=0.10                                        AHI=0.36
Affordable housing requirements are     Affordable housing requirements are rare,       Affordable housing programs are relatively rare
quite rare, as only 1-in-50 of the      with only 10% of communities in this group      even among this group of highly regulated places;
more lightly-regulated places has       reporting them                                  still, over one-third have some such program
such a program
ADI=3.7                                 ADI=5                                           ADI=8.4
This is a 3.7 month average delay       There is an average 5 month lag between         Review times are longer here, averaging 8.4
between project application and         submitting a request for project approval and   months; there is a large 6.9 month standard
receiving a decision from the           hearing back with a decision                    deviation, so the communities in the upper tail of
government                                                                              this distribution have 18-24 month delays




                                                                                                                                               60
                                 Table 5: WRLURI2018 Values for CBSAs with Ten or More Observations
                   CBSA Name                         WRLURI # Obs                      CBSA Name                      WRLURI # Obs
1. San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA                   1.18    18      23. Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX               0.17   49
2. New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA               1.04    57      24. Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford, CT      0.14   14
3. Providence-Warwick, RI-MA                           0.93    14      25. Portland-South Portland, ME                   0.13   16
4. Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA                         0.73    22      26. Kansas City, MO-KS                            0.13   17
5. Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA                  0.73    48      27. San Antonio-New Braunfels, TX                 0.10   10
6. Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA                0.68    18      28. Buffalo-Cheektowaga-Niagara Falls, NY         0.05   12
7. Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV        0.66    16      29. Harrisburg-Carlisle, PA                       0.01   15
8. Miami-Fort Lauderdale-West Palm Beach, FL           0.66    35      30. Lancaster, PA                                -0.01   14
9. Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ                         0.64    11      31. Columbus, OH                                 -0.01   17
10. Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA                0.60    18      32. Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, TX         -0.04   16
11. Madison, WI                                        0.60    13      33. Pittsburgh, PA                               -0.06   56
12. Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD        0.48    49      34. Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI      -0.10   48
13. Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY                        0.47    10      35. Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI           -0.10   94
14. Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO                         0.41    16      36. Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell, GA            -0.12   27
15. Youngstown-Warren-Boardman, OH-PA                  0.32    10      37. Worcester, MA-CT                             -0.23   16
16. Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH                     0.30    44      38. Cleveland-Elyria, OH                         -0.28   19
17. Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson, IN                   0.30    14      39. Grand Rapids-Wyoming, MI                     -0.31   24
18. Scranton--Wilkes-Barre--Hazleton, PA               0.30    10      40. Rochester, NY                                -0.38   26
19. Syracuse, NY                                       0.25    11      41. Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC            -0.38   12
20. Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI                  0.24    22      42. Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN                         -0.38   26
21. Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA-NJ                  0.22    14      43. Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, MI                  -0.42   60
22. Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin, TN     0.17    12      44. St. Louis, MO-IL                             -0.51   37

Note: There are 1,107 communities within these 44 CBSAs.




                                                                                                                                     61
Table 6: Share of Places in Top WRLURI18 Quartile for CBSAs with Ten or More Observations

                           Share in Top                                       Share in Top
CBSA Name                                                  CBSA Name
                           WRLURI Quartile                                    WRLURI Quartile
1. San Francisco           0.78                            23. Dallas                 0.31
2. New York                0.65                            24. Hartford               0.29
3. Providence              0.57                            25. Portland               0.31
4. Seattle                 0.59                            26. Kansas City            0.35
5. Los Angeles             0.46                            27. San Antonio            0.20
6. Riverside               0.56                            28. Buffalo                0.25
7. Washington DC           0.44                            29. Harrisburg             0.27
8. Miami                   0.51                            30. Lancaster              0.21
9. Phoenix                 0.55                            31. Columbus               0.24
10. Portland               0.50                            32. Houston                0.25
11. Madison                0.46                            33. Pittsburgh             0.18
12. Philadelphia           0.41                            34. Minneapolis            0.15
13. Albany                 0.30                            35. Chicago                0.17
14. Denver                 0.44                            36. Atlanta                0.07
15. Youngstown             0.30                            37. Worcester              0.19
16. Boston                 0.39                            38. Cleveland              0.16
17. Indianapolis           0.14                            39. Grand Rapids           0.08
18. Scranton               0.40                            40. Rochester              0.15
19. Syracuse               0.36                            41. Charlotte              0.08
20. Milwaukee              0.23                            42. Cincinnati             0.08
21. Allentown              0.36                            43. Detroit                0.13
22. Nashville              0.33                            44. St. Louis              0.08


Note: There are 1,107 communities within these 44 CBSAs.




                                                                                                62
                     Table 7: Regulatory Change Index Net Change--Community Share, by Region
                                           Increasing Regulation           No Change             Decreasing Regulation
                                                Over Time                   Over Time                  Over Time
                                            (Net Change >= +1)          (Net Change = 0)           (Net Change <= -1)
 1. West Coast                                      63%                       22%                         15%
 2. West Coast, Not Coastal                         61%                       11%                         28%
 3. East Coast                                      59%                       21%                         21%
 4. Northeast, Not Coastal                          53%                       14%                         34%
 5. Sunbelt                                         52%                       15%                         33%
 6. Midwest                                         41%                       21%                         38%
 7. Rustbelt                                        39%                       23%                         38%
 8. Mountain                                        33%                       21%                         46%
Notes: The number of community-level observations in each regional grouping are as follows: West Coast (46), West Coast-Not Coastal (18),
East Coast (29), Northeast-Not Coastal (80), Sunbelt (142), Midwest (95), Rustbelt (66), and Mountain (24).


 Table 8: Political/Legal Index Net Change--Community Share, By Region
                                       Increasing Political/Legal    No Change Over         Decreasing Political/Legal
                                        Involvement Over Time              Time              Involvement Over Time
                                          (Net Change >= +1)         (Net Change = 0)          (Net Change <= -1)
 1. West Coast                                    41%                         17%                         41%
 2. West Coast-Not Coastal                        50%                          6%                         44%
 3. East Coast                                    28%                         21%                         52%
 4. Northeast-Not Coastal                         40%                         11%                         49%
 5. Sunbelt                                       38%                         13%                         49%
 6. Midwest                                       29%                         17%                         54%
 7. Rustbelt                                      30%                         12%                         58%
 8. Mountain                                      42%                         17%                         42%
Notes: The number of community-level observations in each regional grouping are as follows: West Coast (46), West Coast-Not Coastal (18),
East Coast (29), Northeast-Not Coastal (80), Sunbelt (142), Midwest (95), Rustbelt (66), and Mountain (24).




                                                                                                                                            63
