                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOW DO CAMPAIGNS SHAPE VOTE CHOICE? MULTI-COUNTRY EVIDENCE
                FROM 62 ELECTIONS AND 56 TV DEBATES

                                      Caroline Le Pennec
                                        Vincent Pons

                                      Working Paper 26572
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26572


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




For suggestions that have improved this article, we are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Scott
Ashworth, Christopher Berry, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Ernesto Dal Bo, Rafael Di Tella,
Andrew Eggers, Georgy Egorov, Benjamin Enke, Aaron Erlich, Frederico Finan, Alexander
Fouirnaies, Matthew Gentzkow, Benjamin Marx, Sendhil Mullainathan, Benjamin Olken, Torsten
Persson, Nicolas Sauger, Andrei Shleifer, Edoardo Teso, Matthew Weinzierl, and David Yang, as
well as seminar participants at Stanford University, Houston University, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, and the 2019 Galatina Summer Meetings. We also thank Sudeshna Barman, Ashley
Liu, Jack Oster, and Irina Vlasache for great research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Caroline Le Pennec and Vincent Pons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Campaigns Shape Vote Choice? Multi-Country Evidence from 62 Elections and
56 TV Debates
Caroline Le Pennec and Vincent Pons
NBER Working Paper No. 26572
December 2019, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. D72,D83

                                          ABSTRACT

Using multi-country data from 62 elections since 1952, we show that 17% to 29% of voters make
up their mind during the final two months of campaigns, generating sizeable swings in
candidates' vote shares. We obtain these results by measuring the consistency between vote
intention and vote choice of respondents surveyed at different points before, and then again after,
the election. Changes in vote choice are concomitant to shifts in salient issues and beliefs about
candidates, while policy preferences remain remarkably stable. Televised debates do not affect
vote choice formation, suggesting that information continuously received by voters is more
impactful.


Caroline Le Pennec
University of California at Berkeley
clpennec@berkeley.edu

Vincent Pons
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 289
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vpons@hbs.edu
1        Introduction

        A healthy democracy requires informed voters (Downs, 1957; Delli Carpini and Keeter,

1997) ­ but when do citizens acquire information they use in their choice? One longstanding

view is that the weeks immediately preceding elections represent a crucial period because that

is when electoral campaigns flood the electorate with information (e.g., Holbrook, 1996;

Hillygus and Shields, 2009). An alternative view is that campaigns have minimal effects as

most people have decided long in advance based on group identities and party attachments,

not the individual characteristics of candidates or election-specific information (e.g.,

Lazarsfeld et al., 1944; Campbell et al., 1960; Bartels, 2000). We disentangle these contrasting

views using two-round surveys in 62 elections around the world.

        Our research makes three distinct contributions. First, we determine what fraction of

people form their vote choice in the last two months before an election and measure

heterogeneity over time and across countries and voter types. Second, we explore whether

changes in vote intentions are driven by changes in voters' beliefs about candidates, in their

policy preferences, or in issue salience (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010). Third, we use an

event-study approach to assess how TV debates ­ often the most salient and dramatic events

in a campaign ­ contribute to this process of choice formation. Our findings shed light on the

drivers of voter behavior and election results, and they hold lessons for the design of partisan

campaigns and the regulation thereof.

        Our first set of results relate to the overall impact of information received during campaigns.1 If

voters cast their ballots based on information received during campaigns, one should expect a

large share of the electorate to reach their final choice only shortly before elections.                      To

estimate this fraction, we assembled a dataset of nationally representative surveys conducted

around 62 elections from 1952 to 2017 in ten countries: the United States, Canada, the United

Kingdom, New Zealand, the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Austria, and Sweden.

Most existing research on the timing of individual vote decisions uses post-electoral surveys

asking voters when they made up their mind (e.g., Gopoian and Hadjiharalambous, 1994;

McGregor, 2012), a question which has the benefit of directly recording the object of interest

but which people often answer inaccurately (Plumb, 1986; Chaffee and Rimal, 1996). In

contrast, we only use questions which voters can easily respond to.                      All of the surveys
    1
    As is common in the literature (e.g., Holbrook, 1996; Erikson and Wlezien, 2012), we use "campaign"
interchangeably with "electoral season" to designate the period preceding an election and to refer to all factors
which may influence voters in that period, including both candidates' campaigns and factors beyond their control.


                                                       1
included in our dataset entailed interviewing a new set of people every day running up to the

election to elicit their vote intention, then surveying these same people again after the election

to record their actual vote choice. By comparing voters' responses in the two rounds, we can

ascertain whether they had already settled on their final choice by the time of the pre-electoral

survey without having to rely on their own recollection of the date when they formed their

decision. Comparing the intention and ultimate choice of the same individuals also eliminates

any bias present in both declarations, thereby circumventing an important limitation of

studies that use self-reported vote intention or vote choice as outcome. In addition, most of

our data come from surveys that allocated respondents' survey date randomly, facilitating the

interpretation of outcome differences over time.      Overall, our dataset includes a total of

253,000 observations.

   We find that the fraction of people with identical vote declaration pre- and post-election

increases by 17 percentage points over the 60 days leading up to the election, from a baseline

of 71%. This stems both from an increased fraction of people stating any vote intention and

from increased consistency conditional on stating one. On the last day before the election, 12%

of voters still do not know (or will not say) whom they will vote for, or state a different vote

intention than their ultimate choice. This brings the total fraction of voters making up their

mind during the final two months of campaigns between 17% (if none of these voters

surveyed on the last day is really a last-minute decider) and 29% (if all of them are). Within a

given election, vote choice consistency increases faster for younger voters and those without a

college degree, suggesting that people with less preexisting knowledge are more influenced

by the information they receive during the campaign season. Across elections, the influence of

campaigns on vote choice has been relatively stable for the last 70 years but it varies

substantially from one country to another. Notably, vote choice consistency changes less in the

two months preceding the election in the U.S. than in all the other countries in the sample.

   The increase in individual vote choice consistency is concomitant with aggregate trends in

the relative strength of competing candidates. We compute each candidate's daily predicted

vote share based on the vote intentions of respondents surveyed on that day, and compare it

to their final vote share measured in the post-electoral survey. The total distance between

predicted and final vote shares decreases by about 5 percentage points over the last 60 days

before the election. This result indicates that vote choice formation during the campaign

season can change elections' outcomes, and that it is unlikely to be driven by random shocks


                                                2
altering the utility function that individual voters maximize but containing no election-related

information: indeed, the effects of such shocks should be expected to cancel each other out in

the aggregate. Instead, we argue that our results are primarily driven by information acquired

and/or processed during the final two months of campaigns and, therefore, that they provide

a good measure of this information's overall impact on vote choice formation (see Section 3.6

for a detailed discussion of this interpretation). This evidence complements and expands on

previous work focusing on the effects of specific types of information such as TV ads

(Spenkuch and Toniatti, 2018), field visits (Pons, 2018), or reading newspapers (Chiang and

Knight, 2011).

   Our second set of results sheds light on the mechanisms through which information affects

people's vote choice. All main models of electoral competition have one assumption in common:

the median voter, probabilistic voting, and citizen-candidate models all posit that voters have

stable preferences over a set of policy positions (Persson and Tabellini, 2000). In practice,

information shared during the campaign season may first affect voters' choice by changing

their policy preferences (e.g., Page and Jones, 1979; Minozzi et al., 2015).        To test this

hypothesis, we use a set of policy questions which, similarly to questions on vote choice, were

asked in both the pre- and post-electoral surveys. Strikingly, we do not find any increase in

the consistency in policy preferences expressed before and after an election.

   Second, voters may be primed by campaign communication to think about certain policy

issues and they may change their vote choice after reassessing their distance with the different

candidates based on issues which received the most coverage during the campaign season

(e.g., Iyengar and Kinder, 1987). Using questions recording the issue that respondents consider

the most important, we find that the consistency between their pre- and post-electoral survey

responses increases by more than half of the increase in vote choice consistency.

   Third, we assess the role of beliefs voters hold on candidates and find consistent evidence

that beliefs on candidates' attributes matter more than beliefs on their chances of victory. We

use questions ­ again, asked both pre- and post-election ­ directly recording voters' beliefs

concerning candidates' quality and the issues they stand for. We find that belief consistency

also increases over the campaign. In addition, we compare the shift in vote intentions for

incumbents and strong candidates, who should benefit from increased information on the

relative chances of the contenders if people vote strategically, and for lesser-known candidates

(challengers, small candidates, or new candidates), who should benefit from increased


                                               3
information available to voters on candidates' traits and positions. We find that people who

eventually vote for lesser-known candidates are more likely to make up their minds during

the electoral season; these candidates' vote shares grow over the 60 days leading up to the

election; and the concentration of predicted vote shares decreases in that period. In sum,

people who decide late appear to be voting based on changed beliefs concerning candidates'

attributes rather than on strategy.

   Furthermore, using a simple multivariate regression with one observation per election per

day, we show that increases in both mean issue salience consistency and beliefs consistency

are associated with strong increases in mean vote choice consistency, contrasting with the

outcome's lack of significant relationship with policy preferences consistency. While these

effects cannot be interpreted in strict causal terms, our results on mechanisms collectively

point to the conclusion that electoral campaigns affect vote choice by providing information

which changes voters' beliefs on candidates' positions and quality as well as the issues they

find most important without changing their policy preferences and likelihood to rally to the

front-runners.

   Our third set of results provides evidence on the relative importance of different sources of

information.   We observe that, as the election gets closer, voters receive a continous and

growing stream of information from the media, candidates' campaigns, and discussions with

family members, friends, and coworkers. Voters may update their views on candidates based

on these types of information, and arrive at their final choice at different paces, through slow,

cumulative processes (e.g., Beck et al., 2002). Alternatively, many may form their vote choice

within a few critical moments, including televised debates, party conventions, campaign

rallies, scandals, and major domestic and international events such as conflicts, terrorist

attacks, or economic crises (e.g., Shaw, 1999a).

   To investigate the role of discrete events in the formation of vote choice, we focus on TV

debates between candidates for president or prime minister. TV debates are now part of the

electoral cycle in many countries, and have a strong apparent potential to inform voters

(Jamieson and Birdsell, 1988): they give direct and simultaneous exposure to candidates and

allow voters to compare their policy positions and performance (including their rhetorical

skills and how they withstand pressure) in an exercise which campaign teams do not control

as much as scripted speeches, media interviews, or TV ads. Debates draw larger audiences

than any other campaign event (McKinney and Carlin, 2004): close to 65% of respondents


                                                   4
report watching them in our sample.        Debates can also influence non-watchers, through

subsequent discussions, social media posts, and media commentaries.

   We use an event-study approach pooling 56 TV debates in 31 elections and seven countries

of our sample. Including this large number of debates instead of focusing on a single election or

a single country as in the preexisting literature dramatically increases our statistical power and

the external validity of our estimates. In addition, the fact that debates were held at different

times in different elections enables us to disentangle their effect from underlying time trends

by controlling for a full set of daily fixed effects indicating the distance to the election. Our

identification assumption is that, conditional on these and other controls, the timing of debates

is uncorrelated with the outcomes.

   We do not find any significant impact of TV debates on individual consistency between

vote intention and vote choice ­ or between policy preferences, issue salience, or beliefs on

candidates expressed before and after an election. At the aggregate level, debates do not

significantly affect the distance between predicted and final vote shares, and only slightly

increase short-term daily changes in parties' predicted vote shares.        Our null effects are

precisely estimated. For instance, considering the 95% confidence interval, we can reject any

impact higher than 0.5 percentage point on individual vote choice consistency and 0.1

percentage point on the distance between predicted and final vote shares at the 5% level.

Using our estimates of the overall vote choice formation over the final two months of

campaigns as a benchmark, we find that, on average, a TV debate contributes no more than

3% of the total increase in vote choice consistency and 2% of the total decrease in the distance

to final vote shares.

   Remarkably, we do not find that debates contribute to vote choice formation for any group

of voters, including those who report watching them and those most likely to form their vote

choice shortly before the election, or when focusing on types of debates which could be

expected to be more impactful: the first debate held during the campaign as opposed to later

debates, or debates held in close races, fluctuating races, or multiparty systems. Finally,

debates do not impact the predicted vote share even of lesser-known candidates, who benefit

from the campaign the most overall. In sum, the contribution of TV debates to the formation

of vote decisions is negligible, suggesting that information continuously received by voters

during electoral campaigns exerts more influence on their behavior.




                                                5
1.1     Contribution to the Literature

      A large literature studies the influence of interpersonal discussions, the media, and partisan

communication on electoral outcomes. Experiments by Nickerson (2008) and Bond et al. (2012)

show that information received from personal online or offline contacts can be very impactful,

and quasi-experimental evidence indicates that information provided by TV (Gentzkow, 2006;

DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Enikolopov et al., 2011), radio (Adena et al., 2015), newspapers

(Gerber et al., 2009; Gentzkow et al., 2011; Chiang and Knight, 2011), and the internet (Falck

et al., 2014; Campante et al., 2017) can also substantially affect voter behavior. However, the

effects of political ads disseminated by candidates' campaigns through these media are more

modest and short-lived (Krasno and Green, 2008; Gerber et al., 2011; Broockman and Green,

2014). While Larreguy et al. (2018) report positive effects of radio ads on vote shares, Spenkuch

and Toniatti (2018) find that TV ads do not change vote choices and only affect the electoral

results by altering the composition of the electorate. Turning to candidates' field campaigns,

most studies report substantial effects on vote choice of personalized forms of communication

such as direct mail (Rogers and Middleton, 2015), phone calls (Arceneaux, 2007), door-to-door

visits (Pons, 2018, but see Broockman and Kalla, 2018), and town hall meetings (Fujiwara and

Wantchekon, 2013). We make three important contributions to this literature.

      First, we estimate the impact on vote choice of another major type of partisan

communication, on which the existing evidence is less conclusive: TV debates between

candidates. Although their medium, television, is the same as that of political ads, voters may

find TV debates more informative because they last much longer, subject all candidates to the

same exercise, and test their ability to respond in the moment to unexpected moderators'

questions and opponents' arguments. A large number of studies explore the effects of TV

debates by focusing on a unique election or a small number of races held in the same country

and comparing individual vote intentions (e.g., Hillygus and Jackman, 2003), aggregate polls

shares (e.g., Shaw, 1999a), or betting odds (e.g., Shaw and Roberts, 2000) before and after

debates (for broader reviews of the literature on debates, see McKinney and Carlin (2004) and

Birdsell (2017)). Most of this research focuses on the U.S., but a few papers study debates in

other countries, including Canada (Blais and Boyer, 1996), the U.K. (Pattie and Johnston,

2011), Germany (Schrott, 1990), Australia (Senior, 2008), and the Netherlands (van der Meer

et al., 2016). While many studies find modest or null effects (e.g., Katz and Feldman, 1962;

Shaw, 1999b; McKinney and Warner, 2013), others conclude that debates truly matter,

                                                  6
particularly when they occur earlier in the campaign and for voters with less information

(e.g., Geer, 1988; Lanoue, 1992; Benoit et al., 2003). However, these studies' simple pre/post

difference designs fail to control for underlying trends, threatening the internal validity of

their results. Instead, we take advantage of the large number of debates which took place in

the periods covered by our surveys and of the variation in their timing to flexibly control for

the time to the election. This novel strategy provides more reliable estimates of debates'

impact. The fact that our event study includes debates held in a large number of elections and

countries also increases the external validity of our estimates well beyond that of any

preexisting work. Methodologically, we draw on recent event studies used in other settings

(e.g., Chetty et al., 2014; Dobkin et al., 2018).

    Our study is related to recent experimental evidence on a different type of debates:

non-televised debates shown on smartphones, in public gatherings, or broadcast on the radio,

and opposing parliamentary candidates in low-income democracies (Brierley et al., 2019;

Bowles and Larreguy, 2019; Bidwell et al., 2019; Platas and Raffler, 2019). Scarce political

information characterizing these studies' contexts (Pande, 2011) may contribute to explain the

substantial effects on vote choices they find, as noted by Brierley et al. (2019).                      Using

randomized experiments to measure the impact of presidential or prime-ministerial TV

debates has proven more difficult given the large fraction of the population that watches them

and their possible influence on nonviewers. Mullainathan et al. (2009) encourage a random

selection of 505 New York City voters to watch the final 2005 mayoral election debate and

successfully increase the fraction of watchers. They do not find any significant impact on

opinions on candidates but acknowledge that subsequent discussions and media

commentaries, which they did not vary, may explain this null result. Instead, Fridkin et al.

(2007) use a lab experiment with 145 participants to measure both the impact of watching live

the final 2004 U.S. TV debate and of media's instant analysis following it.                      This setting

guaranteed 100% differential take-up as long as subjects remained in the lab. Measuring their

immediate reactions, the authors report large effects on candidates' evaluations. In contrast,

we find null effects on vote intentions one to three days afterward, suggesting that debates'

effects quickly fade away.2

    While most existing research on vote choice seeks to isolate the impact of a specific source

of information or type of campaign contact, our second contribution is to provide an overall
   2
     Supporting this interpretation, a recent Mechanical Turk experiment which varied post-debate media coverage
reports rapid decay in effects on subjects' evaluations of candidates' debate performances (Gross et al., 2019).


                                                       7
estimate of their combined influence in the last two months before an election. Our measure of

vote choice consistency, which compares vote intentions and vote choices, builds on Wlezien

and Erikson (2002) and Wlezien et al. (2017), who compare election polls and actual election

results and show that polls become increasingly predictive as the election comes closer. This

pattern holds across most countries examined by Jennings and Wlezien (2016). Our finding

that the distance between predicted and final vote shares decreases over time replicates this

result in our set of elections, which partly overlaps theirs. The fact that we use individual-

level two-round surveys instead of aggregate polls enables us to complement the study of time

patterns in vote choice formation in three important ways. First, we determine the fraction of

voters who arrive at their final choice during the campaign, which differs from the reduction in

the distance between predicted and final vote shares. Second, we compare the patterns of vote

choice formation across different types of voters to identify the groups that electoral campaigns

influence the most. The differences across groups we uncover are interesting in their own right

and they inform our heterogeneous impact analysis of TV debates. Third, we investigate the

mechanisms through which information affects vote choice.

   Most prior work studying the timing of vote decisions with individual-level data uses

respondents' own recall of the date in which they made their decision (e.g., Gopoian and

Hadjiharalambous, 1994; Nir and Druckman, 2008; McGregor, 2012), or their declared level of

certainty about their vote intention (e.g., Chaffee and Choe, 1980; Catellani and Alberici,

2012). But voters surveyed before the election do not necessarily know how they will respond

to information that is yet to come. Post-election recalls have also been shown to be marred

with error (Chaffee and Rimal, 1996), due to people failing to remember when they made their

decision, not consciously recording this moment in the first place, or providing what they

perceive to be a more desirable answer (e.g., voters who want to signal that they considered

all candidates carefully may choose to report a late decision).       A smaller set of studies

including Plumb (1986), Kogen and Gottfried (2012), and Henderson and Hillygus (2016)

define the time of decision as the date from which panel respondents select the same

candidate across all subsequent interviews. While these studies are based on the comparison

of respondents' answers over time, like ours, they use data limited to a single election and

cannot provide daily estimates of vote choice consistency, which are our main object of

investigation and a necessary input of our event study analyses. In addition, they focus on the




                                               8
level of consistency, which may be biased by misreporting (see Section 3.1), rather than its

change.

      Our last contribution is to assess the overall contribution of changes in beliefs, policy

preferences, and issue salience to the formation of vote choice. A large body of evidence

shows that some of the information obtained by voters during campaigns relates to economic

fundamentals, which explains the good performance of models forecasting election results

based on these variables (e.g., Fair, 1978; Gelman and King, 1993). Other studies find that new

information on candidates' quality, policy platforms, and moral values which emerges during

the campaign also matters (e.g., Kendall et al., 2015; Cruz et al., 2018; Enke, 2020). In both

bodies of evidence, information received by voters affects their vote choice by changing their

beliefs, whether on candidates or on the state of the economy. On the other hand, recent

evidence shows that interpersonal discussions can also lead people to change their

preferences, including on issues as resistant to change as intergroup prejudices (Broockman

and Kalla, 2016).     One could similarly expect partisan campaigns to persuade voters by

changing their policy preferences when they use this type of contact. However, our evidence

indicates that information shared during campaigns tends to affect vote choices and election

outcomes by changing beliefs and issue salience more than policy preferences.

      The remainder of the paper is organized as followed. Section 2 describes our data. Sections

3 and 4 study the formation of vote choice, beliefs, policy preferences, and issue salience during

the campaign season. Section 5 estimates the impact of TV debates on these outcomes, and

Section 6 concludes.



2     Data

2.1     Campaign Surveys

      We assembled a new dataset of nationally representative surveys conducted around 62

elections in ten countries, from 1952 to 2017. The data come from the American National

Election Studies (1952 to 2016), the Canadian Election Studies (1988 to 2015), the British

Election Studies (2001, 2010, 20015, 2016), the New Zealand Election Studies (1996, 1999, 2002),

the Dutch Parliamentary Election Studies (1998, 2002, 2006), the National Annenberg Election

Surveys (2000, 2004, 2008), the German Longitudinal Election Studies (2009, 2013, 2017), the

Swiss Electoral Studies (2011, 2015), the Italian National Election Studies (2013), the Austrian


                                                 9
National Election Studies (2013), and the Swedish National Election Studies (2014).3 While all

surveys are available online, either to the general public or for research purposes, integrating

the responses collected with independent questionnaires into a common empirical framework

marks an important effort.

    A few surveys cover multiple elections because multiple offices were on the ballot on the

same day (for instance President and Member of Congress in the U.S.) or because voters can

cast multiple ballots (for instance Germany's first and second votes). We define each of these

offices or ballots as a separate election. Conversely, the 2000, 2004, and 2008 U.S. presidential

elections are covered both by the American National Election Studies (henceforth ANES) and

the National Annenberg Election Surveys (henceforth NAES). Appendix Table A.1 shows the

full list of elections, their date, type, voting rule, as well as key features of the corresponding

surveys. 27% of the elections were for President, 58% for lower house, 5% for upper house, 5%

for governor, 2% for European Parliament, and 3% were referenda. 76% used the plurality rule

and 24% the proportional rule. We refer indifferently to the individual candidates competing

in plurality elections and lists competing in proportional elections as "parties" or "candidates."

On average, the corresponding surveys started 53 days before Election Day and included 4,062

respondents. We keep all respondents surveyed 60 days before the election or less as only few

surveys started earlier, limiting statistical power to examine earlier outcomes.

    To build this dataset, we searched for all electoral surveys around the world that satisfy

three criteria. First, they must survey respondents twice: once before the election, to elicit

their vote intention, and once afterwards, to record their ultimate choice. We observe 253,000

pre-election vote intentions (including people who say they do not know who they will vote

for) from 217,000 unique respondents, and post-electoral responses for about 201,000 (80%)

of these observations.4 The median length between the election and the post-electoral survey

was 14 days on average. The national representativeness of the surveys and the high response

rate to the post-electoral survey ensured a strong 0.97 correlation between actual aggregate

vote shares and vote shares computed based on survey respondents. Second, surveys must

interview a new set of respondents every day until the election and record the corresponding

date. Third, respondents surveyed on different dates must be as similar as possible.
   3
     The full list of links at which the surveys can be downloaded and the corresponding references are available in
Appendix A.1.
   4
     The fraction of respondents surveyed twice should not be read as a success rate in re-surveying respondents.
Indeed, while most surveys attempt to reach all respondents surveyed before the election a second time afterwards,
others only attempt to re-survey a subset of pre-election respondents, bringing the fraction down. Conversely, a
few surveys only release data for respondents successfully surveyed twice, bringing the fraction up.


                                                        10
      To satisfy the third criterion, most of our sample comes from rolling cross-sections ­

surveys that allocate each respondent's survey date randomly. This design implies that the set

of respondents surveyed on any particular day can be treated as an independently drawn

random sample and it reduces the risk that answers from respondents surveyed on different

dates differ because of underlying differences in their characteristics (Johnston and Brady,

2002; Knight and Marsh, 2002; Brady and Johnston, 2006). To increase statistical power, we

complemented our sample with surveys that were not designed as rolling cross-sections but

are statistically close to daily random sampling. Specifically, we include surveys that do not

show too large imbalances in pairwise comparisons of daily respondents' observable

characteristics (see Appendix A.2 for additional details). Our results are robust to excluding

non rolling cross-sections, which account for 31% of our observations.5

      Our key variables of interest are respondents' pre- and post-election vote declaration. To

construct these variables homogenously across surveys, we establish and follow a set of

common rules. For instance, we keep early voters in the study, to avoid generating sample

selection issues, and we treat the vote choice they report in the pre-electoral survey similarly

to other respondents' vote intention. All the rules we followed when constructing our main

outcomes and other variables are detailed in Appendix A.3.

      In addition to comparing respondents' vote intentions and vote declarations, we study

possible drivers of changes in vote choice by using questions on policy preferences, issue

salience, and beliefs on candidates. We focus on questions asked in the same way before and

after the election, allowing us to use the same specifications as for the formation of vote

choice. We identified 46 questions from 12 surveys that recorded the policy preferences of a

total of 106,000 respondents, and 76 questions from 11 surveys that elicited the beliefs of

112,000 respondents on the quality and policy positions of competing candidates (e.g., "Which

party is best to handle the economic crisis?" or "Does Bush or Kerry favor an increase in the

minimum wage?"). The full list of these questions is available in Appendix Tables A.3 and

A.4. To measure changes in issue salience, we use open-ended questions in 12 surveys asking

a total of 61,000 respondents which issue they find the most important in this election. We

rank all possible answers in all surveys under 10 categories: economic policy, social policy,

foreign policy, public safety, civil rights, moral values, institutions, politics, electoral issues,

and other issues.
  5
      All results restricted to the subset of rolling cross-sections are shown in Appendix Tables C.1 through C.5.



                                                           11
      Finally, we keep the following covariates for heterogeneity and other secondary analyses

and standardize them across surveys: respondents' education, age, gender, income, and

employment status, which are recorded by the vast majority of surveys, as well as their

consumption of different media, party identification, propensity to watch TV debates and

read polls, whether they have recently been contacted or visited by a party, and how

frequently they have discussions about politics, when available (see Appendix Table A.2).


2.2     Complementary Data

      We supplement the survey data with information that we collected from separate sources

including ParlGov and the Manifesto Project on candidates competing in each election: their

party, their incumbency status, and whether they were on the ballot for the first time or not (see

Appendix Table A.5).

      In addition, we systematically searched for all TV debates held between presidential or

prime-ministerial candidates during the periods covered by election surveys in our sample.

Some surveys asked respondents whether they had watched debates, thereby indicating that

debates had taken place before the corresponding election.            In addition, we searched

extensively for the existence and dates of TV debates using the following sources: academic

papers, TV channels archives, newspaper articles, and Wikipedia. We cross-checked these

different sources to ensure that we recorded debates' dates accurately. The full list of debates

included in our analysis is shown in Appendix Table A.6.



3     The Formation of Vote Choice

3.1     Individual Vote Choice Formation

      We first study the timing of vote choice formation. The fraction of people who decide which

candidate to vote for in the last weeks before an election (rather than earlier) is difficult to

estimate directly. Indeed, it is difficult for voters to assess the likelihood that they will stick

to their vote intention, ex ante, or to recall the exact date they made up their mind, ex post.

We overcome this issue by using questions recording vote intention and vote choice, which are

easier to respond to, and by comparing each respondent's answers to both.

      Formally, we define vote choice consistency as a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent's

pre- and post-election vote declaration coincide and 0 if they differ or if the respondent said


                                                12
they did not know whom they would vote for in the first survey. We estimate the share of

respondents surveyed on any day who will vote according to their intention with the following

OLS specification:

                                             -1
                                     e
                                    Cit =           t Dt + e + Wit  + ue
                                                                       it ,                                    (1)
                                            t=-60

       e is the vote choice consistency of respondent i, surveyed for the first time t days before
where Cit

election e, Dt 's are 60 fixed effects indicating the number of days relative to the election, e are

election fixed effects,6 and Wit is a vector of controls. Wit includes fixed effects for the day of

the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place and for the number of days separating

the post-electoral survey from the election.7

    The key coefficients of interest are the t 's. We center all control variables around their mean

value at t = -1 and do not include a constant, so that -1 is equal to the outcome's sample

average among respondents surveyed one day before the election and, for any t = 1, t is the

(conditional) expected outcome for respondents surveyed t days before. Our sample includes

all respondents surveyed both before and after the election who said that they intended to

vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice

declaration, in the second. Standard errors are clustered at the survey level. For instance, all

respondents surveyed in the 2008 wave of the ANES correspond to one cluster. Our results are

robust to allowing for correlation of the error terms with the wild cluster bootstrap procedure

(Cameron et al., 2008), as shown in Appendix Tables C.10 through C.12, and to clustering the

standard errors at the level of the election date, as shown in Appendix Tables C.15 through

C.17. Respondents in the 2008 wave of both the ANES and the NAES are then included in the

same cluster, for instance.

    We plot the t coefficients and their 95% confidence interval against time in Figure 1a. We

find that 60 days before the election, 71% of voters state a vote intention corresponding to

their final vote choice, suggesting that they vote based on earlier information or along party

lines. The fraction of people with identical pre- and post-election vote declaration increases

by 17 percentage points during the final two months of campaigns, up to 88%. The 12% of
    6
      We include two separate fixed effects for U.S. elections covered both by ANES and NAES, to also control for
survey effects.
    7
      Specifications shown in Appendix Tables C.6 through C.9 also control for the following sociodemographic
characteristics: education (dummies indicating above high school education and college degree), age, gender,
income quartiles, and employment status. Despite our survey selection process, some of these variables show
slight imbalance over time (see Appendix Table B.1). For each control variable, we also include a dummy equal to 1
when the control is missing. Our findings on vote choice formation are nearly identical when adding these controls.


                                                        13
voters surveyed on the last day before the election whose vote intention and vote choice remain

different are of two types: they either still do not know (or will not say) whom they will vote

for, or state a vote intention but later report a different vote choice.

       We next estimate the following equation to measure the daily average increase in vote

choice consistency and test whether the trend is linear or convex:


                                      e
                                     Cit = t + t2 + e + Wit  + ue
                                                                it ,                                           (2)

where t is defined as minus the number of days separating the pre-electoral survey from the

election, so that higher values of t indicate closer proximity to the election. The results are

reported in Table 1. We find that each additional day increases vote choice consistency by 0.25

percentage point on average, an estimate that is significant at the 1% level (column 1), and that

the increase in consistency follows a convex pattern, with a significant acceleration in the last

weeks preceding the election (column 2).

       A possible concern is that our survey data may suffer from self-reporting biases. We address

this concern in two ways. First, remember that we define our outcome, vote choice consistency,

by comparing the vote intention and vote choice of the same individual. By construction, this

eliminates any bias affecting both of a respondent's declarations from the outcome itself. Most

expressions of social acceptability bias, which may particularly affect voters expecting their

choice to be frowned upon by pollsters, and of survey demand effects likely fall in this category.

       Second, one may still be concerned by the possibility that some voters misreport their vote

intention while reporting their actual vote choice, or the reverse. In particular, voters may

misreport their vote choice because they forgot, or out of the desire to say they voted for the

winner (e.g., Wright, 1993), leading to an inflated fraction of inconsistent voters measured on

any day. However, vote choice misreporting should not bias our estimate of the change in vote

choice consistency over time (the overall 17 percentage points increase shown in Figure 1a and

the daily 0.25 percentage point increase reported in Table 1). Taking the difference between the

vote choice consistency of respondents surveyed at different dates eliminates any constant level

of misreporting in and of itself. Yet, misreporting could vary over time: for instance, response

accuracy could decrease with the time between the election and the post-electoral survey, which

is in turn correlated with the date of the pre-electoral survey.8 To address this possibility, we
   8
     As shown in Appendix Figure B.1, respondents who received the pre-electoral survey closer to the election have
a larger post-electoral survey lag on average.



                                                        14
control flexibly for post-electoral survey lag. Conditional on the dummies for the number of

days separating the post-electoral survey from the election, included in equations 1 and 2, vote

choice misreporting should be uncorrelated with the timing of the pre-electoral survey, and the

estimated change in vote choice consistency should be fully accurate.

       In sum, our method insulates the estimated 17 percentage points increase in vote choice

consistency from 60 days to one day before the election from multiple plausible sources of

reporting bias. In contrast, we may overestimate the share of voters who remain inconsistent

on the day before the election if some of them miresport their vote choice but not their vote

intention. We conclude that the fraction of voters forming their vote choice during the last two

months before the election is between 17% (if none of the 12% of inconsistent voters surveyed

the last day before the election is really a last-minute decider) and 29% (if all of them are).


3.2      Stating a Vote Intention and Expected Likelihood to Vote

       The increase in vote choice consistency can result from an increased fraction of people

stating any vote intention or from increased vote choice consistency conditional on stating

one. Accordingly, we estimate equation 1 using as outcome a dummy equal to 1 if the

respondent states a vote intention and 0 otherwise. We then restrict the sample to respondents

stating a vote intention and use a dummy equal to 1 if their final vote choice corresponds.9

       As shown in Figure 1a, both the probability of stating a vote intention and conditional

vote choice consistency increase in the last two months before the election, up to 92% and 93%

respectively. The increase is larger for the latter outcome, suggesting that vote choice formation

in this period is driven by a decrease in the fraction of voters changing their mind at least as

much as in the fraction of undecided voters. Finally, as shown in columns 3 through 6 of Table

1, both outcomes follow an increasing and convex pattern similar to vote choice consistency.

       Importantly, all our results exclude respondents who stated that they were unlikely to vote

in the pre-electoral survey. This choice ensures symmetry with post-electoral surveys, where

non-voters are usually not asked whom they would have voted for if they had voted, as well

as homogeneity across surveys: while some surveys ask likely non-voters whom they would

vote for if they did vote, others only record the vote intention of respondents intending to vote.
   9
    Our sample for the first outcome includes all respondents surveyed before the election who said that they
intended to vote. For the second outcome, our sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the
election who said that they intended to vote and stated a vote intention, in the first survey, and who reported that
they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second.




                                                        15
       A legitimate concern is that the type of respondents saying that they intend to vote may

change over time. As shown in column 1 of Appendix Table B.2, the share of respondents who

say that they indend to vote increases by about 6 percentage points over the 60 days leading

up to the election, consistent with preexisting studies (e.g., Hillygus, 2005). Accordingly, the

fraction of respondents entering in the samples used to measure changes in vote choice

consistency and in the likelihood of stating a vote intention also increases over time (columns

2 and 3).

       We do not think this is too much of an issue. Respondents who only say that they intend to

vote (and enter the sample) if they are surveyed close to the election can reasonably be expected

to be less interested in politics and less consistent in their vote intention, on average. Therefore,

if anything, we should expect changes in sample composition to bias the estimated increase in

vote choice consistency downward. In fact, the observed increase in vote choice consistency is

slightly larger when we include unlikely voters (in the surveys in which their vote intention

is recorded), as shown in column 1 of Appendix Table C.20. More generally, Appendix Tables

C.20 through C.23 show that our results are qualitatively very similar when including unlikely

voters.


3.3      Heterogeneity Across Countries and Election Years

       To test whether the increase in vote choice consistency measured in Section 3.1 varies across

countries and over time, we estimate equation 2 for each election separately, without quadratic

term and election fixed effects. Figure 2 plots each election-specific daily increase in vote choice

consistency against election year, along with country-level linear fits.10

       The increase in vote choice consistency during the electoral season is remarkably stable over

time in the U.S. and in Canada, the two countries with the largest number of elections in the

sample. The propensity to form one's vote choice over the last two months before the election

has decreased slightly over time, in some countries with fewer elections (New Zealand and the

U.K.), but increased slightly in others (the Netherlands, Germany, and Switzerland). Overall,

the extent to which people form their vote choice in the campaign season has been relatively

stable for the last 70 years, suggesting that campaigns continue to matter as much as before.

This constancy is all the more striking as campaign methods have undergone major changes in
  10
   Elections covered by two different surveys are represented by two different point estimates. To estimate
country-level linear fits, we regress the point estimates on election year, for each country separately.




                                                    16
this period ­ including the long decline and recent revival of field campaigns and of strategies

focusing on the mobilization of nonvoters rather than the persuasion of active voters (Gerber

and Green, 2000; Panagopoulos, 2016) ­, new types of media have emerged ­ notably cable TV

and the internet ­, and ideological polarisation has recently risen in many countries.11

       Second, even though campaigns matter everywhere and at all times, the size of the daily

change in vote choice consistency differs substantially across countries. In particular, vote

choice consistency increases less in the last two months before the election in the U.S. than in

all the other countries. This difference is strikingly large, suggesting that lessons from U.S.

studies on factors affecting voter behavior and electoral results, which account for most of the

existing literature, may not extend to other contexts. We go back to this difference in Section

4.3.


3.4      Heterogeneity Across Voters

       Voters with less preexisting knowledge on candidates' quality and issue positions or on

the state of the economy may show a larger increase in vote choice consistency before the

election if they are more impacted by the information they receive in this period, as Bayesian

updating would predict (e.g., Zaller, 1992; Freedman et al., 2004). On the other hand, these

voters may be less likely to change their vote intention if they are less likely to hear,

understand, and remember campaign messages in the first place (e.g., Miller and Krosnick,

2000; Prior, 2007). To test these opposite predictions, we compare the timing of vote choice

formation for voters with different age and education levels, which are two strong correlates

of political informedness (e.g., Angelucci and Prat, 2019). We also test for differences along

three additional dimensions available across most surveys and known to predict policy

preferences and vote choices: gender, income, and employment status (e.g., Alesina and La

Ferrara, 2005; Marshall, 2019).

       We use the following specification separately for each characteristic:


                                  e
                                 Cit = t + i +  i t + e + Wit  + ue
                                                                  it ,                                         (3)

where i is a dummy variable equal to 1 if respondent i is a "type-a" voter ­ defined as male,

above the median age of that survey's respondents, college-educated, above the median
  11
     Boxell et al. (2020) find that polarization has increased in the U.S., Canada, New Zealand, and Switzerland in
the last two decades, which jointly account for 73% of the elections in our sample.



                                                        17
income, or not employed ­ and zero if they are "type-b" ­ female, below median age, not

college-educated, below median income, or employed.  measures the differential increase in

the outcome for type-a voters over time.

       Columns 1 through 5 of Table 2, which include one characteristic at a time, show that vote

choice consistency increases substantially for all groups during the last 60 days before the

election but that the increase is faster for younger voters and those without a college degree.

These differences remain significant (at the 1% level) in a specification including all

sociodemographic characteristics and their interaction with the time trend (column 6).

Controlling for other characteristics, voters without a college degree and younger voters show

lower initial levels of vote choice consistency than college degree holders and older voters on

average, but any additional day increases their consistency by an additional 0.05 and 0.07

percentage point respectively (or about 20 and 28% of the average daily change). Much of the

differential increase in vote choice consistency for younger voters is driven by voters below 25

years old: as shown in Appendix Table B.3, this group's vote choice consistency increases by

an additional 0.06 percentage points on average, compared to other voters below median age.

This result complements a large literature showing that the political behavior and attitudes of

young voters are more easily influenced by external factors, in line with Hyman (1959)'s

political socialization theory.12

       Appendix Table B.4 replicates this analysis for the probability of stating a vote intention

(column 1) and for vote choice consistency conditional on stating one (column 2). We find that

the larger increase in vote choice consistency of younger voters and voters without a college

degree is mostly driven by larger changes in the latter outcome. In sum, younger and less-

educated voters are more susceptible to the influence of electoral campaigns. We do not find

heterogeneity in vote choice formation along any other dimension.


3.5      Convergence to Final Vote Shares

       Changes in individual vote intentions may partly compensate each other: voters switching

from intending to vote for candidate A to actually voting for candidate B will not affect

aggregate vote shares and the outcome of the election if an equal number of voters follow the

opposite trajectory. Alternatively, individual vote choice formation may reflect broad shifts in

candidate support. We should then expect increased individual consistency between vote
  12
       For a recent review of this literature, see Neundorf and Smets (2017)



                                                           18
intention and vote choice to be concomitant with a convergence from predicted vote shares to

final vote shares.

    We use vote intentions stated in the pre-electoral survey and vote choices reported in the
                                   e , the predicted vote share of candidate c in election e
post-electoral survey to compute Vct
                                            e , the candidate's final vote share among the
among respondents surveyed at time t, and Vct

same respondents.13 We define the overall distance between predicted and final vote shares as
          1
Vte =     2   c
                    e - V e , which corresponds to the minimal share of voters who had to change
                  Vct    ct

their vote intention after the pre-electoral survey to explain the difference between predicted

and final vote shares' distributions.

    We measure changes in this outcome with a specification of the form in equation 1, but using

only one observation per election per day instead of one observation per individual response:

                                               -1
                                    Vte =            t Dt + e + Wte  + ue
                                                                        t,                                        (4)
                                             t=-60

where Wte includes pre-electoral survey day-of-the-week fixed effects, the average

post-electoral survey lag among respondents who received the pre-electoral survey at time t,

and, in some specifications, their average sociodemographic characteristics. To give more
                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                     Nt
weight to vote shares measured more precisely, we weight each observation by                         Nt ,   where Nt

is the total number of respondents surveyed at time t and Nte is the subset of these

respondents surveyed for election e.

    We plot the t coefficients on Figure 1b. The overall distance between predicted and final

vote shares is divided by more than two, from 8 percentage points on average, 60 days before

the election, to 3.2 percentage points the day before. As shown in columns 7 and 8 of Table 1,

the decrease in this distance is linear but not concave.14
   13
      Our sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they intended to
vote and stated a vote intention different from voting blank or null, in the first survey, and who reported that they
actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration different from voting blank or null, in the second. Our analysis
occurs at the level of the overall election, not the level of an individual race. For instance, we aggregate the vote
intentions and vote choices of all respondents surveyed about U.S. congressional elections irrespective of the local
race in which they participate.
   14
      Appendix Figure B.2 plots the predicted vote share accuracy (1 minus the distance to final vote shares) together
with individual consistency between vote intention and vote choice. Predicted vote share accuracy is always higher
than individual consistency because voters who do not state any vote intention drive down the latter without
necessarily affecting the former, and some differences between vote intentions and vote choices cancel each other
out when aggregated across voters. Both outcomes rise over time, but the change is larger for individual consistency
since the increased fraction of voters stating a vote intention and vote choice trajectories balancing each other
contribute to increasing this outcome without reducing the distance to final vote shares.




                                                         19
3.6     Interpretation

      The magnitudes of the increase in vote choice consistency and of the convergence to final

vote shares during the last two months before an election are interesting in their own right.

We now turn to the interpretation of these patterns. In our view, they are primarily driven by

the information voters receive during the campaign season. Therefore, they provide a good

measure of the impact of this information on individual vote choice formation, aggregate vote

shares, and the result of the election. While previous work has sought to isolate the impact of

specific types of information by comparing voters exposed to them or not, studying the timing

of vote choice formation enables us to account for the overall impact of all types of information

shared during campaigns, without having to observe the particular pieces of information that

people receive.

      While we distinguish information voters receive during the electoral season from

information they have before the campaign begins, it is important to note that campaign

information may relate both to contemporary and past events. For instance, voters may learn

about policies implemented at the beginning of the previous term by reading newspaper

articles which assess the incumbent's overall achievements ahead of the election. In addition,

some of the effects of information received during the campaign may result from the fact that

it resonates with prior information retrieved from memory (e.g., Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2010;

Bordalo et al., 2020).    For instance, voters may update their evaluation of a candidate

negatively if new information about an unfolding crisis contradicts that candidate's earlier

predictions, and new information about a candidate's competence may awaken selective

recollections from previous elections and be assessed against them.


Stream of information

      There are two distinct reasons why voters receiving a stream of information and

incorporating it into their evaluation of candidates should be expected to show increasing

consistency between their pre-election vote intention and their vote choice over time.

      First, voters surveyed later in the campaign will have received more information.

Accordingly, Bayesian updating predicts that their posterior on candidates will be more

precise, making them more likely to state a vote intention and less likely to change it

afterwards. Some voters may simply stop paying attention to new information once they have



                                               20
accumulated the amount of evidence they deem sufficient to choose a candidate, especially if

information acquisition is costly (e.g., Simon, 1955; Ratcliff, 1978; Canen, 2017).

       Second, the later voters are administered the pre-electoral survey, the less time there is for

them to receive new information susceptible to change their vote intention afterwards.15 This

simple point implies that even a process where people's vote choice was entirely swayed by

the latest piece of information would lead to an increase in vote choice consistency over time.

This said, some of our results are more in line with the view that vote choices are

information-rich.       In particular, voters' increasing likelihood to express a vote intention

suggests that they accumulate information over time and only state a vote intention when

their level of informedness makes them feel sufficiently confident about it. Consistent with

this view, Appendix Figure B.3 shows that people's certainty about their vote intention

(conditional on stating one), increases as well.

       Beyond the overall increase in individual vote choice consistency, all other results shown

in this section are consistent with electoral season vote choice formation being primarily

driven by new information. Younger and less-educated voters, who have less preexisting

information, may be expected to be more affected by information received in this period, as

we find. Convexity in the increase in vote choice consistency should be expected if the stream

of information available to voters increases as the election gets closer, either due to increasing

demand (by voters eager to make up their mind) or supply (by candidates, the media, and

friends and family members).16 Finally, changes in predicted aggregate vote shares should be

expected if a large number of voters receive the same information and update their vote

intentions in the same direction as a result.


Alternative interpretation: information-free shocks

       An alternative interpretation is that increased vote choice consistency stems from a stream

of shocks containing no relevant information but affecting vote choice, for instance by altering

the utility function that voters maximize, as in random utility or perturbed utility models (e.g.,
  15
      In addition, theories of bounded memory (e.g., Wilson, 2014) would predict that the likelihood that voters will
have forgotten information they received before the survey (and which enters their vote intention) by the time they
have to cast their vote is itself lower if they are surveyed closer to the election.
   16
      Increases in demand and supply can reinforce each other if gains from additional information increase with
information that was already received. For instance, Canen and Martin (2019) find that voters often respond to
campaign ads by acquiring more information.




                                                         21
McFadden, 1973; Fudenberg et al., 2015).17 Voters surveyed closer to an election may be more

likely to vote for the candidate they announced simply because fewer shocks will hit them

between their survey and the election.

    This interpretation may be appealing for its simplicity, yet it is at odds with the observed

convergence between predicted and final vote shares. Random shocks affecting different

voters should cancel each other out in the aggregate. To account for the convergence to final

vote shares, one would need to assume that shocks are correlated across voters. Shocks

affecting the electorate at large may of course exist, and they play a central role in models such

as probabilistic voting (Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987; Persson and Tabellini, 2000). However, it

is difficult to see how they could change the views of a large fraction of voters without

containing any relevant information. In fact, many versions of the probabilistic voting model

describe the aggregate shock using examples such as political scandals, economic downturns,

or terrorist attacks (Brueckner and Lee, 2015; Galasso and Nannicini, 2017; Rauh, 2017). Such

events are rich in information.            For instance, candidates' reactions to them can reveal

information about their quality.


Complementary interpretation: cognitive costs of processing information

    While our preferred interpretation attributes the increase in vote choice consistency to the

acquisition of new information, a third possible interpretation is that this pattern is due to

delays in incorporating existing information into vote decisions.                      In this interpretation,

processing information and making one's vote choice takes time and effort, and the fraction of

voters who have paid this cognitive cost increases over time.

    We see this interpretation as complementary to our preferred one. First, even in this

interpretation, choices of voters showing an increase in consistency are based on information

that requires time to process, instead of preexisting factors such as partisan affiliations. This

information is just not necessarily received during the last 60 days before the election.

    Second, while postponing one's vote choice until shortly before the election could simply

be a manifestation of procrastination, it could also be a rational decision by voters expecting to

receive useful information until the very last day before the election and desiring to incorporate

all this information into their vote choice. The increased consistency observed in the last few
  17
     Shocks changing voters' beliefs on the payoffs and behavior of others could also lead them to change their own
behavior if they vote strategically (e.g., Harsanyi, 1973).




                                                        22
weeks should then be attributed jointly to people receiving new information and spending

more time to process it in this period.

         Third, it is unlikely that delays in information processing could, alone, fully account for our

results. It is not clear why such delays would predict a larger increase in vote choice consistency

among younger and less educated voters. In addition, the next section provides evidence of

convergence for outcomes which do not require that people exert cognitive skills but which

are likely to be affected by new information, namely beliefs concerning candidates' quality and

issue positions, as well as the perceived importance of different issues.

         In sum, the increase in vote choice consistency and the convergence to final vote shares

shown in this section likely result primarily from information received during the 60 days

leading up to the election. Other factors, including postponed information processing, may

contribute to these patterns, making them an upper bound on the impact of information

received during the campaign season itself.



4        Formation of Beliefs, Policy Preferences, and Issue Salience

4.1        Formation of Policy Preferences

         Information can affect vote choice through multiple mechanisms. First, voters' policy

preferences might change over the course of the campaign, estranging them from candidates

defending positions they are moving away from. Second, voters might update their beliefs

concerning candidates' issue positions and quality based on information provided either by

third parties or by the competing candidates themselves (e.g., Gentzkow and Kamenica, 2017).

This may lead them to favor a new candidate that they find more competent or whom they

find themselves ideologically closer to than they thought initially.18 Third, in races in which

more than two candidates are initially in contention for victory, polls may clarify the identity

of the front-runners and lead strategic voters to desert candidates with too little chance of

winning, to avoid losing their vote. Fourth, campaign season information may increase the

salience of some issues and prime voters to evaluate candidates on them. Voters may thus

desert candidates they were close to on issues which received less coverage, even though their
    18
     The literature distinguishes several ways in which information on candidates' relative qualities and policy
positions can affect vote choices. This type of information can first facilitate prospective voting and issue voting
(e.g., Enelow and Hinich, 1984; Popkin, 1991). In addition, voters may use the pre-election period to learn about the
incumbent's policies and how the country and its economy have fared since the last election, which they can use to
engage in retrospective voting (e.g., Fiorina, 1981; Vavreck, 2009; Strömberg, 2015).



                                                         23
policy preferences and beliefs on candidates' issue positions, quality, and electoral chances

remain unchanged.

       To investigate the role played by the first mechanism, we test whether the formation of

vote choice is mirrored by changes in policy preferences. We define individual i's preference

consistency on question q as:
                                              q
                                                          Aq     q
                                                           it - Ait
                                             Cit   =1-                ,
                                                           Aq - Aq

where Aq          q
       it (resp. Ait ) is the respondent's answer to the question before (resp. after) the election

and Aq - Aq is the range of possible answers. This normalization allows us to use questions

with different answer scales in the same regression.

       We estimate equations 1 and 2 using preference consistency as outcome and replacing

election fixed effects with question fixed effects.19 As shown in Figure 3a and Table 3, Panel a,

policy preferences remain remarkably stable in the last two months before an election. The

probability of stating a policy preference does not change over time either. We then explore

heterogeneity in the formation of policy preferences.                     Column 1 of Appendix Table B.5,

estimated based on equation 3, shows that men, college degree holders, and voters above the

median income are more consistent in their policy preferences than their counterparts.

However, none of the differences in trends across voter types is significant. Simply put, the

persuasive communication voters receive in the campaign season does not alter their policy

preferences.

       The fact that vote choice formation during the campaign is not mirrored by a similar

process of policy preference formation indicates, of course, that the latter is unlikely to explain

the former. It also suggests that the reverse relationship, whereby voters adjust their policy

preferences to their choice of candidate (Lenz, 2012; Barber and Pope, 2019), does not play an

important role in the elections we study. Furthermore, this result provides support for the

assumption of stable preferences, which is a cornerstone of most models of electoral

competition (e.g., Downs, 1957; Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987; Osborne and Slivinski, 1996;

Besley and Coate, 1997).
  19
    Our sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a policy preference in
the second survey. Unlike self-reported vote choice, the accuracy of reported policy preferences should not depend
on the time lapsed since the election. A more likely source of variation in policy preference changes is the distance
between the pre- and post-electoral survey. Therefore, in this specification and in all regressions regarding policy
preferences, we control for dummies indicating the number of days separating the pre- and post-electoral survey
instead of the distance between the latter and the election.




                                                         24
4.2      Changes in Issue Salience

       We use a similar method to explore the role of priming. We define issue salience consistency

as a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent mentions an issue that they consider to be the most

important in the pre-electoral survey and if they provide the same answer in the post-electoral

survey.20

       As shown in Figure 3b, consistency in issue salience increases by 9 percentage points

during the final two months of campaigns. The daily increase in issue salience consistency is

significant at the 5% level and equal to more than half of the daily increase in vote choice

consistency shown in Table 1 (Table 3, Panel b, column 1). It is driven by increases both in the

probability of stating an important issue (column 2) and in consistency conditional on stating

an issue (column 3). Finally, as shown in column 2 of Appendix Table B.5, the average daily

change in issue salience consistency does not differ significantly across voter types.

       These results indicate that electoral season information increases the salience of some issues

while decreasing the importance of others, and they suggest that priming mechanisms may

contribute to vote choice formation.


4.3      Changes in Beliefs on Candidates

       We finally investigate whether increased vote choice consistency in the period leading to an

election is also driven by changes in beliefs voters hold about candidates.

       Using questions recording beliefs on candidates' issue positions and quality, we find that

the average daily increase in belief consistency in the last two months before the election is

about two thirds of the daily change in vote choice consistency but that it falls short of statistical

significance (Figure 3c and Table 3, Panel c, column 1).21 The increase in the probability of

stating a belief over time (instead of responding "I don't know") is estimated more precisely

and significant at the 1 percent level (column 2). As shown in Appendix Table B.6, we observe

similar patterns when we distinguish the beliefs voters hold about candidates' issue positions

and about their quality.
  20
      Our sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a most important issue
in the second survey. Similarly as in regressions regarding policy preference consistency, we control for dummies
indicating the number of days separating the pre- and post-electoral survey instead of the distance between the
latter and the election.
   21
      Questions recording beliefs on candidates are of two types. Some ask voters to select one of the candidates, e.g.,
the candidate that talks the most about a particular issue. Belief consistency is then defined as a dummy equal to
1 if the respondent provides the same answer in the pre- and post-electoral survey. Other questions survey voters
about a particular candidate, e.g., how competent they are. Belief consistency is then defined similarly as preference
consistency, using the range of possible answers as denominator. Our estimates pool both types of questions.


                                                          25
       We complement this evidence by comparing changes in vote choice consistency across

different types of elections and across supporters of different types of candidates, an approach

which is less direct but which has the advantage of using all our data, not just surveys

recording voters' beliefs both before and after the election.

       We can expect information received in the campaign season to change beliefs on

candidates relatively more in multiparty settings, where the diversity of candidates and

frequent changes in the party system may make initial priors less precise on all dimensions. If

changes in these beliefs are responsible for the formation of vote choice, we should thus

expect vote choice consistency to be initially lower and increase more rapidly in multiparty

elections than in bipartisan systems.

       The difference shown in Figure 2 between U.S. elections, a vast majority of which are

bipartisan, and elections in other countries, which all have multiparty systems, is in line with

this prediction. To investigate the size and statistical significance of this difference more

systematically, we use a specification of the form in equation 3 and interact a linear time trend

with a dummy e equal to 1 for the U.S.22 As shown in Table 4, column 1, vote choice

consistency increases in both types of elections, but a much larger fraction of voters form their

vote choice during the electoral season in multiparty elections. Similarly, the distance between

predicted and final vote shares decreases less in the U.S. than in other countries (column 5). Of

course, other cross-country differences than in the party system, including the fact that U.S.

voters can start forming their choice during lengthy primary elections, may drive the

observed patterns. Regardless of the exact interpretation, these results are noteworthy and

inform our heterogeneity analysis of debates' impact in the next section.

       We now distinguish beliefs on candidates' relative qualities and policy positions, which

may affect the choice of any voter, and beliefs on their relative chances (based for instance on

polls clarifying the identity of the front-runners), which should primarily affect strategic

voters.23 Changes in the second type of beliefs should be more consequential for vote choice

in plurality rule elections, where the incentives to be strategic are stronger than under

proportional rule. We find suggestive evidence that changes in the former type of beliefs, due

to new information on candidates' positions and quality, exert more influence on vote choice.
  22
    To avoid perfect multicollinearity with the set of election fixed effects e , we do not include the dummy e .
  23
    We define voting strategically as voting based on likely outcomes of the election rather than expressively, for
one's favorite candidate (Duverger, 1954; Hall and Snyder, 2015). Outside of strategic considerations, information
on candidates' chances may affect voters if they use it as a signal of quality or if they desire to vote for the winner
(Pons and Tricaud, 2019).



                                                          26
Indeed, the change in vote choice consistency is not larger in plurality elections (columns 2

through 4), and the distance between predicted and final vote shares decreases at the same

pace in plurality and proportional systems (columns 6 through 8).

       To bring additional evidence on the role of these two types of beliefs, note that information

on candidates' positions and quality can be expected to benefit the candidates on whom

voters have less prior knowledge, including new and small candidates, as well as any

candidate challenging the incumbent (Alvarez, 1988; Fujiwara and Wantchekon, 2013;

Larreguy et al., 2018). If changes in related beliefs are responsible for vote choice formation,

people who eventually vote for lesser-known candidates should arrive at their final choice

later in the campaign, and these candidates should see their predicted vote share increase over

time. Instead, information on candidates' chances should lead strategic voters to rally to the

strongest candidates, increasing these candidates' predicted vote shares and overall vote share

concentration. We now test these opposite predictions.

       First, we compare individual vote choice formation between voters who end up voting

for well-established candidates and for candidates likely to be lesser-known at the beginning

of the campaign. Formally, we estimate specifications of the form in equation 3 where we

define as type-a people voting for a challenger, a small party, or a new party; and as type-b

people voting for the party that won the last election, an initially strong party (with an average

predicted vote share larger than 10% in the first five days of the survey), or for a party that had

competed in earlier elections.24 As shown in Appendix Table B.8, vote choice consistency is

initially lower and it increases faster among those who eventually vote for challengers, small

candidates, and new candidates.25 These differential increases remain statistically significant

in a specification controlling for all candidate types as well as their interaction with the time

trend, with or without sociodemographic controls (columns 4 and 5).

       Second, we compare changes in the predicted vote share of different types of candidates in

the 60 days leading up to the election, using the individual likelihood to vote for these

candidates as outcome, the same specification and sample of elections, and excluding

respondents who do not state a vote intention or announce that they will cast a blank or null
  24
     The party that won the last election is defined as the party of the president, the governor, the prime minister (in
lower house elections that lead to the designation of a prime minister), or the party with plurality at the house (in
other lower house elections and in upper house elections). The party is defined as new if it was absent from any
previous presidential election, any previous legislative race in the country (for lower and upper house elections), or
any race in that state (for gubernatorial elections).
  25
     As shown in Appendix Table B.7, the fractions of voters who report voting for a challenger, a small party, or a
new party in the post-electoral survey are stable over time, suggesting that our results are not driven by changes in
sample composition.


                                                          27
vote. We find that the support for challengers and small candidates increases as the election

gets closer (Table 5, columns 1 and 2).

      Finally, we measure changes in the following index of vote share concentration:
                     2
Mte =      c
                 e
               Vct       . As shown in column 4 and in Appendix Figure B.4, vote share concentration

decreases, on average, in the last two months before an election.

      Overall, these multiple results converge to support the interpretation that vote choice

formation is driven by changed beliefs on candidates' issue positions and quality more than

on their relative chances. This conclusion echoes recent evidence indicating that voters are

more likely to behave expressively than strategically (Pons and Tricaud, 2018).


4.4     Intermediation Analysis

      Together with the other results shown above, the fact that consistency in beliefs and issue

salience, but not policy preferences, increase during the campaign season indicates that changes

in the two former outcomes (and not in the latter) may contribute to vote choice formation,

but it does not suffice to prove it. To go one step further in the direction of establishing a

causal relationship between these variables, we compute mean vote choice consistency in each

election on each day, and regress it on mean consistency in beliefs, issue salience, and policy

preferences.

      Formally, we estimate the following regression model:

                                                                -1
                      e =  C e,P +  C e,S +  C e,B +
                     Ct                                               t Dt + e + Wte  + ue                        (5)
                          P t      S t      B t                                          t,
                                                              t=-60

             e is the mean vote choice consistency among respondents surveyed t days before
      where Ct
                e,P         e,S      e,B
election e and Ct   (resp. Ct   and Ct   ) is the mean consistency in policy preferences (resp. in

issue salience and in beliefs on candidates).26

      This specification separates the influence of changes in preferences, beliefs, and issue

salience consistency on vote choice consistency from two other important sources of

correlation. First, individual characteristics such as age and education may affect both vote
  26
     In addition to pre-electoral survey day-of-the-week fixed effects and the average post-electoral survey lag
among respondents who received the pre-electoral survey at time t, the vector of controls Wte includes three
                                           e,P    e,S        e,B
dummy variables indicating whether Ct          , Ct   , and Ct   are missing. We weight each observation by the
number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the overall number of respondents surveyed at the
same relative time to the election. In surveys including multiple policy preferences or beliefs questions, consistency
in policy preferences and consistency in beliefs are averaged at the respondent level before taking the mean across
respondents surveyed on a given day.



                                                         28
choice consistency and consistency in beliefs, preferences, and issue salience. However, the

ensuing correlation should not affect our point estimates because our regression is at the day

level and our daily samples are generally balanced on these characteristics. The same applies

to other individual characteristics such as respondents' level of interest in politics, which we

do not observe but which we can expect to be balanced over time in the rolling cross sections.

Second, mean vote choice consistency and consistency in our regressors may be affected by

types of information which differ but are all increasingly available as the election gets closer.

The 60 fixed effects indicating the number of days relative to the election, which are included

in equation 5, control for this second source of correlation by capturing the effect of factors

which change over time but do not affect policy preferences, beliefs, and issue salience.

   It remains that our coefficients of interest P , B ,and S may not only capture the impact

of preferences, beliefs, and issue salience consistency on vote choice consistency, but they may

also measure a reverse causal relationship or capture the impact of factors which affect both

vote choice consistency and consistency in our regressors but whose effect on the former

outcome is not mediated by the latter.

   The results are reported in Table 6, Panel a. We do not observe any significant relationship

between consistency in policy preferences and in vote choice (column 1). Instead, increases in

mean issue salience and beliefs consistency are both associated with strong increases in mean

vote choice consistency (columns 2 and 3). Both estimates are significant at the 5% level. They

remain statistically significant (at the 5 and 10% level) and of very similar magnitude (0.25 and

0.13 percentage points) in a specification including all three variables (column 4). Similarly,

Panel b shows that one percentage point increases in the likelihood of stating an important

issue or a belief on candidates are associated with 0.20 and 0.24 percentage points increases

in the likelihood of stating a vote intention, which are significant at the 1% level, but that the

probability of stating a policy preference is uncorrelated with this outcome conditional on our

controls.

   While these point estimates do not necessarily represent causal evidence, they do support

the conclusion that changes in beliefs on candidates and priming mechanisms are likely to

contribute substantially to the formation of vote choice, but that policy preferences do not.




                                               29
5        Impact of TV Debates

         Finally, we investigate which sources of information are responsible for the formation of

vote choice. One view is that voters base their choice of candidate on information they

continuously receive and aggregate from the media, candidates' campaigns, and discussions

with others. Figure 4 and Appendix Table B.9 show the change in the fraction of voters who

report getting information frequently from newspapers, TV, radio, and the Internet, having

seen election polls recently, discussing politics frequently with others, and having been

contacted or visited by a party recently. All these outcomes increase during the electoral

season, suggesting that the corresponding sources of information may contribute to the

concomitant increase in vote choice consistency.

         On the other hand, the slow and continuous convergence of vote intentions to final vote

choices observed across elections does not preclude the possibility that discrete events, taking

place at different times in each race, play a decisive role by changing the mind of many voters.

We use an event-study approach to estimate the impact of the most salient of these events: TV

debates. Holding TV debates before national elections is the norm in a growing number of

countries (National Democratic Institute, 2014): after the first presidential TV debate, between

Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy in 1960, TV debates were held in each U.S. election

beginning in 1976 and the practice quickly spread to other countries.27 The now-common use

of debates invites using a multi-country sample to study their impact.


5.1        Estimation Strategy

         In some elections, multiple debates take place. We exclude debates held less than three days

from one another, to be able to estimate effects up to three days after.28 This leaves us with a

total of 56 debates. Debates in our sample were held between five and 44 days before the

election, with an average of 24 days (see Figure 5). The fact that TV debates are concentrated

in the period in which vote choice consistency increases the fastest makes them as plausible
    27
      The list of countries in which TV debates have been held includes Canada (since 1968), Germany (1972), France
(1974), the Netherlands (1963), Israel (1977), Australia (1984), New Zealand (1984), Austria (1994), Ukraine (1994),
South Africa (1994), Poland (1995), Greece (1996), South Korea (1997), Sweden (1998), Taiwan (2004), the U.K. (2010),
and Kenya (2013).
   28
      The results are robust to an extended model excluding debates held less than five days from one another and
including relative day dummies for up to five (not three) days before and after the debate. The corresponding
results are shown in Appendix Tables C.24 through C.27.




                                                         30
a driver of vote choice formation as the sources of information shown in Figure 4.29 The full

list of debates is included in Appendix Table A.6, together with the following information:

whether the debates featured candidates for president or prime minister, their date, the time to

the election, and the surveys covering them.

       A few debates affect several elections, namely the first and second votes in German

elections, and the electoral vote and party vote in New Zealand elections. Therefore, an

observation is a respondent × debate × election. For each debate, our estimation uses all

respondents in the corresponding survey. As a result, the same response is included multiple

times when multiple debates were held before an election. In total, our sample includes

331,000 observations.              We cluster standard errors at the debate level to adjust for the

correlation between the error terms of all observations related to the same debate. This

clustering also accommodates for the fact that some debates preceding the 2000, 2004, and

2008 U.S. presidential elections are covered both by the ANES and the NAES. As in Section 3,

we also check the robustness of our results to allowing for correlation of the error terms with

the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (Appendix Tables C.13 and C.14), and to clustering the

standard errors at the level of the election date (Appendix Tables C.18 and C.19).

       Our main specification is as follows:

                             -1            3                       -60
                    d
                  Yit   =          µk +         µk + µ4- + µ4+ +          t Dt + d + Wit  + ud
                                                                                             it ,                   (6)
                            k=-3          k=1                      t=-1


        d is the outcome for respondent i, surveyed t days before the election corresponding
where Yit

to debate d, µk (-3  k  3) are dummies indicating the number of days relative to the debate,

µ4- and µ4+ are dummies equal to 1 for respondents surveyed four days or more before or

after the debate, respectively, and d are debate × election fixed effects.30

       The key coefficients of interest are µ1 , µ2 , and µ3 , which measure the impact of debates one

to three days after, relative to the omitted category µ0 .31 Our estimates capture direct effects

of debates as well as indirect effects of subsequent media commentaries and discussions, both
  29
      As shown in Appendix Figure B.5, vote choice consistency increases at a similar pace in the sample of elections
including debates as in the overall sample.
   30
      We include separate fixed effects for distinct elections affected by the same debate. We also include two separate
fixed effects for U.S. debates covered both by ANES and NAES.
   31
      We use the day of the debate as reference group because debates take place in the evening. Therefore, the vast
majority of respondents surveyed on that day are surveyed before the debate. The exact time of the interview is
available for 4,095 respondents surveyed on the day of 26 different debates. We find that only 15% of them were
surveyed after the debate started, on average.




                                                           31
on people who watch debates and those who do not. In Section 5.4, we separate effects on

watchers and non-watchers.

       Importantly, the fact that debates took place at different times in different elections, as

shown on Figure 5, allows us to control flexibly for the number of days relative to the election,

with the 60 daily fixed effects Dt . This is critical to disentangle the effect of debates from the

underlying time trends shown in Section 3. In addition, the vector Wit controls again for

day-of-the-week and post-electoral survey lag fixed effects and, in some specifications, for

sociodemographic characteristics.

       Our identifying assumption is that conditional on all these controls, and conditional on

having a TV debate during our observation window, the timing of the debate is uncorrelated

with the outcome. In addition, we assume that any pre-trend before the fourth day preceding

the debate or any impact after the fourth day following it are accurately captured by the fixed

effects µ4- and µ4+ .32

       There are three important potential threats to our identification strategy. First, systematic

differences in the characteristics of respondents surveyed before and after debates would

clearly violate the identifying assumption and could lead us to mistakenly attribute to debates

changes in outcomes originating in sample composition changes. The fact that most surveys

in the study are rolling cross-sections alleviates this risk, as these surveys allocate each

respondent's survey date randomly. It remains that debates, like other campaign events, may

affect the characteristics of people willing to answer the survey, once contacted (Gelman et al.,

2016).      To address this concern, Appendix Table B.10 reports balance checks for our

sociodemographic characteristics as well as two other variables later used in the heterogeneity

analysis. Out of 80 differences, nine are significant at the 10% level, five at the 5% level, and

none at the 1% level, which is in line with what would be expected.

       A second potential risk arises if unexpected shocks occurring on the same day or

immediately before or after the debate bias our estimates. This risk is important for existing

studies that use pre/post difference designs and focus on a unique debate or a few debates

only. In our case, such shocks would only violate the identifying assumption if they were
  32
     Our results pointing to the lack of increase in vote choice consistency and the lack of decrease in the distance
to final vote shares are robust to an alternative specification which does not require this assumption because it
uses a sample restricted to a balanced panel of observations for each of the three days preceding and following
each debate and excluding all respondents surveyed before or after. The drawback of that specification is that we
can only control for election fixed effects instead of debate × election fixed effects because collinearity prevents
estimating a full set of debate fixed effects, time fixed effects, and fixed effects for days relative to the debate. The
corresponding results are shown in Appendix Tables C.28 through C.31.



                                                           32
systematically correlated with debates' dates. Given the large number of debates in the study,

and conditional on the daily fixed effects and other controls, this should not be the case.

   The third and perhaps most serious potential violation of the identifying assumption

comes from the fact that, of course, debates do not happen unexpectedly. Instead, their dates

are known long in advance. As a result, candidates and the media may strategically time their

communication around them. This could generate continuous trends in outcomes around

debates, which the pre-debate dummies µ-3 , µ-2 , and µ-1 allow us to test for. However, these

dummies would not capture discrete changes taking place on the day of the debate or

immediately after. One possibility is that the amount of information increases abruptly (or

that voters pay significantly more attention to it) after the debate, biasing our estimates

upwards. Given our mostly null results, changes susceptible to bias our estimates downwards

would be more concerning. For instance, downard bias could occur if candidates decreased

the intensity of their campaign and if media decreased their coverage thereof, after the debate

(e.g., because they anticipate debate-related information will lower the returns of any other

type of communication), or if voters decreased their media consumption.

   Appendix Table B.11 tests for changes in media consumption and partisan communication

around debates. Columns 1 through 4 use dummies for getting information frequently from

newspapers, TV, radio, and the Internet as outcomes. None of the pre-debate or post-debate

dummies are significant, providing evidence of stable media consumption around TV debates.

Columns 5 and 6 show no significant effect on the probability of having seen election polls

recently (despite a significant point estimate one day before the debate) or of discussing politics

frequently with others. Finally, we obtain only insignificant coefficients when using dummies

for having been contacted and having been visited by a party as outcomes (columns 7 and 8),

except for a small decrease in party contact the day after the debate, significant at the 10% level.

While these results support our identifying assumption, we note that the object of all questions

­ either overall media consumption or having been contacted by a party recently, not just on

the day of the survey ­, limits the power of these tests.

   The next two sections measure mean effects of debates on individual and aggregate

outcomes. We then explore potential sources of heterogeneity in debate impact.




                                                33
5.2     Effects on Individual Outcomes

      We first measure the impact of TV debates on our main outcome, Cit , the individual

consistency between vote intention and vote choice.33 We would not be able to measure the

impact of TV debates using only post-electoral survey responses:                          by the time of the

post-electoral surveys, vote choices reported by all respondents may reflect debates' influence.

However, if debates do help voters decide between candidates, we should expect the fraction

of people stating a vote intention identical to their eventual vote to be higher among those

who answered the pre-electoral survey right after the debate than those surveyed right before.

Day-to-day increases in vote choice consistency after the debates, conditional on the controls,

would indicate that debates' effects increase over time. It is important to note that studying

individual vote choice formation should help uncover effects which aggregate predicted vote

shares could miss. For instance, debates and subsequent media commentaries may increase

the likelihood that voters of opposing sides express support for the nominee of their preferred

party, instead of not stating any vote intention, if they are watched through a partisan lens.

Our measure of individual vote choice consistency would capture this effect even if the net

impact on aggregate vote shares were null.

      We report the coefficients on the µk dummies indicating the number of days relative to the

debate in Table 7, column 1, and plot them in Figure 6a. We do not observe any pre-trend in vote

choice consistency in the three days preceding debates. The dummies for the days following

debates are also all close to zero and not significant. On average, debates decrease individual

vote choice consistency by a non-significant 0.7 percentage point in the three following days.

Estimates of overall vote choice formation during the final two months of campaigns shown

in Section 3 provide a useful benchmark to interpret this result. Considering the upper bound

of the 95% confidence interval, we can reject any impact of debates on vote choice consistency

higher than 0.5 percentage point at the 5% level, which corresponds to 3% of the overall 17

percentage points increase over the electoral season (Figure 1). These results are robust to

controlling for respondents' sociodemographic characteristics (column 2).
   33
      Once again, our sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they
intended to vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration,
in the second. As shown in column 3 of Appendix Table B.12, TV debates marginally affect selection into this
sample, with one positive coefficient three days after the debate, significant at the 10% level. However, column 1
shows no significant impact on turnout intention, and Appendix Tables C.22 and C.23 show that our main findings
are robust to including unlikely voters in the sample, alleviating the concern that our results may be biased by
differential sample selection.




                                                        34
       We next measure the impact of debates on stating any vote intention34 and on vote choice

consistency conditional on stating one. We do not observe any pre-trend in the likelihood

to state a vote intention, and the impact on this outcome is not significant on any day after

the debate (Figure 6b and Table 7, columns 3 and 4). The average impact of debates on the

likelihood to state any vote intention in the three following days is positive but small and not

significant in either specification shown in columns 3 and 4. None of the three pre-debate or

post-debate dummies is significant for conditional vote choice consistency either, and the effect

of debates on this outcome in the three following days is negative and not significant (Figure

6c and Table 7, columns 5 and 6).

       Finally, as shown in columns 3 through 6 of Appendix Table B.13 as well as in Appendix

Figures B.6b and B.6c, none of the relative days dummies are significant when using

consistency in issue salience or in beliefs on candidates as outcome, suggesting that debates

do not affect the factors found to be likely contributors to vote choice formation in Section 4.

Effects on policy preference consistency are not significant either (Appendix Table B.13,

columns 1 and 2, and Appendix Figure B.6a).

       All our point estimates measure the impact of debates in the short run. If our estimates were

positive and significant, we could be worried about potential subsequent reversion to the mean.

Instead, even if debate information could in theory resonate with subsequent information, it

seems unlikely that the null effects we measure three to five days after the debate give way to

large effects later on.


5.3      Effects on Aggregate Outcomes

       Debates' lack of impact on individual vote choice consistency does not necessarily preclude

effects on aggregate vote shares: debates may lead some voters to change their views without

fully converging on their final vote choice yet.

       We first measure debates' effects on Vt , the overall distance between predicted and final

vote shares defined in Section 3.5, with a specification using only one observation per debate

per day:
                           -1            3                       -60
                 Vtd =           µk +         µk + µ4- + µ4+ +          t Dt + d + Wt  + ud
                                                                                          t.         (7)
                          k=-3          k=1                      t=-1

  34
   This outcome is defined on the sample of respondents who said that they intended to vote. Column 2 of
Appendix Table B.12 shows that TV debates do not affect selection into this sample.




                                                       35
    As shown in Figure 7a and in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8, all pre- and post-debate relative

days dummies are close to zero and not significant. The average effect of debates on this

outcome in the three days following debates is positive, small (0.1 percentage point), and not

statistically significant. Considering the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval, we can

reject any impact lower than -0.1 percentage point at the 5% level, which corresponds to 2% of

the overall 5 percentage points decrease in the distance between predicted and final vote

shares over the electoral season (Figure 1b). This result is unchanged when controlling for

sociodemographic variables (column 2).

    Even if debates do not contribute to the convergence to final vote shares, they may generate

short-term shifts in aggregate vote intentions. We define the overall daily change in predicted
                           1
vote shares as Vtd =       2    c
                                      d-Vd
                                    Vct  ct-1 , where Vct is the predicted vote share of candidate c

among respondents surveyed at time t. Vt corresponds to the minimal share of voters who

had to change their vote intention to explain the difference between predicted vote shares'

distributions at time t and t - 1. We estimate equation 7 using this outcome, and we show

the results in Figure 7b and in columns 3 and 4 of Table 8.35 We find some evidence that

debates increase the daily change in predicted vote shares: the dummy for the second day

after the debate is significant at the 5% level, and the average effect in the three days following

the debate is 1.4 percentage points, significant at the 10% level. The average of the three post-

debate dummies is no longer significant but of similar magnitude in the specification including

sociodemographic controls (column 4). However, the dummy for the day preceding the debate

is also positive and statistically significant. The post debate increase may thus be driven in part

by an unusually low change in vote shares on the day of the debate.

    Debates' positive effects on the daily change in vote shares, together with their

(non-significant) negative effects on individual vote choice consistency, suggest that, if

anything, they move a small fraction of voters away from their final choice, in the short term.

Overall, while debates may generate short term shifts in vote shares, these do not contribute

to the overall increase in vote choice consistency established in Section 3.
   35
      In this specification, we weight each observation by the number of t and t-1 respondents it was constructed
from, relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate.




                                                       36
5.4      Treatment Impact Heterogeneity

       The mostly null average effects of debates reported heretofore do not rule out the possibility

that debates matter relatively more in certain conditions. Debates may affect specific groups

of voters or benefit particular candidates, and their effects may depend on the time at which

they take place and on the type of election (McKinney and Carlin, 2004). We explore treatment

impact heterogeneity on individual vote choice and aggregate vote shares along these three

dimensions.

       We first study the potential mediating influence of debates' timing and election type.

Debates may affect vote choice more in contexts in which preexisting knowledge about the

candidates is low or incentives to pay attention are high, for instance because the race is tight.

To test this hypothesis, we compare the first debate of each race to debates taking place later,

when the fraction of voters who have already arrived at their final choice is higher; close races

to expected landslides; highly fluctuating races to more stable races;36 the U.S. bipartisan

elections to multiparty elections, in which a larger fraction of voters form their vote choice

shortly before the election (as shown in Section 4); and plurality rule to proportional rule

elections.

       To study treatment impact heterogeneity on vote choice formation, we interact the relative

days dummies with indicators of debate type or election type:


                          d =            -1              3
                        Yit              k=-3 µk    +    k=1 µk   + µ4- + µ4+ × d
                                      -1             3
                              +       k=-3 k    +    k=1 k    + 4- + 4+ × 1 - d                                 (8)
                                               -60
                              +                t=-1 t Dt     + d + Wit  + ud
                                                                           it ,

where  is a dummy equal to 1 for "type-a" races or debates, for which effects may be expected

to be larger, and 0 otherwise. We interact the µk 's and k 's with  and (1 - ), respectively, to

measure the effects of the two types of debates (not the difference in effect size) and directly

test the null that neither type-a nor type-b debates have significant effects.

       Results are shown in Table 9. While a few pre- and post-debate relative days dummies are

statistically significant, as would be expected given the large number of tests, we do not find

any positive and significant effect on vote choice consistency in the three days following early
  36
    We define close races as elections for which the mean difference in vote shares between the two leading
candidates over the five days before the debate is smaller than 10 percentage points, and highly fluctuating races
as elections in which the mean daily change in vote shares (as defined in Section 5.3) over the five days before the
debate is higher than 10 percentage points.




                                                        37
or later debates or debates held in any subset of races we examine. This is true whether we

consider the day related dummies separately or take their average.

   We use a similar method to study treatment impact heterogeneity on the overall distance

between predicted and final vote shares. The results are shown in Appendix Table B.14.

Considering the average of the three post-debate dummies, we do not find any significant

effect on the distance to actual vote shares of any type of debate, or of debates held in any type

of race.     Only two individual post-debate dummies are negative and significant,

corresponding to the effects of first debates and U.S. debates, two days after the debate

(columns 1 and 4). However, in both cases, the coefficients for one and three days after the

debate and, again, the average of the three post-debate coefficients are not significant. In

addition, the lower distance between predicted and actual vote shares observed two days

after the debates is not mirrored by any substantial increase in individual consistency in either

case (columns 1 and 4 of Table 9).

   We now explore treatment impact heterogeneity along voter characteristics with a

specification of the form in equation 8. First and foremost, we measure effects separately for

voters who report watching debates and those who do not, to test the natural prediction that

the former group may be more affected. We do not separate watchers from non-watchers

based on information recorded in the pre-electoral survey, as this would likely generate

different splits among people surveyed before and after the debate.             Instead, we use

post-electoral survey questions recording whether the respondents watched any of the

debates held before that election. This information is available for half of the debates. In

addition to people watching them, debates could plausibly have larger effects on voters with

weak or no party identification, who may be freer to switch candidates, and on voters without

college education and young voters, whom we found to be more likely to form their vote

choice during the campaign in Section 3.4.

   Results obtained using these four variables and our other sociodemographic

characteristics as mediating factors are reported in Table 10 and Appendix Table B.15.

Considering average effects in the three days following debates, we do not find any significant

and positive effect on vote choice consistency or any significant and negative effect on the

convergence from predicted vote shares to final vote shares for any of the 14 subgroups of

voters we consider. The only exception is a negative effect, significant at the 5% level, on the

distance to final vote shares for debate watchers.        However, point estimates of similar


                                               38
magnitude and identical sign on pre-debate dummies for this group suggest that this effect is

spuriously driven by unusually high distance to final vote shares among debate watchers

surveyed on the day of the debate. In addition, this pattern is not mirrored by an increase in

vote choice consistency: on average, the sign of the effect on the latter outcome is negative for

debate watchers (column 1 of Table 10). Overall, we do not find any clear evidence that

debates contribute to the process of vote choice formation for any type of voters.

    Finally, we test whether debates systematically benefit some candidates at the expense of

others and, in particular, whether they contribute to the increase in the vote share of

lesser-known candidates, shown in Table 5. We first run a specification of the form in equation

6 for each type of candidate, using a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent intends to vote for

them as outcome. Then, we run a specification of the form in equation 7 to estimate the impact

of debates on vote share concentration. As shown in Appendix Table B.16, debates affect

significantly neither the predicted vote share of challengers, small candidates, or new

candidates, nor the concentration of predicted vote shares. Overall, our results suggest that

the impact of TV debates on vote choice formation is minimal.



6   Conclusion

    Using 253,000 observations from two-round surveys in 62 elections around the world since

1952, we find that the fraction of people who state a pre-election vote intention identical to the

vote choice they report after the election increases by 17 percentage points on average in the

60 days leading up to the vote.       This increase in individual vote choice consistency is

concomitant with a 5 percentage points reduction in the overall distance between predicted

and final vote shares. In other words, voters who make up their mind in this period affect the

electoral results. These effects have been relatively stable for several decades. They are larger

in multiparty elections than in the U.S. biparty system, they are similar across races using

plurality and proportional rule, and they benefit lesser-known candidates. These patterns

suggest that changes in vote choice reflect expressive motives more than strategic behavior

and are driven by changed beliefs on candidate' issue positions or quality more than their

chances of victory. Beyond changes in beliefs, we find that the consistency in issues that voters

deem the most important before and after an election increases substantially during the

campaign, suggesting that priming also contributes to vote choice formation.             Overall,



                                               39
increases in issue salience consistency and beliefs consistency, averaged at the day level, are

both associated with strong increases in vote choice consistency.

   While our results support the view that campaigns have substantial effects on vote choice,

it would be wrong to infer that voters are an uninformed public, swayed by any information

they receive in the campaign season. It is quite the opposite. Contrasting with their vote

choice, people's policy preferences are not affected by the campaign: we were surprised to

find that the fraction of respondents stating identical policy preferences in the pre- and

post-electoral survey does not increase during the campaign. In addition, our event-study

approach finds that presidential or prime ministerial TV debates, campaigns' most salient

events, do not play any significant role in shaping voters' choice of candidate. For all the

interest they generate, the large audience they draw, and the many media commentaries they

provoke, debates neither increase individual vote choice consistency nor reduce the distance

to final aggregate vote shares. These null findings are observed even for a race's first debate

and in multiparty elections, in which voters remains undecided until later in the campaign.

They hold when focusing on less-educated and young voters, who are the most influenced by

campaigns, or on lesser-known candidates, who benefit the most from them. Even if TV

debates do not contribute to the convergence to final vote shares, we find some evidence that

they increase the daily change in predicted vote shares by an average 1.4 percentage points in

the next three days.    Together with the small and non-significant decline in vote choice

consistency, this effect indicates that, if anything, debates move a small fraction of voters away

from their final vote choice, in the short term.

   These results suggest that even if voters sometimes seem relatively uninformed, their vote

choice actually aggregates a lot of information, beyond just debates, and that other sources are

more impactful. A possible interpretation is that voters discard candidates' debate statements

because they rationally expect them to be more biased than information coming from

nonpartisan sources, or that they only pay attention to statements aligned with their beliefs.

But there is ample evidence that some forms of partisan communication do persuade voters.

An alternative interpretation is that the particular medium through which debates are

broadcast is what matters: it is difficult for candidates to change people's minds, and this does

not happen on TV or radio. This interpretation is consistent with the fact that campaign

advertisements diffused through these channels fail to affect individual vote choice (e.g.,




                                                   40
Spenkuch and Toniatti, 2018), differently from more personalized contacts such as

door-to-door visits or town hall meetings (e.g., Fujiwara and Wantchekon, 2013; Pons, 2018).

   One implication is that candidates should focus on organizing these more-impactful

activities if they want to increase their chances of winning, even if this means spending less

time on TV and more time recruiting and organizing volunteers. In the elections we study,

only a minority of voters report having been contacted or visited by a party. Our results also

have implications for the regulation of campaigns. Since the first presidential TV debate in the

U.S. in 1960, there has been a continuous and ongoing effort to diffuse this innovation to

countries which have not adopted it yet, and to improve the format of debates where they

have become a tradition (McKinney and Carlin, 2004). Our results suggest that some of this

energy may be better spent in studying and reforming campaign regulations to ensure that all

candidates have equal access to voters and in monitoring the most personal and tailored

forms of partisan communication, on the field and in social media, to improve the quality of

information available to voters and increase the chance that their final choice corresponds to

their actual preferences.




References
Adena, M., Enikolopov, R., Petrova, M., Santarosa, V., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2015). Radio and
  the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1885­1939.
Alesina, A. and La Ferrara, E. (2005). Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of
  Opportunities. Journal of Public Economics, 89(5):897­931.
Alvarez, R. M. (1988). Information and Elections. University of Michigan Press.
Angelucci, C. and Prat, A. (2019). Measuring Inequality in News Knowledge. Working Paper.
Arceneaux, K. (2007). I'm Asking for Your Support: The Effects of Personally Delivered
  Campaign Messages on Voting Decisions and Opinion Formation. Quarterly Journal of
  Political Science, 2(1):43­65.
Barber, M. and Pope, J. C. (2019). Does Party Trump Ideology? Disentangling Party and
  Ideology in America. American Political Science Review, 113(1):38­54.
Bartels, L. M. (2000). Partisanship and Voting Behavior, 1952-1996. American Journal of Political
  Science, 44(1):35­50.
Beck, P. A., Dalton, R. J., Greene, S., and Huckfeldt, R. (2002). The Social Calculus of Voting:
  Interpersonal, Media, and Organizational Influences on Presidential Choices. American
  Political Science Review, 96(1):57­73.
Benoit, W. L., Hansen, G. J., and Verser, R. M. (2003). A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Viewing
  U.S. Presidential Debates. Communication Monographs, 70(4):335­350.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1997). An Economic Model of Representative Democracy. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 112(1):85­114.
Bidwell, K., Casey, K., and Glennerster, R. (2019). Debates: Voting and Expenditure Responses
  to Political Communication. Journal of Political Economy.


                                               41
Birdsell, D. S. (2017). Political Campaign Debates. In Kenski, K. and Jamieson, K. H., editors,
  The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication. Oxford University Press.
Blais, A. and Boyer, M. M. (1996). Assessing the Impact of Televised Debates: The Case of the
  1988 Canadian Election. British Journal of Political Science, 26(2):143­164.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., and Fowler,
  J. H. (2012). A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence and Political Mobilization.
  Nature, 489(7415):295­298.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2020). Memory, Attention, and Choice. The Quarterly
  journal of economics, pages 1399­1442.
Bowles, J. and Larreguy, H. (2019). Who Debates, Who Wins? At-Scale Experimental Evidence
  on Debate Participation in a Liberian Election. Working Paper.
Boxell, L., Gentzkow, M., and Shapiro, J. (2020). Cross-Country Trends in Affective Polarization.
Brady, H. E. and Johnston, R. (2006). The Rolling Cross-Section and Causal Attribution. In
  Capturing Campaign Effects, pages 164­195. University of Michigan Press.
Brierley, S., Kramon, E., and Ofosu, G. K. (2019). The Moderating Effect of Debates on Political
  Attitudes. American Journal of Political Science.
Broockman, D. and Kalla, J. (2018). The Minimal Persuasive Effects of Campaign Contact in
  General Elections: Evidence from 49 Field Experiments. American Political Science Review,
  112(1):148­166.
Broockman, D. E. and Green, D. P. (2014). Do Online Advertisements Increase Political
  Candidates' Name Recognition or Favorability?              Evidence from Randomized Field
  Experiments. Political Behavior, 36(2):263­289.
Broockman, D. E. and Kalla, J. (2016). Durably Reducing Transphobia: A Field Experiment on
  Door-to-Door Canvassing. Science, 352(6282):220­224.
Brueckner, J. K. and Lee, K. (2015). Negative Campaigning in a Probabilistic Voting Model.
  Public Choice, 164(3):379­399.
Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., and Miller, D. L. (2008). Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
  Inference with Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):414­427.
Campante, F., Durante, R., and Sobbrio, F. (2017). Politics 2.0: The Multifaceted Effect of
  Broadband Internet on Political Participation. Journal of the European Economic Association,
  16(4):1094­1136.
Campbell, A., Converse, P. E., Miller, W. E., and Stokes, D. E. (1960). The American Voter.
  JohnWiley & Sons.
Canen, N. and Martin, G. J. (2019). How Campaign Ads Stimulate Political Interest.
Canen, N. J. (2017). Information Accumulation and the Timing of Voting Decisions. Working
  Paper.
Catellani, P. and Alberici, A. I. (2012). Does the Candidate Matter? Comparing the Voting
  Choice of Early and Late Deciders. Political Psychology, 33(5):619­634.
Chaffee, S. H. and Choe, S. Y. (1980). Time of Decision and Media Use During the Ford-Carter
  Campaign. Public Opinion Quarterly, 44(1):53­69.
Chaffee, S. H. and Rimal, R. N. (1996). Time of Vote Decision and Openness to Persuasion.
  In Mutz, D. C., Sniderman, P. M., and Brody, R. A., editors, Political Persuasion and Attitude
  Change, pages 267­291. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Chetty, N., Friedman, J., Leth-Petersen, S., Nielsen, T. H., and Olsen, T. (2014). Active vs.
  Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3):1141­1219.
Chiang, C. F. and Knight, B. (2011). Media Bias and Influence: Evidence from Newspaper
  Endorsements. Review of Economic Studies, 78(3):795­820.
Cruz, C., Keefer, P., Labonne, J., and Trebbi, F. (2018). Making Policies Matter: Voter Responses
  to Campaign Promises. NBER Working Paper No. 24785.



                                               42
DellaVigna, S. and Gentzkow, M. (2010). Persuasion: Empirical Evidence. Annual Review of
  Economics, 2:643­649.
DellaVigna, S. and Kaplan, E. (2007). The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 122(3):1187­1234.
Delli Carpini, M. X. and Keeter, S. (1997). What Americans Know about Politics and Why It Matters.
  Yale University Press.
Dobkin, C., Finkelstein, A., Kluender, R., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2018). The Economic
  Consequences of Hospital Admissions. American Economic Review, 108(2):308­352.
Downs, A. (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy. Harper and Row, New York.
Duverger, M. (1954). Political Parties. Wiley.
Enelow, J. N. and Hinich, M. J. (1984). The Spatial Theory of Voting: An Introduction. Cambridge
  University Press.
Enikolopov, R., Petrova, M., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2011). Media and Political Persuasion:
  Evidence from Russia. American Economic Review, 101(7):3253­3285.
Enke, B. (2020). Moral Values and Voting. Journal of Political Economy.
Erikson, R. S. and Wlezien, C. (2012). The Timeline of Presidential Elections: How Campaigns Do
  (and Do Not) Matter. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Fair, R. C. (1978). The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 60(2):159­173.
Falck, O., Gold, R., and Heblich, S. (2014). E-lections: Voting Behavior and the Internet.
  American Economic Review, 104(7):2238­2265.
Fiorina, M. P. (1981). Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. Yale University Press.
Freedman, P., Franz, M., and Goldstein, K. (2004). Campaign Advertising and Democratic
  Citizenship. American Journal of Political Science, 48(4):723­741.
Fridkin, K. L., Kenney, P. J., Gershon, S. A., Shafer, K., and Woodall, G. S. (2007). Capturing
  the Power of a Campaign Event: The 2004 Presidential Debate in Tempe. Journal of Politics,
  69(3):770­785.
Fudenberg, D., Iijima, R., and Strzalecki, T. (2015). Stochastic Choice and Revealed Perturbed
  Utility. Econometrica, 83(6):2371­2409.
Fujiwara, T. and Wantchekon, L. (2013). Can Informed Public Deliberation Overcome
  Clientelism? Experimental Evidence from Benin. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 5(4):241­255.
Galasso, V. and Nannicini, T. (2017). Political Selection under Alternative Electoral Rules. Public
  Choice, 171(3):257­281.
Geer, J. (1988). The Effects of Presidential Debates on the Electorate's Preferences for
  Candidates. American Politics Quarterly, 16(4):486­501.
Gelman, A., Goel, S., Rivers, D., and Rothschild, D. (2016). The Mythical Swing Voter. Quarterly
  Journal of Political Science, 11(1):103­130.
Gelman, A. and King, G. (1993). Why Are American Presidential Election Campaign Polls So
  Variable When Votes Are So Predictable? British Journal of Political Science, 23(4):409­451.
Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer, A. (2010). What Comes to Mind. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  125(4):1399­1433.
Gentzkow, M. (2006). Television and Voter Turnout. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3):931­
  972.
Gentzkow, M. and Kamenica, E. (2017). Competition in Persuasion. Review of Economic Studies,
  84(1):300­322.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Sinkinson, M. (2011). The Effect of Newspaper Entry and
  Exit on Electoral Politics. American Economic Review, 101(7):2980­3018.
Gerber, A. S., Gimpel, J. G., Green, D. P., and Shaw, D. R. (2011). How Large and Long-lasting
  Are the Persuasive Effects of Televised Campaign Ads? Results from a Randomized Field
  Experiment. American Political Science Review, 105(1):135­150.


                                                43
Gerber, A. S. and Green, D. P. (2000). The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct
  Mail on Voter Turnout: A field experiment. American Political Science Review, 94(3):653­663.
Gerber, A. S., Karlan, D., and Bergan, D. (2009). Does the Media Matter? A Field Experiment
  Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinion. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2):35­52.
Gopoian, J. D. and Hadjiharalambous, S. (1994). Late-Deciding Voters in Presidential Elections.
  Political Behavior, 16(1).
Gross, K., Porter, E., and Wood, T. J. (2019). Identifying Media Effects Through Low-Cost,
  Multiwave Field Experiments. Political Communication, 36(2):272­287.
Hall, A. B. and Snyder, J. M. (2015). Information and Wasted Votes: A Study of U.S. Primary
  Elections. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 10(4):433­459.
Harsanyi, J. C. (1973). Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoffs: A New Rationale for Mixed-
  Strategy Equilibrium Points. International Journal of Game Theory, 2(1):1­23.
Henderson, M. and Hillygus, D. S. (2016). Changing the Clock: The Role of Campaigns in the
  Timing of Vote Decision. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(3):761­770.
Hillygus, D. S. (2005). Campaign Effects and the Dynamics of Turnout Intention in Election
  2000. Journal of Politics, 67(1):50­68.
Hillygus, D. S. and Jackman, S. (2003). Voter Decision Making in Election 2000: Campaign
  Effects, Partisan Activation, and the Clinton Legacy. American Journal of Political Science,
  47(4):583­596.
Hillygus, D. S. and Shields, T. G. (2009). The Persuadable Voter: Wedge Issues in Presidential
  Campaigns. Princeton University Press.
Holbrook, T. M. (1996). Do Campaigns Matter? SAGE Publications.
Hyman, H. (1959). Political Socialization: A Study in the Psychology of Political Behavior. Free
  Press, New York.
Iyengar, S. and Kinder, D. R. (1987). News That Matters. Television and American Opinion.
  University of Chicago Press.
Jamieson, K. H. and Birdsell, D. S. (1988). Presidential Debates: The Challenge of Creating an
  Informed Electorate. Oxford University Press.
Jennings, W. and Wlezien, C. (2016). The Timeline of Elections: A Comparative Perspective.
  American Journal of Political Science, 60(1):219­233.
Johnston, R. and Brady, H. E. (2002). The Rolling Cross-Section Design. Electoral Studies,
  21(2):283­295.
Katz, E. and Feldman, J. J. (1962). The Debates in the Light of Research: A Survey of Surveys.
  In Kraus, S., editor, The Great Debates, pages 173­223. Indiana University Press.
Kendall, C., Nannicini, T., and Trebbi, F. (2015). How Do Voters Respond to Information?
  Evidence from a Randomized Campaign. American Economic Review, 105(1):322­353.
Knight, K. and Marsh, M. C. (2002). Varieties of Election Studies. Electoral Studies, 21(2):169­187.
Kogen, L. and Gottfried, J. A. (2012). I Knew it All Along! Evaluating Time-of-Decision
  Measures in the 2008 U.S. Presidential Campaign. Political Behavior, 34(4):719­736.
Krasno, J. S. and Green, D. P. (2008). Do Televised Presidential Ads Increase Voter Turnout?
  Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Journal of Politics, 70(1):245­261.
Lanoue, D. J. (1992). One That Made a Difference: Cognitive Consistency, Political Knowledge,
  and the 1980 Presidential Debate. Public Opinion Quarterly, 56(2):168­184.
Larreguy, H. A., Marshall, J., and Snyder, J. M. (2018). Leveling the Playing Field: How
  Campaign Advertising Can Help Non-Dominant Parties. Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 16(6):1812­1849.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., Berelson, B., and Gaudet, H. (1944). The People's Choice: How the Voter Makes
  Up His Mind in a Presidential Campaign. Duell, Sloan and Pearce.
Lenz, G. S. (2012). Follow the Leader? How Voters Respond to Politicians' Policies and Performance.
  University of Chicago Press.


                                                44
Lindbeck, A. and Weibull, J. W. (1987). Balanced-Budget Redistribution as the Outcome of
  Political Competition. Public Choice, 52(3):273­297.
Marshall, J. (2019). The Anti-Democrat Diploma: How High School Education Decreases
  Support for the Democratic Party. American Journal of Political Science, 63(1).
McFadden, D. (1973). Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior. In Zarembka,
  P., editor, Frontiers in Econometrics, pages 105­142. Academic Press.
McGregor, R. M. (2012). Voter Sincerity and the Time-of-Voting-Decision. Electoral Studies,
  31(4):715­725.
McKinney, M. S. and Carlin, D. B. (2004). Political Campaign Debates. In Kaid, L. L., editor,
  Handbook of Political Communication Research, pages 203­234. Routledge.
McKinney, M. S. and Warner, B. R. (2013). Do Presidential Debates Matter? Examining a Decade
  of Campaign Debate Effects. Argumentation and Advocacy, 49(4):238­258.
Miller, J. M. and Krosnick, J. A. (2000). News Media Impact on the Ingredients of Presidential
  Evaluations: Politically Knowledgeable Citizens Are Guided by a Trusted Source. American
  Journal of Political Science, 44(2):301­315.
Minozzi, W., Neblo, M. A., Esterling, K. M., and Lazer, D. M. J. (2015). Field Experiment
  Evidence of Substantive, Attributional, and Behavioral Persuasion by Members of Congress
  in Online Town Halls. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  America, 112(13):3937­3942.
Mullainathan, S., Washington, E., and Azari, J. R. (2009). The Impact of Electoral Debate on
  Public Opinions: An Experimental Investigation of the 2005 New York City Mayoral Election.
  In Shapiro, I., Stokes, S. C., Wood, E. J., and Kirshner, A. S., editors, Political Representation,
  pages 324­341. Cambridge University Press.
National Democratic Institute (2014). Organizing and Producing Debates: An International
  Guide. Technical report.
Neundorf, A. and Smets, K. (2017). Political Socialization and the Making of Citizens. Oxford
  Handbooks Online, (January):­.
Nickerson, D. W. (2008). Is Voting Contagious? Evidence from Two Field Experiments.
  American Political Science Review, 102(1):49­57.
Nir, L. and Druckman, J. N. (2008). Campaign Mixed-Message Flows and Timing of Vote
  Decision. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 20(3).
Osborne, M. and Slivinski, A. (1996). A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
  Candidates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1):65­96.
Page, B. I. and Jones, C. C. (1979). Reciprocal Effects of Policy Preferences, Party Loyalties and
  the Vote. American Political Science Review, 73(4):1071­1089.
Panagopoulos, C. (2016). All About that Base: Changing Campaign Strategies in U.S.
  Presidential Elections. Party Politics, 22(2):179­190.
Pande, R. (2011). Can Informed Voters Enforce Better Governance? Experiments in Low-
  Income Democracies. Annual Review of Economics, 3:215­237.
Pattie, C. and Johnston, R. (2011). A Tale of Sound and Fury, Signifying Something? The Impact
  of the Leaders' Debates in the 2010 UK General Election. Journal of Elections, Public Opinion
  and Parties, 21(2):147­177.
Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (2000). Political Economics. Explaining Economic Policy. MIT Press.
Platas, M. and Raffler, P. (2019). Meet the Candidates: Field Experimental Evidence on Learning
  from Politician Debates in Uganda. In Humphreys, M., Grossman, G., Nellis, G., Hyde, S. D.,
  Dunning, T., and McIntosh, C., editors, Information, Accountability, and Cumulative Learning:
  Lessons from Metaketa I. Cambridge University Press.
Plumb, E. (1986). Validation of Voter Recall: Time of Electoral Decision Making. Political
  Behavior, 8(4):302­312.
Pons, V. (2018). Will a Five-Minute Discussion Change your Mind? A Countrywide Experiment
  on Voter Choice in France. American Economic Review, 108(6):1322­1363.


                                                 45
Pons, V. and Tricaud, C. (2018). Expressive Voting and Its Cost: Evidence from Runoffs with
  Two or Three Candidates. Econometrica, 86(5):1621­1649.
Pons, V. and Tricaud, C. (2019). Coordination and Bandwagon Effects of Candidate Rankings:
  Evidence from Runoff Elections. NBER Working Paper Series No. 26599.
Popkin, S. L. (1991). The Reasoning Voter: Communication and Persuasion in Presidential Campaigns.
  University of Chicago Press.
Prior, M. (2007). Post-Broadcast Democracy: How Media Choice Increases Inequality in Political
  Involvement and Polarizes Elections. Cambridge University Press.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A Theory of Memory Retrieval. Psychological Review, 85(2):59­108.
Rauh, C. (2017). Voting, Education, and the Great Gatsby Curve. Journal of Public Economics,
  146:1­14.
Rogers, T. and Middleton, J. A. (2015). Are Ballot Initiative Outcomes Influenced by the
  Campaigns of Independent Groups? A Precinct-Randomized Field Experiment Showing
  That They Are. Political Behavior, 37(3):567­593.
Schrott, P. R. (1990). Electoral Consequences of "Winning" Televised Campaign Debates. Public
  Opinion Quarterly, 54(4):567­585.
Senior, P. (2008). Electoral Impact of Televised Leaders' Debates on Australian Federal
  Elections. Australian Journal of Political Science, 43(3):443­464.
Shaw, D. R. (1999a). A Study of Presidential Campaign Event Effects from 1952 to 1992. Journal
  of Politics, 61(2):387­422.
Shaw, D. R. (1999b). The Impact of News Media Favorability and Candidate Events in
  Presidential Campaigns. Political Communication, 16(2):183­202.
Shaw, D. R. and Roberts, B. E. (2000). Campaign Events, the Media and the Prospects of Victory:
  The 1992 and 1996 US Presidential Elections. British Journal of Political Science, 30(2):259­289.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  69(1):99­118.
Spenkuch, J. L. and Toniatti, D. (2018). Political Advertising and Election Results. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 133(4):1981­2036.
Strömberg, D. (2015). Media Coverage and Political Accountability: Theory and Evidence. In
  Anderson, S. P., Waldfogel, J., and Strömberg, D., editors, Handbook of Media Economics, pages
  595­622. North Holland.
van der Meer, T. W. G., Walter, A., and Van Aelst, P. (2016). The Contingency of Voter Learning:
  How Election Debates Influenced Voters' Ability and Accuracy to Position Parties in the 2010
  Dutch Election Campaign. Political Communication, 33(1):136­157.
Vavreck, L. (2009). The Message Matters. The Economy and Presidential Campaigns. Princeton
  University Press.
Wilson, A. (2014). Bounded Memory and Biases in Information Processing. Econometrica,
  82(6):2257­2294.
Wlezien, C. and Erikson, R. S. (2002). The Timeline of Presidential Election Campaigns. Journal
  of Politics, 64(4):969­993.
Wlezien, C., Jennings, W., and Erikson, R. S. (2017). The "Timeline" Method of Studying
  Electoral Dynamics. Electoral Studies, 48:45­56.
Wright, G. C. (1993). Errors in Measuring Vote Choice in the National Election Studies, 1952-88.
  American Journal of Political Science, 37(1):291­316.
Zaller, J. R. (1992). The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. Cambridge University Press.




                                                46
                 Figure 1: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares
                 (a) Individual vote choice consistency, vote intention, and conditional consistency
      1
      .9




                                                                                            Conditional
                                                                                            consistency
      .8




                                                                                            Vote
                                                                                            intention
      .7




                                                                                            Vote choice
                                                                                            consistency
      .6
      .5




           -60                 -40                 -20                            0
                           Number of days before the election


                               (b) Distance between predicted and final vote shares
      .5
      .4
      .3




                                                                                            Distance
                                                                                            to final
                                                                                            vote shares
      .2
      .1
      0




           -60                 -40                 -20                            0
                           Number of days before the election


Notes: Figure 1a shows the point estimates and the 95% confidence interval from a regression of vote
choice consistency, vote intention, and conditional vote choice consistency on 60 fixed effects indicating
the number of days relative to the election. The respective samples include all respondents surveyed
before and after the election who said that they intended to vote, in the first survey, and who reported
that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second (N = 200,916); all respondents
surveyed before the election who said that they intended to vote (N = 253,489); and all respondents
surveyed before and after the election who said that they intended to vote and stated a vote intention,
in the first survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in
the second (N = 178,176). Figure 1b plots the distance between predicted and final vote shares. Vote
shares are computed based on all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they
intended to vote and stated a vote intention different from voting blank or null, in the first survey, and
who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration different from voting blank or
null, in the second. We use one observation per election per day and we weight each observation by the
number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at
the same relative time to the election (N=3,125). Both figures control for election fixed effects as well as
fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. In addition, Figure 1a
controls for fixed effects for the number of days between the post-electoral survey and the election and
Figure 1b for the average of this variable. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the survey level.
           Figure 2: Increase in vote choice consistency across countries and over time


         .01
         .005
         0
         -.005




                 1940           1960                1980                2000                2020
                                                Election year

                                       United States         Canada
                                       United Kingdom        Germany
                                       New Zealand           Netherlands
                                       Switzerland           Austria
                                       Italy                 Sweden


Notes: We show the point estimates from election-level regressions of vote choice consistency on time
against election year. Time is defined as minus the number of days separating the pre-electoral survey
from the election (so that higher values indicate closer proximity to the election). Each point estimate
comes from a separate regression. Elections covered by two different surveys are represented by two
different point estimates. Each regression's sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after
the election who said that they intended to vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually
voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second. Each regression controls for fixed effects for
the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place and for the number of days between
the post-electoral survey and the election. We also show country-level linear fits of the point estimates,
for all countries with two election years or more. To construct these linear fits, we regress the point
estimates on election year, for each country separately. N=65.




                                                   48
        Figure 3: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates
                       (a) Policy preferences                                                                  (b) Issue salience
  1




                                                                                        1
  .9




                                                                                        .9
  .8




                                                                                        .8
  .7




                                                                                        .7
  .6




                                                                                        .6
  .5




                                                                                        .5
       -60                -40                       -20                             0        -60               -40                       -20                          0
                        Number of days before the election                                                   Number of days before the election

             Consistency in policy preferences               Stating a preference                  Consistency in issue salience            Stating a salient issue
             Conditional consistency                                                               Conditional consistency




                     (c) Beliefs on candidates
  1
  .9
  .8
  .7
  .6
  .5




       -60                -40                       -20                             0
                        Number of days before the election

             Consistency in beliefs on candidates                Stating a belief
             Conditional consistency




Notes: We show the point estimates and the 95% confidence interval from regressions of consistency
in policy preferences (Figure 3a), issue salience (Figure 3b), and beliefs on candidates (Figure 3c) on
60 fixed effects indicating the number of days relative to the election. We use one observation per
respondent per policy question in Figure 3a, one observation per respondent in Figure 3b, and one
observation per respondent per belief question in Figure 3c. We control for question fixed effects (Figures
3a and 3c) or election fixed effects (Figure 3b), as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which
the pre-electoral survey took place and for the number of days separating the pre- and post-electoral
survey. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the survey level. In each figure, we consider three
outcomes: consistency; stating a preference (resp. a salient issue or a belief); and conditional consistency.
The sample includes (respectively) all respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a
policy preference, a salient issue, or a belief on candidates in the second survey (N = 228,562; 46,108;
and 478,039); all respondents surveyed before the election (N = 330,843; 60,713; and 809,037); and all
respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a policy preference, a salient issue, or a
belief on candidates in both the first and the second surveys (N = 222,785; 44,049; and 440,771).




                                                                              49
           Figure 4: Media consumption, political discussions, and partisan communication
                     (a) Newspapers                                                (b) TV
1




                                                             1
.8




                                                             .8
.6




                                                             .6
.4




                                                             .4
.2




                                                             .2
0




                                                             0
     -60             -40                       -20      0         -60       -40                       -20      0
                   Number of days before the election                     Number of days before the election




                          (c) Radio                                            (d) Internet
1




                                                             1
.8




                                                             .8
.6




                                                             .6
.4




                                                             .4
.2




                                                             .2
0




                                                             0




     -60             -40                       -20      0         -60       -40                       -20      0
                   Number of days before the election                     Number of days before the election




                           (e) Polls                                    (f) Political discussions
1




                                                             1
.8




                                                             .8
.6




                                                             .6
.4




                                                             .4
.2




                                                             .2
0




                                                             0




     -60             -40                       -20      0         -60       -40                       -20      0
                   Number of days before the election                     Number of days before the election




                                                            50
   Figure 4: Media consumption, political discussions, and partisan communication (cont.)
              (g) Contacted by a party                                (h) Visited by a party
  1




                                                           1
                                                           .8
  .8




                                                           .6
  .6




                                                           .4
  .4




                                                           .2
  .2




                                                           0
  0




       -60         -40                       -20      0         -60      -40                       -20      0
                 Number of days before the election                    Number of days before the election




Notes: We show the point estimates and the 95% confidence interval from regressions of different forms
of media consumption, political discussions, and partisan communication on 60 fixed effects indicating
the number of days relative to the election. The sample includes all respondents surveyed before the
election who said that they intended to vote. We control for election fixed effects and fixed effects for the
day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering
at the survey level. The outcomes are dummies for getting information frequently from newspapers
(N=147,119), TV (N=140,040), radio (N=101,015), and the Internet (N=119,596), having seen election
polls recently (N=38,355), discussing politics frequently with others (N=103,805), having been contacted
by a party recently (N=57,634), and having been visited at home by a party recently (N=41,301).




                                                          51
                            Figure 5: Vote choice consistency and debate dates




                 1
                 .9
                 .8
                 .7
                 .6
                 .5




                      -60                  -40                       -20            0
                                         Number of days before the election

                                             Individual vote choice consistency



Notes: Each debate is represented by a vertical bar. Thicker bars correspond to dates in which debates
were held in multiple elections. On average, debates were held 24 days before the election. This average
distance to the election is represented by a red vertical bar. Other notes as in Figure 1a.




                                                      52
                                          Figure 6: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency
                               (a) Vote choice consistency                                                         (b) Vote intention
  .1




                                                                                   .1
  .075




                                                                                   .075
  .05




                                                                                   .05
  .025




                                                                                   .025
  0




                                                                                   0
  -.075 -.05 -.025




                                                                                   -.075 -.05 -.025
  -.1




                                                                                   -.1
                     -3   -2         -1           0             1         2    3                      -3   -2       -1           0             1         2   3
                                 Number of days before/after the debate                                         Number of days before/after the debate




                               (c) Conditional consistency
  .1
  .075
  .05
  .025
  0
  -.075 -.05 -.025
  -.1




                     -3   -2         -1           0             1         2    3
                                 Number of days before/after the debate




Notes: We show point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of vote choice
consistency, vote intention, and conditional vote choice consistency on dummy variables for being
surveyed one, two, or three days before the debate, as well as dummies for being surveyed one, two,
or three days after the debate. We also include dummies for being surveyed four days or more before
or after the debate, respectively, and omit the dummy for being surveyed on the day of the debate.
We control for debate × election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the number of days relative
to the election and for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. In Figures
6a and 6c, we also control for fixed effects for the number of days separating the post-electoral survey
from the election. For each debate and election, our estimation uses all respondents in samples defined
as in Figure 1. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the debate level. There are 56 debates,
after excluding debates held less than three days from one another. N=263,681; 330,621; and 240,826,
respectively.




                                                                              53
                                                     Figure 7: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares
                            (a) Distance between predicted and final vote shares                                           (b) Daily change in predicted vote shares
  .1




                                                                                            .1
  .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                            .02 .04 .06 .08
  0




                                                                                            0
  -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02




                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02
                             -3      -2       -1           0             1         2    3                             -3       -2       -1           0             1         2   3
                                          Number of days before/after the debate                                                    Number of days before/after the debate




Notes: We show point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of the distance between
predicted and final vote shares, and daily change in predicted vote shares, on dummy variables for being
surveyed one, two, or three days before the debate, as well as dummies for being surveyed one, two,
or three days after the debate. We also include dummies for being surveyed four days or more before
or after the debate, respectively, and omit the dummy for being surveyed on the day of the debate. We
control for debate × election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the number of days relative to the
election and for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. We also control for the
average number of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election in Figure 7a. We use one
observation per election per day. In Figure 7a, vote shares are computed based on the set of respondents
used in Figure 1b, and we weight each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed
from, relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. In
Figure 7b, vote shares are computed based on all respondents surveyed before the election who said
that they intended to vote and stated a vote intention different from voting blank or null, and we weight
each observation by the number of t and t-1 respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total
number of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. Standard errors are adjusted
for clustering at the debate level. There are 56 debates, after excluding debates held less than three days
from one another. N=3,802 and 3,749, respectively.




                                                                                       54
                   Table 1: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares

                       Vote choice                Vote               Conditional         Distance between predicted
                       consistency              intention            consistency            and final vote shares
                      (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
  Time              0.0025     0.0061      0.0010     0.0031      0.0018     0.0038      -0.0008       -0.0013
                    (0.0003)   (0.0008)    (0.0002)   (0.0005)    (0.0003)   (0.0007)    (0.0002)       (0.0005)
  Time2                        0.0001                 0.0000                 0.0000                     -0.0000
                                (0.0000)               (0.0000)               (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
  Observations       200916     200916     253489      253489     178176      178176       3125          3125
  R2                  0.070      0.071      0.072       0.073      0.041       0.041      0.520          0.523
  Mean at day -1     0.8768     0.8768     0.9157      0.9157     0.9346      0.9346      0.0324        0.0324

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). Time is defined as minus the number of days separating the pre-
electoral survey from the election (so that higher values indicate closer proximity to the election). We
use one observation per respondent in columns 1 through 6 and control for election fixed effects as well
as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. In columns 1, 2,
5, and 6, we also control for fixed effects for the number of days separating the post-electoral survey
from the election. The sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said
that they intended to vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a
vote choice declaration, in the second (columns 1 and 2); all respondents surveyed before the election
who said that they intended to vote (columns 3 and 4); and all respondents surveyed before and after
the election who said that they intended to vote and stated a vote intention, in the first survey, and
who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second (columns 5
and 6). We use one observation per election per day in columns 7 and 8 and control for election fixed
effects, fixed effects for the day of the week in which the preelectoral survey took place, and the average
number of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election. We compute vote shares based on
all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they intended to vote and stated a
vote intention different from voting blank or null, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually
voted and gave a vote choice declaration different from voting blank or null, in the second. We weight
each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number of
respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the election.




                                                            55
                               Table 2: Vote choice consistency across voter types
                               College degree vs.   Above median age     Male vs.    Above median income   Not employed vs.
                               no college degree       vs. below         female           vs. below           employed           All
                                       (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)                (5)             (6)
  Time                             0.0024               0.0028           0.0025           0.0025              0.0025          0.0030
                                    (0.0003)             (0.0003)         (0.0003)         (0.0003)            (0.0003)        (0.0004)
  College degree                     -0.0016                                                                                   0.0029
                                    (0.0057)                                                                                  (0.0053)
  Time * College degree            -0.0006                                                                                    -0.0005
                                    (0.0002)                                                                                   (0.0002)
  Above median age                                      0.0221                                                                0.0166
                                                         (0.0078)                                                             (0.0086)
  Time * Above median age                              -0.0007                                                                -0.0007
                                                        (0.0002)                                                               (0.0002)
  Male                                                                   0.0351                                               0.0336
                                                                          (0.0046)                                             (0.0043)
  Time * Male                                                             -0.0000                                              -0.0000
                                                                         (0.0002)                                             (0.0002)
  Above median income                                                                       -0.0020                            0.0005
                                                                                           (0.0065)                           (0.0066)
  Time * Above median income                                                                -0.0003                            -0.0002
                                                                                           (0.0002)                           (0.0002)
  Not employed                                                                                                0.0208          0.0217
                                                                                                               (0.0051)        (0.0054)
  Time* Not employed                                                                                           -0.0001         0.0001
                                                                                                               (0.0002)       (0.0002)
  Observations                      200916               200916           200916           200916              200916          200916
  R2                                 0.071                0.072            0.072            0.070               0.071           0.075
  Mean at day -1                    0.8768               0.8768           0.8768           0.8768              0.8768          0.8768


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). We regress vote choice consistency on a linear time trend and its
interaction with dummies for being a type-a voter (having a college degree, being above the median age,
a male, above the median income, and not employed) as opposed to a type-b voter (not having a college
degree, being below the median age, a female, below the median income, and employed). Dummies for
being a type-a voter as well as dummies for whether the characteristics are missing and their interaction
with the time trend are also included. We control for election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the
day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place and for the number of days separating the
post-electoral survey from the election. The sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after
the election who said that they intended to vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually
voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second.




                                                                    56
      Table 3: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates
                                             (a) Policy preferences

                              Consistency       Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                  (1)                  (2)                       (3)
          Time                    0.0001                0.0001                    0.0001
                                 (0.0001)              (0.0001)                  (0.0001)
          Observations           228562                 330843                    222785
          R2                      0.047                  0.078                     0.040
          Mean at day -1         0.8488                 0.9615                    0.8689

                                               (b) Issue salience

                              Consistency       Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                  (1)                  (2)                       (3)
          Time                   0.0015                0.0006                    0.0010
                                 (0.0006)              (0.0003)                  (0.0004)
          Observations            46108                 60713                     44049
          R2                       0.046                0.063                      0.054
          Mean at day -1          0.7392                0.9212                    0.7676

                                            (c) Beliefs on candidates

                              Consistency       Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                  (1)                  (2)                       (3)
          Time                    0.0018              0.0006                      0.0017
                                 (0.0015)              (0.0001)                  (0.0014)
          Observations           478039                 809037                    440771
          R2                      0.074                  0.101                     0.095
          Mean at day -1         0.8119                 0.8690                    0.8601


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). We use one observation per respondent per policy question in Panel
a, one observation per respondent in Panel b, and one observation per respondent per belief question
in Panel c. In column 1, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election
who stated a policy preference (Panel a), a salient issue (Panel b), or a belief on candidates (Panel c) in
the second survey. In column 2, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before the election. In
column 3, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a policy
preference, a salient issue, or a belief on candidates in both the first and the second surveys. We control
for question fixed effects (Panels a and c) or election fixed effects (Panel b), as well as fixed effects for
the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. In columns 1 and 3, we also control for
fixed effects for the number of days separating the pre- and post-electoral survey.




                                                      57
    Table 4: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares across election types

                                                                                             Distance between predicted
                                          Vote choice consistency                               and final vote shares
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)        (7)           (8)
 Time                         0.0036       0.0037      0.0037        0.0038      -0.0012       -0.0012     -0.0012     -0.0012
                               (0.0003)     (0.0003)    (0.0003)      (0.0003)    (0.0002)      (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Time * U.S.                  -0.0025                  -0.0025       -0.0025     0.0007                     0.0007        0.0007
                               (0.0003)                 (0.0004)      (0.0005)    (0.0003)                  (0.0004)      (0.0004)
 Time * Plurality rule                    -0.0013      -0.0000       -0.0002                     0.0004      0.0000        0.0000
                                           (0.0004)    (0.0005)      (0.0005)                   (0.0003)    (0.0004)      (0.0004)
 Observations                  175832       175832      175832        175832       3045           3045       3045          3045
 R2                             0.068        0.066       0.068         0.073       0.482          0.476      0.482         0.484
 Mean at day -1                0.8639       0.8639      0.8639        0.8639      0.0376         0.0376     0.0376        0.0376
 Socio-demographic controls                                              X                                                   X


Notes: The linear time trend is interacted with dummies for being surveyed before a type-a election
(U.S. bipartisan system or plurality voting rule) as opposed to a type-b election (multiparty system or
proportional rule). Dummies indicating the election type are not included to avoid multicollinearity
with the election fixed effects. The sample is defined as in Table 1 but excludes referenda. Other notes
as in Table 1.




                                                                58
     Table 5: Likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and vote share concentration

                         Support for         Support for            Support for            Vote share
                         challenger        small candidate         new candidate         concentration
                               (1)                 (2)                    (3)                   (4)
   Time                   0.00046              0.00038                 0.00006             -0.00021
                           (0.00017)           (0.00015)              (0.00004)             (0.00010)
   Observations             189733              190329                 187068                  3138
   R2                        0.081               0.089                  0.145                 0.932
   Mean at day -1           0.66015             0.14837                0.02083               0.33637

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively). In columns 1 to 3, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before
the election who said that they intended to vote and stated a vote intention different from voting blank
or null. Referenda are excluded. We define the outcomes as dummies equal to 1 if they intend to vote for
a challenger, a small candidate, or a new candidate, and use one observation per respondent. In column
4, we use one observation per election per day and compute vote share concentration based on all these
respondents (including referenda). We weight each observation by the number of respondents it was
constructed from, relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the
election. We control for election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the
pre-electoral survey took place.




                                                      59
                              Table 6: Drivers of vote choice formation
                                      (a) Mean vote choice consistency

                                                                (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
    Mean consistency in policy preferences                   -0.104                               -0.138
                                                             (0.116)                             (0.122)
    Mean consistency in issue salience                                    0.255                  0.247
                                                                          (0.097)                (0.097)
    Mean consistency in beliefs on candidates                                         0.133      0.125
                                                                                      (0.065)    (0.065)
    Observations                                              3129         3129       3129       3129
    R2                                                        0.807        0.809      0.808      0.810


                               (b) Mean probability of stating a vote intention

                                                                  (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)
   Mean probability of stating a policy preference               0.005                           -0.028
                                                                (0.152)                          (0.151)
   Mean probability of stating a salient issue                             0.200                 0.203
                                                                            (0.054)               (0.053)
   Mean probability of stating a belief on candidates                                 0.233      0.236
                                                                                       (0.077)    (0.076)
   Observations                                                  3144        3144      3144       3144
   R2                                                            0.840       0.840     0.841      0.841


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). We use one observation per election per day and we weight
each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number of
respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the election. In Panel a, mean vote choice consistency
is computed based on all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they intended
to vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration,
in the second. Mean policy preferences consistency, mean consistency in issue salience, and mean
consistency in beliefs on candidates are computed based on all respondent surveyed before and after the
election who stated a policy preference, a salient issue, or a belief on candidates in the second survey.
In Panel b, mean probability of stating a vote intention is computed based on all respondents surveyed
before the election who said that they intended to vote. Mean probability of stating a policy preference,
a salient issue, or a belief on candidates are computed based on all respondents surveyed before the
election. We control for election fixed effects, 60 fixed effects indicating the number of days relative
to the election, fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place, and
dummies indicating if mean consistency in policy preferences, issue salience or beliefs on candidates are
missing. In Panel a, we also control for the average number of days separating the post-electoral survey
from the election.




                                                     60
                         Table 7: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency

                                              Vote choice consistency   Vote intention      Conditional consistency
                                                (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
  Before -3                                   -0.014      -0.015         0.003     0.002    -0.015      -0.016
                                              (0.006)        (0.007)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.006)
  -3                                           -0.009         -0.010     0.003     0.003    -0.005        -0.006
                                              (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.006)      (0.007)
  -2                                           -0.001         -0.002     0.007     0.007    -0.004        -0.004
                                              (0.009)        (0.009)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.007)      (0.007)
  -1                                           -0.001         -0.002     0.005     0.005    -0.001        -0.002
                                              (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)      (0.006)
  +1                                           -0.009         -0.009     0.007     0.007    -0.008        -0.008
                                              (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)      (0.007)
  +2                                           -0.007         -0.008     0.002     0.001    -0.007        -0.008
                                              (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.007)      (0.007)
  +3                                           -0.006         -0.006     0.007     0.007    -0.006        -0.006
                                              (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  After +3                                     -0.002         -0.003     0.008     0.008    -0.005        -0.005
                                              (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  Observations                                263681         263681     330621    330621    240826       240826
  R2                                           0.072          0.077      0.069     0.076     0.042        0.044
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.811          0.811      0.896     0.896     0.887        0.887
  Number of debates                              56             56         56        56        56           56
  Sociodemographic controls                                      X                   X                       X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1    -0.004         -0.005     0.005     0.005    -0.003        -0.004
  .                                           (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      -0.007         -0.008     0.005     0.005    -0.007        -0.007
  .                                           (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.005)

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). For each debate and election, our estimation uses all respondents
in samples defined as in Table 1. We control for debate × election fixed effects as well as fixed effects
for the number of days relative to the election and for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral
survey took place. In columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 we also control for fixed effects for the number of days
separating the post-electoral survey from the election. Sociodemographic controls include education
(dummies indicating above high school education and college degree), gender, age, income quartiles,
and employment status. The mean value of the three pre-debate dummies and the mean value of the
three post-debate dummies are also reported, along with their standard errors.




                                                        61
                          Table 8: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares

                                                   Distance between predicted          Daily change in
                                                      and final vote shares         predicted vote shares
                                                      (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)
   Before -3                                        0.005            0.006           0.009        0.007
                                                   (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.006)      (0.006)
   -3                                              -0.001            0.000          -0.003       -0.004
                                                   (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.010)      (0.010)
   -2                                              -0.000            0.000           0.001       -0.001
                                                   (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.008)      (0.009)
   -1                                              -0.003            -0.002         0.013        0.012
                                                   (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.006)      (0.006)
   +1                                               0.002            0.002           0.008        0.006
                                                   (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.006)      (0.007)
   +2                                               0.000            0.001          0.022        0.021
                                                   (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.010)      (0.009)
   +3                                               0.001            0.002           0.011        0.009
                                                   (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.009)      (0.009)
   After +3                                         0.002            0.002           0.006        0.005
                                                   (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.005)      (0.005)
   Observations                                     3802              3802           3749         3749
   R2                                               0.575            0.581           0.470        0.477
   Mean, day of the debate                          0.046            0.046           0.085        0.085
   Number of debates                                  56               56              56           56
   Sociodemographic controls                                            X                           X
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1       -0.001            -0.000          0.004        0.002
   .                                               (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.007)      (0.007)
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3          0.001            0.002          0.014         0.012
   .                                               (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.008)      (0.008)

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively). We use one observation per election per day. In columns 1 and 2, vote
shares are computed based on the set of respondents used in Table 1, columns 7 and 8, and we weight
each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number
of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. In columns 3 and 4, vote shares are
computed based on the set of respondents used in Table 5, column 4, and we weight each observation by
the number of t and t-1 respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number of respondents
surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. We control for debate × election fixed effects as well
as fixed effects for the number of days relative to the election and for the day of the week in which the
pre-electoral survey took place. We also control for the average number of days separating the post-
electoral survey from the election in columns 1 and 2. Sociodemographic controls are averages of the
sociodemographic variables included in Table 7. The mean value of the three pre-debate dummies and
the mean value of the three post-debate dummies are also reported, along with their standard errors.




                                                      62
      Table 9: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency across debate and election types

                                            First vs.       Close vs.      Fluctuating vs.      U.S. vs.         Plurality vs.
                                           next debate   less-close race     stable race     other countries   proportional rule
                                               (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
  -3*type-b                                   -0.011        -0.009             -0.007             -0.014            -0.027
                                             (0.008)        (0.012)            (0.007)           (0.009)            (0.021)
  -2*type-b                                   0.007         -0.004              0.007             -0.004            -0.021
                                             (0.010)        (0.013)            (0.012)           (0.011)            (0.021)
  -1*type-b                                   0.003         -0.010              0.003             -0.002            -0.013
                                             (0.009)        (0.011)            (0.009)           (0.010)            (0.020)
  +1*type-b                                   -0.001        -0.008             -0.000             -0.015            -0.055
                                             (0.007)        (0.010)            (0.007)           (0.011)            (0.029)
  +2*type-b                                   -0.007         0.003             -0.005             -0.013            -0.044
                                             (0.010)        (0.013)            (0.010)           (0.011)            (0.023)
  +3*type-b                                   -0.006        -0.001             -0.006             -0.008            -0.027
                                             (0.007)        (0.010)            (0.006)           (0.008)            (0.019)
  -3*type-a                                   -0.010        -0.010             -0.016             0.002             -0.008
                                             (0.012)        (0.007)            (0.013)           (0.011)            (0.007)
  -2*type-a                                 -0.025          -0.000             -0.019             0.004             -0.000
                                             (0.011)        (0.011)            (0.011)           (0.012)            (0.010)
  -1*type-a                                   -0.016         0.003             -0.014             -0.002            -0.002
                                             (0.012)        (0.009)            (0.013)           (0.011)            (0.008)
  +1*type-a                                  -0.029         -0.009             -0.024             0.003             -0.003
                                             (0.016)        (0.010)            (0.015)           (0.012)            (0.007)
  +2*type-a                                   -0.012        -0.016             -0.012             0.004             -0.003
                                             (0.011)        (0.009)            (0.013)           (0.010)            (0.008)
  +3*type-a                                   -0.011        -0.010             -0.007             -0.002            -0.004
                                             (0.013)        (0.008)            (0.012)           (0.010)            (0.006)
  Observations                               263681         263681             263681            263681             263681
  R2                                          0.077           0.077             0.077             0.077               0.077
  Mean, day of the debate                     0.811           0.811             0.811             0.811               0.811
  Number of debates                             56              56                56                56                  56
  Sociodemographic controls                      X              X                 X                  X                  X
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-b       -0.000         -0.007             0.001             -0.007             -0.020
  .                                          (0.008)        (0.010)            (0.008)           (0.009)            (0.018)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-b      -0.004         -0.002            -0.003             -0.012           -0.042
  .                                          (0.006)        (0.009)            (0.006)           (0.008)            (0.015)
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-a       -0.017         -0.002            -0.016             0.001              -0.003
  .                                          (0.010)        (0.008)            (0.010)           (0.008)            (0.007)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-a      -0.017         -0.012            -0.014             0.002              -0.003
  .                                          (0.011)        (0.007)            (0.010)           (0.009)            (0.006)


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively). We interact the relative days dummies with indicators for type-a debate
or election (first debate, close race, fluctuating race, U.S. bipartisan system, and plurality rule) and type-
b debate or election (next debates, less-close race, more stable race, multiparty system, and proportional
rule). Dummies for being surveyed four days or more before or after the debate interacted with the
type-a and type-b indicators were included in the regressions but are not shown, for presentation clarity.
Other notes as in Table 7.




                                                             63
                   Table 10: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency across voter types
                                          Debate watchers vs.    Strong vs. weak       College degree vs.   Above median age   Male vs.    Above median income   Not employed vs.
                                            non-watchers        party identification   no college degree       vs. below       female           vs. below           employed
                                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                 (4)           (5)                (6)                (7)
 -3*type-b                                      -0.014                -0.006                -0.010               -0.017         -0.003           -0.004               -0.011
                                                (0.022)               (0.008)               (0.010)              (0.011)        (0.010)          (0.014)              (0.009)
 -2*type-b                                      -0.002                 0.018                -0.005               -0.009          0.012            0.010               -0.009
                                                (0.024)               (0.013)               (0.009)              (0.014)        (0.012)          (0.014)              (0.011)
 -1*type-b                                       0.010                 0.009                -0.004               -0.008          0.012           -0.002               -0.007
                                                (0.025)               (0.011)               (0.011)              (0.013)        (0.012)          (0.016)              (0.009)
 +1*type-b                                      -0.032                 0.007                -0.009               -0.021         -0.002            0.010               -0.017
                                                (0.022)               (0.009)               (0.009)              (0.013)        (0.012)          (0.015)              (0.012)
 +2*type-b                                      -0.016                 0.001                -0.020                -0.004        -0.000            -0.012               -0.013
                                                (0.016)               (0.012)               (0.011)              (0.013)        (0.015)          (0.015)              (0.008)
 +3*type-b                                       0.015                 0.012                -0.011               -0.008          0.002           -0.011               -0.009
                                                (0.021)               (0.009)               (0.009)              (0.010)        (0.012)          (0.017)              (0.010)
 -3*type-a                                      -0.002                -0.008                -0.007               -0.004         -0.016           -0.004               -0.005
                                                (0.012)               (0.009)               (0.008)              (0.012)        (0.010)          (0.010)              (0.014)
 -2*type-a                                      -0.014                -0.025                 0.008                0.003        -0.016             -0.000               0.005
                                                (0.012)               (0.013)               (0.012)              (0.010)       (0.009)           (0.012)              (0.013)
 -1*type-a                                      -0.022                -0.017                 0.010                0.002        -0.017             0.003                0.009
                                                (0.013)               (0.010)               (0.010)              (0.010)        (0.008)          (0.010)              (0.014)
 +1*type-a                                       0.004                -0.020                 0.004                0.002        -0.016             -0.003               0.002
                                                (0.013)               (0.011)               (0.011)              (0.009)       (0.009)           (0.011)              (0.010)
 +2*type-a                                       0.005               -0.028                 0.013                 -0.011       -0.016             0.002               -0.010
                                                (0.010)               (0.013)               (0.007)              (0.011)       (0.008)           (0.010)              (0.014)
 +3*type-a                                      -0.015                -0.029                 -0.005               -0.004       -0.014             -0.009               -0.005
                                                (0.012)               (0.015)               (0.010)              (0.007)       (0.007)           (0.008)              (0.014)
 Observations                                    85235                217168                214383               262830          263584          205284              219659
 R2                                              0.095                 0.096                 0.072                0.077           0.077           0.069               0.085
 Mean, day of the debate                         0.810                 0.817                  0.817               0.811           0.811           0.816                0.807
 Number of debates                                 28                    41                     50                  56              56              50                  47
 Sociodemographic controls                         X                     X                      X                   X               X               X                    X
 Average pre-debate dummies for type-b          -0.002                 0.007                 -0.006              -0.011           0.007           0.001               -0.009
 .                                              (0.021)               (0.009)               (0.009)              (0.012)         (0.010)         (0.013)             (0.008)
 Average post-debate dummies for type-b         -0.011                 0.007                -0.013               -0.011          -0.000          -0.004              -0.013
 .                                              (0.012)               (0.008)               (0.008)              (0.010)         (0.011)         (0.014)             (0.007)
 Average pre-debate dummies for type-a          -0.013                -0.017                  0.004               0.001         -0.016           -0.001               0.003
 .                                              (0.010)               (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.009)         (0.007)         (0.009)             (0.012)
 Average post-debate dummies for type-a         -0.002               -0.026                   0.004               -0.005       -0.015            -0.003               -0.004
 .                                              (0.010)               (0.012)               (0.007)              (0.007)         (0.005)         (0.008)             (0.011)



Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). We interact the relative days dummies with indicators for type-a
voter (debate watcher, voter with strong party identification, with a college degree, above the median
age, male, above the median income, and not employed) and type-b voter (non-debate watcher, voter
with weak or no party identification, without college degree, below the median age, female, below the
median income, and employed) and also control for the dummy for being a type-a voter, uninteracted.
Dummies for being surveyed four days or more before or after the debate interacted with the type-a
and type-b indicators were included in the regressions but are not shown, for presentation clarity. Other
notes as in Table 7.




                                                                                        64
Appendix to "How Do Campaigns Shape Vote Choice?" (Le Pennec and Pons) - For

Online Publication


  · Appendix A: Additional Information on the Data

      ­ Appendix A.1: Data References and Links to Surveys

      ­ Appendix A.2: Survey Selection

      ­ Appendix A.3: Definition of Key Variables

      ­ Appendix A.4: Sampling Frame

  · Appendix B: Additional Results

      ­ Appendix B.1: Formation of Vote Choice: Additional Results

      ­ Appendix B.2:    Formation of Beliefs, Policy Preferences, and Issue Salience:

        Additional Results

      ­ Appendix B.3: Impact of TV Debates: Additional Results

  · Appendix C: Additional Robustness Checks

      ­ Appendix C.1: Rolling Cross-sections

      ­ Appendix C.2: Sociodemographic Controls

      ­ Appendix C.3: Wild Cluster Bootstrap Standard Errors

      ­ Appendix C.4: Standard Errors Adjusted for Clustering at the Election Date Level

      ­ Appendix C.5: Including Unlikely Voters

      ­ Appendix C.6: Event Study with Five-Day Window

      ­ Appendix C.7: Event Study with Balanced Panel on Three-Day Window




                                           1
A     Additional Information on the Data

A.1   Data References and Links to Surveys

    The references for the nationally representative surveys included in the sample and the

links at which the corresponding data can be downloaded are as follows.


Austrian National Election Studies (AUTNES):

    2013: Kritzinger, Sylvia; Zeglovits, Eva; Aichholzer, Julian; Glantschnigg, Christian;

Glinitzer, Konstantin; Johann, David; Thomas, Kathrin; Wagner, Markus (2017): AUTNES Pre-

and Post Panel Study 2013. GESIS Data Archive, Cologne. ZA5859 Data file Version 2.0.1,

doi:10.4232/1.12724.

    This dataset can be downloaded at: https://www.autnes.at/en/data-download/.


British Election Studies (BES):

    2001: Clarke, H. et al., British General Election Study, 2001; Cross-Section Survey.

Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive [distributor], March 2003.

    2010: Whiteley, P.F. and Sanders, D., British Election Study, 2010: Face-to-Face Survey.

Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive [distributor], August 2014.

    2015: Fieldhouse, E., J. Green., G. Evans., H. Schmitt, C. van der Eijk, J. Mellon and C.

Prosser (2015) British Election Study Internet Panel Wave 5. DOI: 10.15127/1.293723.

    2016: Evans, G., E. Fieldhouse., J. Green., H. Schmitt, C., van der Eijk., J. Mellon and C.

Prosser (2016) British Election Study Internet Panel Wave 8 (2016 EU Referendum Study, Daily

Campaign Survey). DOI: 10.15127/1.293723.

    These            datasets           can            be           downloaded              at:

https://www.britishelectionstudy.com/data/#.XRlYB-hKhPY.


Canadian Election Studies (CES):

    1988: Johnston, Richard, et al. Canadian Election Study, 1988 [Computer file]. Toronto,

Canada: Institute for Social Research [producer], 1989.      Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university

Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1990.

    1992-1993: Johnston, Richard, Andre Blais, Henry Brady, Elisabeth Gidengil, and Neil

Nevitte. Canadian Election Study 1993: Incorporating the 1992 Referendum Survey on the

Charlottetown Accord [Computer file]. ICPSR version. Vancouver, British Columbia: Richard

Johnston, University of British Columbia/Montreal, Quebec: Andre Blais, University of

                                               2
Montreal/Berkeley, CA: Henry Brady, University of California at Berkeley/Montreal, Quebec:

Elisabeth Gidengil, McGill University/Calgary, Alberta: Neil Nevitte, University of Calgary

[producers], 1995.    Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social

Research [distributor], 1995.

   1997: Blais, Andre, Elisabeth Gidengil, Richard Nadeau, and Neil Nevitte. Canadian

Election Study, 1997 [Computer file]. 3rd ICPSR version. Toronto, Ontario: York University,

Institute for Social Research [producer], 1997. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for

Political and Social Research [distributor], 2000.

   2000: Blais, Andre, Elisabeth Gidengil, Richard Nadeau, and Neil Nevitte. Canadian

Election Study, 2000 [Computer file]. ICPSR version. Toronto, Ontario: York University,

Institute for Social Research [producer], 2000. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consorti-um

for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2004.

   2004-2011: Fournier, Patrick, Fred Cutler, Stuart Soroka and Dietlind Stolle. 2011. The 2004-

2011 Canadian Election Study. [dataset].

   2015: Fournier, Patrick, Fred Cutler, Stuart Soroka and Dietlind Stolle. 2015. The 2015

Canadian Election Study. [dataset].

   These             datasets             can            be          downloaded              at:

https://ces-eec.arts.ubc.ca/english-section/surveys/.


Dutch Parliamentary Election Studies (DPES):

   1998: M. Kamp, (Universiteit Twente); C.W.A.M. Aarts (Universiteit Twente); H. van der

Kolk (Universiteit Twente); J.J.A. Thomassen (Universiteit Twente); Stichting Kiezersonderzoek

Nederland (SKON)(1998): Nationaal Kiezersonderzoek, NKO 1998. DANS.

   2002: G.A. Irwin (University of Leiden); J.J.M. Holsteyn (University of Leiden); J.M. den

Ridder (University of Leiden); Stichting Kiezersonderzoek Nederland (SKON) (2003):

Nationaal Kiezersonderzoek, NKO 2002 2003. DANS.

   2006: Kolk, Dr. H. van der (Universiteit Twente); Aarts, Prof.dr. C.W.A.M. (Universiteit

Twente); Rosema, Dr. M. (Universiteit Twente); Stichting Kiezersonderzoek Nederland (SKON)

(2006): Nationaal Kiezersonderzoek, NKO 2006. DANS.

   These datasets can be downloaded at:

   https://www.surveydata.nl/browse-our-data/repository/dutch-parliamentary-election-

studies-28.



                                                 3
German Longitudinal Election Studies (GLES):

    2009: Rattinger, Hans; Roßteutscher, Sigrid; Schmitt-Beck, Rüdiger; Weßels, Bernhard

(2011): Rolling Cross-Section Campaign Survey with post- election Panel Wave (GLES 2009).

GESIS Data Archive, Co-logne. ZA5303 Data file Version 6.0.0, doi: 10.4232/1.11604.

    2013: Rattinger, Hans; Roßteutscher, Sigrid; Schmitt-Beck, Rüdiger; Weßels, Bernhard; Wolf,

Christof (2014): Rolling Cross-Section Cam-paign Survey with Post-election Panel Wave (GLES

2013). GESIS Data Archive, Cologne. ZA5703 Data file Version 2.0.0, doi: 10.4232/1.11892.

    2017: Roßteutscher, Sigrid; Schoen, Harald; Schmitt-Beck, Rüdiger; Weßels, Bernhard;

Wolf, Christof; Staudt, Alexander (2019): Rolling Cross-Section Campaign Survey with

Post-election Panel Wave (GLES 2017). GESIS Data Archive, Cologne: ZA6803 Data file

Version 4.0.1, 10.4232/1.13213.

    These            datasets            can            be            downloaded              at:

https://www.gesis.org/en/elections-home/gles/data/.

Italian National Election Studies (ITANES):

    2013: Vezzoni, Cristiano. (2014). Italian National Election Survey 2013: A further step in a

consolidating tradition. Rivista Italiana di Scienza Politica. 2014. 81-108. 10.1426/76399.

    This dataset can be downloaded at: http://www.itanes.org/en/.

Swiss Electoral Studies (SELECTS):

    2011: Selects: Swiss national election studies, Rolling Cross-Section (RCS) - 2011 [Dataset].

Distributed by FORS, Lausanne, 2012. www.selects.ch https://doi.org/10.23662/FORS-DS-

596-.

    2015: Selects: Panel / Rolling cross-section study - 2015 [Dataset]. Distributed by FORS,

Lausanne, 2016. www.selects.ch.

    These datasets can be downloaded at: https://forscenter.ch/projects/selects/.

New Zealand Election Studies (NZES):

    1996: Vowles, J, Banducci, S, Karp, J, Aimer, P, Catt, H, Miller, R, and Denemark, D. 1996.

New Zealand Election Study, 1990 [computer file].

    1999: Vowles, J, Banducci, S, and Karp, J. 1999. New Zealand Election Study, 1999 [computer

file].

    2002: Vowles, J, Banducci, S, Karp, J, Aimer, P, and Miller, M. 2002. New Zealand Election

Study, 2002 [computer file].

                                                4
   These datasets can be downloaded at: http://www.nzes.org/.


Swedish National Election Studies (SNES):

   2014: Boije, Edvin, Oscarsson, Henrik & Maria Oskarson (2016) The 2014 CSM campaign

panel study. Dataset. University of Gothenburg: Swedish National Election Studies, The

Department of Political Science.

   This dataset can be downloaded at: https://valforskning.pol.gu.se/.


American National Election Studies (ANES):

   1952: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political

Research. The data were originally collected by Angus Campbell, Gerald Gurin, and Warren

Miller. Neither the original collectors of the data nor the consortium bear any responsibility

for the analyses or interpretations presented here.

   1956: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political

Research. The data for the SRC 1956 American National Election Study were origi-nally

collected by the Survey Research Center of the Institute for So-cial Research, the University of

Michigan under a grant from the Rock-efeller Foundation. Neither the original collectors of

the data nor the consortium bear any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations

presented here.

   1960: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political

Research. The data for the Survey Research Center 1960 American National Election Study

were originally collected by Angus Campbell, Philip Converse, Warren Miller, and Donald

Stokes. Neither the original collectors of the data nor the consortium bear any responsibility

for the analyses or interpretations presented here.

   1964: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political

Research. The data were originally collected by the Survey Research Center Political Behavior

Program. Neither the original collectors of the data nor the consortium bear any responsibility

for the analyses or interpretations presented here.

   1968: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political

Research. The data for the SRC 1968 American National Election Study were origi-nally

collected by the Political Behavior Program of the Survey Re-search Center, Institute for Social

Research, the University of Michi-gan. Neither the original collectors of the data nor the

consortium bear any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations presented here.


                                               5
   1972: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political

Research. The data for the CPS 1972 American National Election Study were origi-nally

collected by the Center for Political Studies of the Institute for Social Research, the University

of Michigan under grants from the Na-tional Science Foundation and the National Institute

for Mental Health. Neither the original collectors of the data nor the consortium bear any

responsibility for the analyses or interpretations presented here.

   1976: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and

Social Re-search. The data for the CPS 1976 American National Election Study were originally

collected by the Center for Political Studies of the Insti-tute for Social Research, the University

of Michigan under a grant from the National Science Foundation.             Neither the original

collectors of the data nor the consortium bear any responsibility for the analyses or

in-terpretations presented here.

   1980: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and

Social Re-search. The data for the American National Election Study, 1980, were originally

collected by the Center for Political Studies of the Institute for Social Research, the University

of Michigan, for the National Elec-tion Studies, under the overall direction of Warren E.

Miller; Maria Elena Sanchez was director of studies in 1980. The data were collected under a

grant from the National Science Foundation. Neither the origi-nal collectors of the data nor

the consortium bear any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations presented here.

   1984: The data were made available by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and

Social Re-search. The data for the American National Election Study, 1984, were originally

collected by the Center for Political Studies of the Institute for Social Research, the University

of Michigan, for the National Elec-tion Studies, under the overall direction of Warren E. Miller;

Santa Traugott was director of studies in 1984. The data were collected under a grant from the

national science foundation. Neither the collector of the original data nor the consortium bears

any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations presented here.

   1988: Miller, Warren E., and the National Election Studies. American National Election

Study, 1988: Pre- and Post-Election Survey computer file. Ann Arbor, MI: Center for Political

Studies, University of Michigan, 1989 original producer. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-university

Consor-tium for Political and Social Research, 1989 producer and distributor.

   1992: Miller, Warren E., Donald R. Kinder, Steven J. Rosenstone, and the National Election

Studies. American National Election Study, 1992: Pre- and Post-election sruvey [Computer


                                                6
file]. Conducted by University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies. ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor,

MI: University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies, and Inter-university Consortium for

Political and Social Research [producers], 1993. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium

for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1993.

   1996: The National Election Studies (www.umich.edu/~nes). The 1996 National Election

Study [dataset]. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies [producer

and distributor].

   2000: Burns, Nancy, Donald R. Kinder, Steven J. Rosenstone, Virginia Sapiro, and the

National Election Studies. National Election Studies, 2000:Pre-/Post-election Study [dataset].

Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-versity of Michigan, Center for Political Studies [producer and

distributor], 2001.

   2004: The National Election Studies (www.umich.edu/~nes). THE 2004 National Election

Study [dataset]. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies [producer

and distributor]. These materials are based on work supported by the National Science Foun-

dation under grant SES-0118451, and the University of Michigan. Any opinions, findings and

conclusions or recommendations expressed in these materials are those of the author(s) and do

not necessarily reflect the views of the funding organizations.

   2008:   Arthur Lupia, Jon A. Krosnick, Pat Luevano, Matthew DeBell, and Darrell

Donakowski. 2009. User's Guide to the ANES 2008 Time Series Study. Ann Arbor, MI and

Palo Alto, CA: the University of Michigan and Stanford University.

   2012: ANES. 2014. User's Guide and Codebook for the ANES 2012 Time Series Study. Ann

Arbor, MI and Palo Alto, CA: the University of Michigan and Stanford University.

   2016: The American National Election Studies.         These materials are based on work

supported by the National Science Foundation under grant numbers SES 1444721, 2014-2017,

the University of Michigan, and Stanford University.

   These datasets can be downloaded at: https://electionstudies.org/data-center/.

National Annenberg Election Surveys (NAES):

   2000-2004: Romer, Daniel, et al. Capturing campaign dynamics, 2000 and 2004: The

national Annenberg election survey. University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006.

   2008: Johnston, Richard. "Modeling campaign dynamics on the web in the 2008 National

Annenberg Election Study." Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 18.4 (2008): 401-

412.

                                                 7
   These             datasets            can            be            downloaded               at:

https://www.annenbergpublicpolicycenter.org/political-communication/naes/.


A.2   Survey Selection

   As discussed in Section 2.1, our study only includes surveys showing a sufficiently high

similarity between respondents surveyed on different dates. Rolling cross-sections satisfy this

criterion by design. In these surveys, a random subsample of respondents is drawn from the

overall sample on each day. Those who are not successfully reached are either not contacted

again (for instance in the BES), or contacted again along with randomly drawn new

respondents over the next few days, following a consistent rule (e.g., all respondents are

contacted for up to seven days before being removed from the pool in AUTNES 2013). In the

latter case, each daily sample combines both easy-to-reach and hard-to-reach respondents.

Apart from the very first days, where hard-to-reach respondents tend to be underrepresented,

all daily samples are comparable in terms of both observed and unobserved respondents'

characteristics.

   To increase statistical power, we complemented our sample of rolling cross-sections with

surveys that were not designed as rolling cross-sections but showed a sufficiently high

similarity between respondents surveyed on different dates nonetheless (in addition to

satisfying the two other criteria laid out in the main text). To assess the comparability of daily

samples in these surveys, we tested for differences in mean sociodemographic characteristics

(education, age, gender, income, and employment status) for any pair of daily samples. We

excluded surveys for which we reject the null hypothesis of no difference in mean

characteristics more than 15% of the times, a benchmark defined based on the rolling-cross

sections. Surveys from the Cooperative Congressional Election Studies (in the U.S.) and the

Israel National Election Studies were excluded because they violated this condition. Instead,

surveys from the American National Election Studies, the Dutch Parliamentary Election

Studies, the New Zealand Election Studies and the Swedish National Election Studies passed

this test and were included in the study.

   All of the surveys entail interviewing a new set of respondents every day until the election,

with two minor exceptions. First, some surveys do not interview anyone on weekends and

holidays. Second, all surveys end one day before Election Day, except for AUTNES 2013 and

ANES 1952, which end two days before.


                                                8
A.3     Definition of Key Variables

A.3.1    Main outcomes

Vote intention: Categorical variable indicating which candidate or party the respondent

intends to vote for.

   · This variable is constructed from questions in the pre-electoral survey of the type: "Who

        do you think you will vote for? Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump, Gary Johnson, Jill Stein,

        or someone else?" (ANES 2016) or "Which constituency candidate of which party will

        you give your first vote to in the federal election?" (GLES 2009).

   · Possible values include answers of the type "blank" (for respondents who say they intend

        to vote blank or null) or "don't know" (for respondents who say they do not know whom

        they will vote for).

   · The variable is set to missing for respondents who mention a candidate or party which

        does not appear among answers to the post-electoral vote choice question. We take the

        fact that they do not appear among answers to the post-electoral vote choice question as

        a sign that this option was not proposed in the post-electoral survey, so that comparing

        the respondent's pre-election vote intention and post-electoral vote choice would be

        uninformative. This rule also applies to answers of the type "other" (for respondents

        who state they intend to vote for another candidate or party) or "blank" (for

        respondents who state they intend to vote blank or null): we set the variable to missing

        for the answers "other" or "blank" when these answers do not appear among answers

        to the post-electoral vote choice question.

   · When an answer "other" is available both in the pre- and post-electoral surveys, we keep

        it and treat it as a unique party. In that case, we also give the value "other" to respondents

        who say they intend to vote for small candidates who do not appear in the post-electoral

        survey.

   · This variable is set to missing for people who respond "I will not vote" instead of naming

        a candidate or party.

   · This variable, and all variables described below, are set to missing for respondents who

        refused to answer the question.

Vote choice: Categorical variable indicating which candidate or party the respondent voted

for.


                                                   9
   · This variable is constructed from questions in the post-electoral survey of the type: "Who

     did you vote for? Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump, Gary Johnson, Jill Stein, or someone

     else?" (ANES 2016) or "Which constituency candidate of which party did you give your

     first vote to?" (GLES 2009).

   · Possible values include answers of the type "blank" (for respondents who report that

     they voted blank or null).

   · The variable is set to missing for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.

   · The variable is set to missing for respondents who mention a candidate or party which

     does not appear among answers to the pre-electoral vote intention question, for the

     same reason as mentioned above. This rule also applies to answers of the type "other"

     (for respondents who report they voted for another candidate or party) or "blank" (for

     respondents who report they voted blank or null): we set the variable to missing for the

     answers "other" or "blank" when these answers do not appear among answers to the

     pre-electoral vote intention question.

   · When an answer "other" is available both in the pre- and post-electoral surveys, we keep

     it and treat it as a unique party. In that case, we also give the value "other" to respondents

     who report they voted for small candidates who do not appear in the pre-electoral survey.

   · This variable is set to missing for people who respond "I did not vote" instead of naming

     a candidate or party.

Turnout intention: Dummy equal to 1 if the respondent intends to vote, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is constructed from questions in the pre-electoral survey of the type: "Many

     people vote at elections. Others don't get around to voting or don't take part in the

     election for other reasons. The next federal election will be held on 27 September. What

     will you do? Are you certain to vote, likely to vote, might you vote, or are you not likely

     or certain not to vote?" (GLES 2009) or "How about the election for President? Do you

     intend to vote for a candidate for President?" (ANES 2016).

   · When the question in the survey proposes a range of answers, from answers of the type

     "certain not to vote" or 0 on a scale from 0 to 10, to answers of the type "certain to vote" or

     10 on the 0-10 scale, the variable is set to 1 for respondents who give the highest answer

     (respondents who intend to vote with certainty) and to 0 for respondents who give any

     other answer, including respondents who say that they may vote but are not certain they

     will. This rule has the advantage of being easily applicable in a uniform way to surveys


                                                10
     with very different response scales. In addition, in the vast majority of surveys, even the

     share of respondents who give the highest answer exceeds actual turnout by a substantial

     amount. In few surveys (e.g., ANES 1952-1968), the variable is set to 1 for respondents

     who give either the highest or the second highest answer ("yes, definitely" or "yes") as a

     very small share of respondents give the highest answer ("yes, definitely").

   · When possible, this variable is specific to each ballot (in surveys asking questions about

     multiple ballots, e.g., the first and second vote in Germany) or to each office (in surveys

     asking questions about multiple offices, e.g., presidential and gubernatorial elections in

     the U.S.). The variable is then set to 0 both for respondents who do not intend to vote

     in the overall election and for those who intend to vote but not for that specific ballot or

     office.

   · The variable is set to 0 for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.

   · The variable is also set to 0 for people who respond "I will not vote" to the vote intention

     question, regardless of their answer to the turnout intention question.

Turnout declaration: Dummy equal to 1 if the respondent voted, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is constructed from questions in the post-electoral survey of the type:

     "Many voters didn't get around to voting or did not participate in the federal election on

     27 September for other reasons. What about you? Did you vote or not?" (GLES 2009) or

     "In talking to people about elections, we often find that a lot of people were not able to

     vote because they weren't registered, they were sick, or they just didn't have time.

     Which of the following statements best describes you: One, I did not vote (in the election

     this November); Two, I thought about voting this time, but didn't; Three, I usually vote,

     but didn't this time; or Four, I am sure I voted?" (ANES 2016).

   · This variable is set to missing for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.

   · This variable is set to 0 for people who respond "I did not vote" to the vote choice

     question, regardless of their answer to the turnout declaration question.

Certainty of vote intention: Numerical variable from 0 to 1 indicating how certain the

respondent is to vote for the candidate or party they intend to vote for.

   · This variable is constructed from questions asked in the pre-electoral survey of the type:

     "How certain are you that you would vote for this party?" (BES 2016), "Will you

     definitely vote for George W. Bush for president, or is there a chance you could change



                                               11
        your mind and vote for someone else?" (NAES 2004), or "Would you say that your

        preference for this candidate is strong or not strong?" (ANES 1996).

   · When the certainty question in the survey proposes more than two answers ("certain" or

        "not certain"), this variable is normalized to range from 0 (for respondents who are not

        certain at all that they will vote for the candidate or party they intend to vote for) to 1 (for

        respondents who are certain they will vote for the candidate or party they intend to vote

        for).

   · This variable is set to missing for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.

   · It is also set to missing for people who responded "I don't know" to the vote intention

        question.


A.3.2     Special cases

   Early voters: Some countries allow people to vote before Election Day, by casting their

ballot in-person at a polling place or by mailing their ballot. In our sample, pre-electoral

survey respondents were asked whether they voted early and for whom in the following

surveys: AUTNES 2013, BES 2016, CES 2004-15, SELECTS 2011-15, GLES 2009-13, NAES

2000-08, ANES 2012-16. In some surveys, these questions were asked to all respondents; and

in others, only to respondents surveyed sufficiently close to the election. Differently from

other voters, early voters' pre-electoral answers report their actual vote choice, not their vote

intention.      In addition, their vote choice consistency is mechanically very high, as their

pre-electoral vote intention is identical to their post-electoral vote choice, provided that they

do not misrecall or misreport whom they voted for in any of the two surveys. Nonetheless, we

keep early voters in the sample and treat the vote choice they report in the pre-electoral

survey similarly to other respondents' vote intention. The reason is, first, that their high vote

choice consistency adequately reflects the fact that they have already arrived at their final

choice by the time in which they receive the pre-electoral survey. In fact, they felt sufficiently

certain about it that they casted their ballot ahead of time. Second, the share of respondents

who report they voted early naturally increases over time. But early voters likely differ from

other voters on many dimensions, including the time at which they reach their final vote

decision. Dropping them could therefore generate sample selection issues. Our treatment of

early voters includes the following rules:

   · Turnout intention is set to 1 for all early voters.


                                                   12
   · Certainty of vote intention is set to 1 for all early voters, except those who say that they do

        not know whom they voted for, in which case certainty of vote intention is set to missing.

   · When early voters are not asked whether they voted and whom they voted for in the

        post-electoral survey, we set the post-electoral turnout declaration of these respondents

        equal to 1, and their post-electoral vote choice equal to their recorded pre-electoral vote

        choice.

Unlikely voters: The vote intention variable is defined for all respondents who were asked this

question, including those who are not certain that they will vote. In several surveys, likely and

unlikely voters are asked separate questions, of the type "Which political party will you give

your vote to in the federal election?" for respondents likely to vote and "Which political party

would you vote for, assuming you voted at all?" for unlikely voters (GLES 2009). Our vote

intention variable combines answers to both questions.

Undecided voters: In the BES 2001-15 surveys, pre-electoral survey respondents are asked

whether they have already decided whom they will vote for before being asked whom they

intend to vote for. For instance, BES 2001 first asks "If you do vote in the general election,

have you decided which party you will vote for, or haven't you decided yet?" Voters who

answer "yes" to that question are then asked "Which party is that?" while undecided voters

who answer "no" are then asked "Which party do you think you are most likely to vote for?"

Our vote intention variable combines answers to both of these questions. In BES 2016, CES

1988-2015, SELECTS 2011-15, NZES 1996-2002, and DPES 1998-2002, respondents who answer

"I don't know" to the vote intention question are asked a second question of the type "Which

party would you be most likely to vote for?" (NZES 1996). These respondents' answer would

be treated as "don't know" in surveys that ask a single question. Therefore, to ensure that we

treat vote intentions homogeneously across all surveys, we ignore their answer to the second

question.


A.3.3    Policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates

Pre-electoral policy preference: Numerical variable indicating the respondent's position on a

policy issue before the election.

   · This variable is constructed from questions about policy issues or policy proposals that

        allow for a range of answers ordered from one extreme position (e.g., "I do not agree



                                                 13
      at all" or "I am very unfavorable") to the opposite extreme position (e.g., "I agree very

      much" or "I am very favorable").

   · This variable is constructed from questions that were asked both in the pre- and the

      post-electoral surveys, using the same wording and admitting the same answers in both

      surveys. The full list of policy questions included in our analysis is available in Table

      A.3.

   · In some surveys (e.g., GLES 2009 or CES 1988), the variable combines answers to several

      versions of the same policy question that are asked to different subsamples of

      respondents.

   · Possible values include answers of the type "don't know" (for respondents who state

      they do not have a preferred position on the issue).

Post-electoral policy preference: Numerical variable indicating the respondent's preferred

position on a specific policy issue after the election.

   · The variable is set to missing for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.

Pre-electoral most important issue: Categorical variable indicating which issue the respondent

considers the most important before the election.

   · This variable is constructed from questions that ask respondents to choose from a closed

      list of issues or from open-ended questions that allow respondents to provide their own

      answer.     We only use questions of the latter type if respondents' answers were

      aggregated into a finite number of issues ex post in the survey data. We further aggregate

      respondents' answers into 10 larger categories: economic policy (e.g., 'inflation'), social

      policy (e.g., 'abortion'), foreign policy (e.g., 'Iraq war'), public safety (e.g., 'crime and

      violence'), civil rights (e.g., 'civil liberties'), moral values (e.g., 'decline of tradition'),

      institutions (e.g., 'country stability'), politics (e.g., 'integrity in politics'), electoral issues

      (e.g., 'low turnout'), and other.

   · Possible values include answers of the type "don't know" (for respondents who state

      they do not know which issue they find the most important).

   · We also include answers of the type "no issue" (for respondents who state that they do

      not find any issue important) or "other issue" (for respondents who mention an issue that

      is not on the list). These "no issue" and "other issue" answers are assigned to the "other"

      category.



                                                   14
Pre-electoral most important issue: Categorical variable indicating which issue the respondent

considers the most important after the election.

   · The variable is set to missing for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.

Pre-electoral belief on candidate: Variable indicating the respondent's belief about candidates'

or parties' positions on specific policy issues and/or candidates' or parties' quality, before the

election.

   · This variable is constructed from questions of two different types:

          1. Numerical questions, which ask respondents to choose from a range of answers

             ordered from one extreme (e.g., "this party is very unfavorable to this policy

             proposal" or "this party is very incompetent") to the other (e.g., "this party is very

             favorable to this policy proposal" or "this party is very competent").

          2. Categorical questions, which ask respondents to choose from the list of candidates

             or parties in the race, e.g., to identify which one would be the best to address the

             issue they deem the most important, or which one has a certain position on the issue

             of immigration.

   · This variable is constructed from questions that were asked both in the pre- and the post-

        electoral surveys, using the same wording and allowing for the same list of answers. The

        full list of belief questions included in our analysis is available in Table A.4.

   · Possible values include answers of the type "don't know" (for respondents who state

        they do not know the answer to the question).

   · For questions of the second type, we also include answers of the type "no party" or "all

        parties".

Post-electoral belief on candidate:          Variable indicating the respondent's belief about

candidates' or parties' positions on specific policy issues and/or candidates' or parties'

quality, after the election.

   · The variable is set to missing for people who respond "I don't know" to the question.


A.3.4    Sociodemographic characteristics

Gender: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent is a man, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable, and all other sociodemographic characteristics, is constructed from

        questions asked in the pre-electoral survey. If the characteristic was not recorded in the



                                                   15
     pre-electoral survey, we use questions asked in surveys that preceded the pre-electoral

     survey (in studies that survey respondents over multiple waves before the election) or

     questions asked in the post-electoral survey.

   · This variable, and all other sociodemographic characteristics, is set to missing for people

     who respond "other" to the question.

Age: Respondent's age in number of years.

   · One survey (ANES 1956) records age brackets instead of exact age in years. For that

     survey, the variable is set to the median age within each bracket. We use ANES surveys

     conducted in previous and following election years (1952 and 1960) to determine the

     median age among respondents selecting into the youngest bracket (below 21 years old)

     and the oldest bracket (65 years old and older).

More education than high school: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has completed

more education than high school, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is constructed from questions of the type: "At what age did you finish full-

     time education?" (BES 2001) or "What is the highest level of education that you have

     completed?" (CES 2015).

College degree: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has a college degree, and 0

otherwise.

Income quartiles: Dummy variables (one for each quartile) equal to 1 if the respondent's

income falls into the first (resp. second, third, and fourth) quartile of the income distribution

(among respondents from the same survey), and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is constructed from questions of the type: "What is your total household

     income before taxes for the year 2014?" (CES 2015) or "How would you assess your

     current income situation? Would you say that you get along very well, get along well, get

     along with difficulty, get along with great difficulty?" (AUTNES 2013).

Employment status: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has a full-time or part-time

employed job or is self-employed, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is constructed from questions of the type: "Which of the following best

     describes your current situation?" (AUTNES 2013) or "We'd like to know if you are

     working now, or are you unemployed, retired, permanently disabled, a housewife, a

     student or what?" (ANES 1976). We do not use questions of the type: "Are you currently

                                               16
        unemployed?", which give the same value to people who are currently employed and

        people outside the labor force.

   · This variable is set to 0 for respondents who are currently enrolled as students or retired,

        even if they state they have a paid job as well.


A.3.5    Media consumption, campaign exposure, and political engagement

Newspapers: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent's consumption of newspapers is

high, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable, and, unless specified, all other variables in this subsection, are constructed

        from questions asked in the pre-electoral survey exclusively.

   · When possible, this variable is constructed from questions specific to political news of

        the type: "How often do you inform yourself about political events in Austria through

        newspapers?"     (AUTNES 2013).       When specific questions are unavailable, we use

        questions about general news.

   · Some surveys ask respondents how frequently they read newspapers and how much

        attention they pay to political news in newspapers (e.g., NAES). In this case, the

        newspapers variable is set to 0 for respondents who never read newspapers and for

        respondents who read newspapers but do not pay any attention to political news.

   · In many surveys, media questions propose more than two answers, from answers of the

        type "never" or "not at all" (for respondents who never read newspapers and/or who

        do not pay attention to political news in newspapers) to answers of the type "every day"

        or "a lot" (for respondents who read newspapers everyday and/or pay a lot of attention

        to political news in newspapers). When the possible number of answers K is even, the
                                                                                       K
        newspapers variable is set to 1 for respondents who provide one of the         2    highest

        answers, and 0 otherwise.         When the possible number of answers K is odd, the
                                                                                     K -1
        newspapers variable is set to 1 for respondents who provide one of the        2     highest

        answers, and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is typically constructed from questions that ask respondents about their

        consumption of newspapers offline. However, for surveys conducted in the most recent

        election years, it is likely that respondents answer the newspaper question with both

        offline and online newspapers in mind. In a few surveys, the variable is constructed from

        questions that explicitly ask respondents about their consumption of newspapers both


                                                  17
     offline and online (e.g., BES 2016: "During the last seven days, on average how much

     time (if any) have you spent per day following news about politics or current affairs from

     newspapers (including online)?").

TV News: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent's consumption of TV news is high,

and 0 otherwise.

   · This variable is constructed from questions specific to news programs exclusively. We do

     not use questions that ask respondents about their consumption of other TV programs

     such as sport and entertainment.

   · Like for newspapers, some surveys ask respondents how frequently they watch TV

     news programs and how much attention they pay to political news on TV (e.g., NAES).

     In this case, the TV news variable is set to 0 for respondents who never watch TV, for

     respondents who never watch news programs on TV, and for respondents who watch

     news programs on TV but say that they do not pay any attention to political news.

Radio news: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent's consumption of radio news is

high, and 0 otherwise.

Online news: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent's consumption of online news is

high, and 0 otherwise.

   · The variable is constructed from questions that ask respondents about their consumption

     of online news, broadly defined. In a few surveys, it is constructed from questions that

     ask about the respondent's consumption of news on Internet sites, excluding newspapers

     (e.g., BES 2016). In others, it is constructed from questions that ask about the respondent's

     consumption of online newspapers (e.g., ANES 2004).

Contact by campaign: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has recently been

contacted by a candidate's or party's campaign, and 0 otherwise.

   · The variable is constructed from questions that ask respondents if they have recently been

     contacted by any candidate, party member, or campaign activist, of the type: "In the past

     week, were you contacted in person or by telephone by any of the local candidates or

     party workers in your riding?" (CES 1992).

   · When the survey specifies the mean of communication used by the candidate's or party's

     campaign to contact the respondent, the variable is constructed from questions referring

     to contact by mail, email, phone call, text message, and home visit. We exclude questions


                                               18
     that ask respondents if they proactively engaged with a candidate's or party's campaign

     themselves, e.g., by attending a meeting or visiting a campaign office.

   · When respondents are asked multiple contact questions, one for each candidate or party

     in the race, the variable is set to 0 for respondents who give a negative answer to all

     questions.

Visit by campaign: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has recently been visited at

home by a candidate's or party's campaign, and 0 otherwise.

Polls: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has seen elections polls recently, and 0

otherwise.

Political discussions: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent reports a high propensity

to discuss politics with others in the recent period, and 0 otherwise.

   · The variable is constructed from questions of the type: "During the last week, roughly on

     how many days did you talk about politics with other people?" (BES 2015).

   · In many surveys, the discussion question proposes more than two answers, from

     answers of the type "never" or "not at all" (for respondents who never discuss politics

     with others) to answers of the type "every day" or "a lot" (for respondents who discuss

     politics with others very often). When the possible number of answers K is even, the
                                                                                       K
     discussion variable is set to 1 for respondents who provide one of the            2   highest

     answers, and 0 otherwise. When the possible number of answers K is odd, the variable
                                                          K -1
     is set to 1 for respondents who provide one of the    2     highest answers, and 0 otherwise.

Party identification: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent strongly identifies with a

party, and 0 otherwise.

   · Unlike other variables described in this section, the party identification variable is

     constructed from questions asked in the post-electoral survey exclusively.

   · In many surveys, the question that asks respondents how strongly they identify with a

     party is preceded by a question that asks respondents which party they identify with. The

     variable on party identification strength is set to 0 for people who respond "no party" or

     ­ in the U.S. ­ "independent" to the former question.

   · In many surveys, the party identification question proposes more than two answers,

     from answers of the type "no party identification" or "not strong at all" (for respondents

     who do not strongly identify with a party) to answers of the type "very strong" (for


                                               19
      respondents who strongly identify with a party). When the possible number of answers

      K is even, the party identification variable is set to 1 for respondents who provide one of
            K
      the   2   highest answers, and 0 otherwise. When the possible number of answers K is
                                                                                     K -1
      odd, the variable is set to 1 for respondents who provide one of the            2     highest

      answers, and 0 otherwise.

Debate watching: Dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has watched TV debates

during the campaign, and 0 otherwise.

   · Unlike other variables described in this section, the debate watching variable is

      constructed from questions asked in the post-electoral survey exclusively.

   · The variable is constructed from questions that ask respondents (after the election) if they

      watched a specific TV debate or TV debates in general during the campaign. It is set to 0

      for respondents who have not watched any debate during the campaign.


A.4   Sampling Frame

   This section provides the full list of elections, surveys, policy and belief questions, parties,

and TV debates included in our analysis.




                                               20
                                                Table A.1: List of elections by country


                                                                     (a) United States

  Survey      Election date     Election type    Voting rule     # days before election   N pre-election      N pre- and post-election    Post-election: median lag

ANES 1952      11/4/1952         Governor         Plurality               50                    753                     610                          19

ANES 1952      11/4/1952        Lower House       Plurality               50                   1230                     888                          19

ANES 1952      11/4/1952         President        Plurality               50                   1333                    1108                          19

ANES 1952      11/4/1952        Upper House       Plurality               50                    934                     694                          19

ANES 1956      11/6/1956         President        Plurality               50                   1304                    1155                          21

ANES 1960      11/8/1960         President        Plurality               57                    943                     836                          23

ANES 1964      11/3/1964         President        Plurality               57                   1410                    1190                          22

ANES 1968      11/5/1968         President        Plurality               60                   1302                    1026                          19

ANES 1972      11/7/1972         President        Plurality               67                   2117                    1535                          22

ANES 1976      11/2/1976         President        Plurality               46                   1522                    1138                          17

ANES 1980      11/4/1980         President        Plurality               90                   1196                     896                          18

ANES 1984      11/6/1984         President        Plurality               63                   1807                    1336                          11

ANES 1988      11/8/1988         President        Plurality               63                   1615                    1170                          13

ANES 1992      11/3/1992         President        Plurality               63                   2040                    1609                          27

ANES 1996      11/5/1996        Lower House       Plurality               63                   1316                     945                          12

ANES 1996      11/5/1996         President        Plurality               63                   1460                    1107                          12

ANES 2000      11/7/2000         President        Plurality               63                   1523                    1121                          14

ANES 2004      11/2/2004         President        Plurality               56                   1045                     804                          11

ANES 2008      11/4/2008         President        Plurality               63                   1925                    1500                          14

ANES 2012      11/6/2012         Governor         Plurality               58                    191                     132                          20

ANES 2012      11/6/2012        Lower House       Plurality               58                   1312                    1001                          20

ANES 2012      11/6/2012         President        Plurality               58                   1631                    1290                          20

ANES 2012      11/6/2012        Upper House       Plurality               58                    971                     772                          20

ANES 2016      11/8/2016         Governor         Plurality               62                    461                     339                          11

ANES 2016      11/8/2016        Lower House       Plurality               62                   2988                    2117                          11

ANES 2016      11/8/2016         President        Plurality               62                   3589                    2665                          11

ANES 2016      11/8/2016        Upper House       Plurality               62                   2187                    1469                          11

NAES 2000      11/7/2000         President        Plurality               112                  3156                    2765                          15

NAES 2004      11/2/2004         President        Plurality               110                  7351                    6771                          26

NAES 2008      11/4/2008         President        Plurality               67                  21093                    15777                         27




                                                                          (b) Austria

   Survey       Election date    Election type     Voting rule     # days before election    N pre-election    N pre- and post-election    Post-election: median lag

AUTNES 2013      9/29/2013       Lower House       Proportional                55                2441                    1555                         18




                                                                   (c) United Kingdom

Survey      Election date     Election type     Voting rule    # days before election     N pre-election   N pre- and post-election       Post-election: median lag

BES 2001     6/7/2001         Lower House        Plurality               30                   2737                     2024                           4

BES 2010     5/6/2010         Lower House        Plurality               29                   10701                    9004                           2

BES 2015     5/7/2015         Lower House        Plurality               38                   25917                    23250                          3

BES 2016     6/23/2016        Referendum         Yes/No                  48                   29175                    23653                          3




                                                                                21
                                                                            (d) Canada

 Survey     Election date     Election rype     Voting rule      # days before election     N pre-election       N pre- and post-election       Post-election: median lag

CES 1988    11/21/1988       Lower House          Plurality                48                      3043                     2125                             24

CES 1992    10/26/1992        Referendum           Yes/No                  32                      1781                     1431                             9

CES 1993    10/25/1993       Lower House          Plurality                45                      2916                     2347                             12

CES 1997     6/2/1997        Lower House          Plurality                36                      2671                     1869                             14

CES 2000    11/27/2000       Lower House          Plurality                34                      2405                     1606                             19

CES 2004     6/28/2004       Lower House          Plurality                36                      2607                     1794                             26

CES 2006     1/23/2006       Lower House          Plurality                55                      2754                     2120                             14

CES 2008    10/14/2008       Lower House          Plurality                18                      2149                     1485                             8

CES 2011     5/2/2011        Lower House          Plurality                37                      2849                     2126                             16

CES 2015    10/19/2015       Lower House          Plurality                69                      7606                     4863                             11




                                                                         (e) Netherlands

 Survey      Election date     Election type      Voting rule      # days before election      N pre-election      N pre- and post-election       Post-election: median lag

DPES 1998      5/6/1998       Lower House         Proportional               39                     1771                     1501                            16

DPES 2002      5/15/2002      Lower House         Proportional               31                     1805                     1468                            12

DPES 2006    11/22/2006       Lower House         Proportional               43                     2382                     2133                            7




                                                                           (f) Germany

 Survey     Election date         Election type          Voting rule     # days before election     N pre-election     N pre- and post-election    Post-election: median lag

GLES 2009    9/27/2009       Lower House - 1st vote       Plurality                    60                 4479                  3009                             8

GLES 2009    9/27/2009       Lower House - 2nd vote     Proportional                   60                 4531                  3089                             8

GLES 2013    9/22/2013       Lower House - 1st vote       Plurality                    76                 6131                  4122                             8

GLES 2013    9/22/2013       Lower House - 2nd vote     Proportional                   76                 6217                  4211                             8

GLES 2017    9/24/2017       Lower House - 1st vote       Plurality                    62                 6185                  3426                             6

GLES 2017    9/24/2017       Lower House - 2nd vote     Proportional                   62                 6257                  3505                             6




                                                                         (g) Switzerland

   Survey       Election date     Election type      Voting rule      # days before election    N pre-election       N pre- and post-election     Post-election: median lag

SELECTS 2011     10/23/2011      Lower House        Proportional                41                    2777                    2214                            4

SELECTS 2015     10/18/2015      Lower House        Proportional                62                    5094                    4355                            2




                                                                            (h) Sweden

 Survey     Election date       Election type         Voting rule      # days before election     N pre-election     N pre- and post-election     Post-election: median lag

SNES 2014    05/25/2014      European Parliament     Proportional                 11                  14096                    12565                          1

SNES 2014    09/14/2014         Lower House          Proportional                 12                  14426                    13212                          1




                                                                                  22
                                                                      (i) New Zealand

   Survey    Election date        Election type        Voting rule    # days before election   N pre-election   N pre- and post-election    Post-election: median lag

 NZES 1996   10/12/1996       Lower House - 1st vote     Plurality              37                 2100                  1925                          24

 NZES 1996   10/12/1996      Lower House - 2nd vote    Proportional             37                 2093                  1944                          24

 NZES 1999   11/27/1999       Lower House - 1st vote     Plurality              40                 2211                  2074                          23

 NZES 1999   11/27/1999      Lower House - 2nd vote    Proportional             40                 2217                  2131                          23

 NZES 2002      7/27/2002     Lower House - 1st vote     Plurality              36                 2068                  1973                         N/A

 NZES 2002      7/27/2002    Lower House - 2nd vote    Proportional             36                 2073                  1987                         N/A




                                                                           (j) Italy

    Survey       Election date   Election type    Voting rule    # days before election   N pre-election    N pre- and post-election       Post-election: median lag

  ITANES 2013     2/24/2013      Lower House      Proportional             50                   1658                   1478                           31



Notes: The surveys included in the study are the American National Election Studies (ANES), the
National Annenberg Election Surveys (NAES), the Austrian National Election Studies (AUTNES), the
British Election Studies (BES), the Canadian Election Studies (CES), the Dutch Parliamentary Election
Studies (DPES), the German Longitudinal Election Studies (GLES), the Italian National Election Studies
(ITANES), the Swiss Electoral Studies (SELECTS), the New Zealand Election Studies (NZES), and the
Swedish National Election Studies (SNES). In New Zealand and Sweden, Lower House refers to the only
house in the country's unicameral parliament. Other columns report how many days before Election
Day the survey started, the number of respondents who said that they intended to vote (N pre-election),
and the number of respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they intended to
vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the
second (N pre- and post-election). We also report the median number of days separating the post-
electoral survey from the election.




                                                                             23
                                Table A.2: List of surveys by country
                                                   (a) United States
                               RCS     Sociodemographic    Media       Contact        Party         Political    Watching
  Survey      Survey mode
                              design        factors     consumption    by party   identification   discussions   debates
 ANES 1952     Face-to-face    No            All              None      None           No              No          No
 ANES 1956     Face-to-face    No            All              None      None           No              No          No
 ANES 1960     Face-to-face    No            All              None      None           Yes             No          Yes
 ANES 1964     Face-to-face    No            All              None      None           No              No          No
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 1968                     No           Some              None      None           No              No          No
                  Mail
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 1972                     No            All              None      None           No              No          No
                  Mail
 ANES 1976     Face-to-face    No            All              None      None           No              No          Yes
 ANES 1980     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           Yes             No          Yes
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 1984                     No            All              Some      None           Yes            Yes          Yes
                 Phone
 ANES 1988     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           No             Yes          No
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 1992                     No           Some              None      None           No              No          No
                 Phone
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 1996                     No            All              Some      None           Yes             No          No
                 Phone
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 2000                     No            All              Some      None           No              No          Yes
                 Phone
 ANES 2004     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           No              No          No
 ANES 2008     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           No              No          No
 ANES 2012     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           Yes             No          No
              Face-to-face/
 ANES 2016                     No           Some              Some      None           No              No          No
                 Online
 NAES 2000       Phone         Yes           All              Some      None           Yes            Yes          Yes
 NAES 2004       Phone         Yes           All              Some      None           Yes            Yes          Yes
 NAES 2008    Phone/Online     Yes           All              Some      None           Yes             No          No




                                                     (b) Austria
                               RCS     Sociodemographic    Media       Contact        Party         Political    Watching
  Survey      Survey mode
                              design        factors     consumption    by party   identification   discussions   debates
AUTNES 2013      Phone         Yes           All              Some       All           No              No          No




                                                   (c) Netherlands
                               RCS     Sociodemographic    Media       Contact        Party         Political    Watching
  Survey      Survey mode
                              design        factors     consumption    by party   identification   discussions   debates
              Face-to-face/
 DPES 1998                     No            All              Some      None           No              No          Yes
                 Phone
 DPES 2002     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           No              No          Yes
 DPES 2006     Face-to-face    No            All              Some      None           No              No          Yes




                                                    (d) Germany
                               RCS     Sociodemographic    Media       Contact        Party         Political    Watching
  Survey      Survey mode
                              design        factors     consumption    by party   identification   discussions   debates
 GLES 2009       Phone         Yes          Some              Some      Some           Yes            Yes          Yes
 GLES 2013       Phone         Yes          Some              Some      Some           Yes            Yes          Yes
 GLES 2017        Phone        Yes          Some              Some      Some           Yes            Yes          Yes




                                                         24
                                                         (e) Canada
                                   RCS     Sociodemographic    Media      Contact        Party         Political    Watching
      Survey      Survey mode
                                  design        factors     consumption   by party   identification   discussions   debates
     CES 1988        Phone         Yes           All              Some     None           Yes            Yes          Yes
     CES 1992        Phone         Yes           All              Some     None           No              No          Yes
     CES 1993        Phone         Yes           All              Some     Some           Yes            Yes          Yes
     CES 1997        Phone         Yes           All              Some     None           Yes            Yes          Yes
     CES 2000        Phone         Yes           All              Some      All           No             Yes          Yes
     CES 2004        Phone         Yes           All              Some      All           Yes            Yes          Yes
     CES 2006        Phone         Yes           All               All     None           Yes            Yes          No
     CES 2008        Phone         Yes           All              None     None           Yes             No          No
     CES 2011        Phone         Yes           All              None     None           Yes             No          No
     CES 2015     Phone/Online     Yes           All              None     None           Yes             No          No




                                                       (f) Switzerland
                                   RCS     Sociodemographic    Media      Contact        Party         Political    Watching
      Survey      Survey mode
                                  design        factors     consumption   by party   identification   discussions   debates
   SELECTS 2011      Phone         Yes           All              Some     None           No             Yes          No
   SELECTS 2015      Phone         Yes           All              Some     None           Yes            Yes          No




                                                           (g) Italy
                                   RCS     Sociodemographic    Media      Contact        Party         Political    Watching
      Survey      Survey mode
                                  design        factors     consumption   by party   identification   discussions   debates
   ITANES 2013     Face-to-face    Yes          Some              Some     Some           No              No          No




                                                       (h) New Zealand
                                   RCS     Sociodemographic    Media      Contact        Party         Political    Watching
      Survey      Survey mode
                                  design        factors     consumption   by party   identification   discussions   debates
    NZES 1996     Phone/Mail       Yes           All              None     None           Yes             No          No
    NZES 1999        Phone         Yes           All              Some     Some           Yes             No          No
    NZES 2002        Phone         No            All              Some     None           Yes            Yes          No




                                                         (i) Sweden
                                   RCS     Sociodemographic    Media      Contact        Party         Political    Watching
      Survey      Survey mode
                                  design        factors     consumption   by party   identification   discussions   debates
    SNES 2014        Online        No            All              None     None           No              No          No
    SNES 2014        Online        No            All              None      All           No              No          Yes




                                                  (j) United Kingdom
                                   RCS     Sociodemographic    Media      Contact        Party         Political    Watching
      Survey      Survey mode
                                  design        factors     consumption   by party   identification   discussions   debates
     BES 2001         Phone        Yes          Some              Some     None           Yes             No          No
     BES 2010        Online        Yes          Some              None      All           Yes             No          No
     BES 2015        Online        Yes           All              Some      All           Yes            Yes          No
     BES 2016        Online        Yes           All              Some      All           Yes            Yes          No




Notes: For each survey included in the study, we indicate: which survey mode was used; whether the
survey is a rolling cross-section; whether all, some, or none of the selected sociodemographic factors and
variables on media consumption, contact by a party, and the respondent's propensity to discuss politics
with others are available in the pre-electoral survey; and whether information on party identification
and watching TV debates is available in the post-electoral survey. Other notes as in Table A.1.



                                                             25
                Table A.3: List of policy questions by country
                                       (a) United States

Survey   Year    Question

                 Some people believe a change in our whole form of government is needed to solve the problems
ANES     1972    facing our country, while others feel no real change is necessary. Do you think a big change is
                 needed in our form of government, or should it be kept pretty much as it is?

                 Some people feel that the government in Washington should see to it that every person has a job
                 and a good standard of living. Suppose that these people are at one end of this scale ­ at point
                 number 1. Others think the government should just let each person get ahead on his own.
ANES     1976
                 Suppose that these people are at the other end -- at point number 7. And, of course, some other
                 people have opinions in between. Where would you place yourself on this scale, or haven't you
                 thought much about this?

NAES     2004    Making recent federal tax cuts permanent ­ do you favor or oppose this?

                 Do you favor or oppose increasing the $5.15 minimum wage employers now must pay their
NAES     2004
                 workers?

                 As far as you know, has the No Child Left Behind education law made American public schools
NAES     2004
                 much better, somewhat better, somewhat worse, much worse, or hasn't it made a difference?

                 The federal government helping to pay for health insurance for all children ­ do you favor or
NAES     2004
                 oppose this?

                 The federal government helping employers pay the cost of their workers' health insurance ­ do
NAES     2004
                 you favor or oppose this?

                 Who do you think will benefit more from the new Medicare prescription drug plan ­ seniors on
NAES     2004
                 Medicare or the drug manufacturers?

                 Changing the recently passed Medicare prescription drug law to allow re-importing drugs from
NAES     2004
                 Canada ­ do you favor or oppose this?

                 Do you favor or oppose allowing workers to invest some of their Social Security contributions in
NAES     2004
                 the stock market?

                 Do you think the US should keep military troops in Iraq until a stable government is established
NAES     2004
                 there, or do you think the U.S. should bring its troops home as soon as possible?

NAES     2004    Laws making it more difficult for a woman to get an abortion ­ do you favor or oppose this?

                 Making additional stem cell lines from human embryos available for federally funded research
NAES     2004
                 on diseases like Parkinson's ­ do you favor or oppose this?

                 Would you favor or oppose an amendment to the U.S. Constitution saying that no state can
NAES     2004
                 allow two men to marry each other or two women to marry each other?

NAES     2004    Extending the federal law banning assault weapons ­ do you favor or oppose this?

                 The government placing limits on how much people could collect when a jury finds that a doctor
NAES     2004
                 has committed medical malpractice ­ do you favor or oppose this?

                 I'm going to read you some options about federal income taxes. Please tell me which one comes
                 closest to your view on what we should be doing about federal income taxes: Taxes should be
NAES     2008
                 cut. Taxes should be kept pretty much as they are. Taxes should be raised if necessary in order to
                 maintain current federal programs and services.

                 Do you favor or oppose the federal government in Washington negotiating more free trade
NAES     2008
                 agreements like NAFTA?

                 I'm going to read you some plans for United States policy in Iraq. Please tell me which one
                 comes closest to your own position: The US should withdraw all troops from Iraq as soon as
NAES     2008    possible. The US should set a deadline for withdrawing its troops if the Iraqi government
                 doesn't show definite progress. The US should keep its troops in Iraq until a stable government
                 is established.




                                              26
                                   (b) United States (cont.)

Survey   Year   Question

NAES     2008   All in all, do you think the situation in Iraq was worth going to war over, or not?

                I'm going to read you a proposal some have made regarding immigration. Please tell me
                whether you strongly favor, somewhat favor, somewhat oppose, or strongly oppose it: provide a
NAES     2008
                path to citizenship for some illegal aliens who agree to return to their home country for a period
                of time and pay substantial fines.

                I'm going to read you a proposal some have made regarding immigration. Please tell me
NAES     2008   whether you strongly favor, somewhat favor, somewhat oppose, or strongly oppose it: increase
                border security by building a fence along part of the US border with Mexico.

                Please tell me which of the following statements about abortion comes closest to your own view:
                Abortion should be available to anyone who wants it. Abortion should be available, but with
NAES     2008   stricter limits than it is now. Abortion should not be permitted except in cases of rape, incest, or
                when the life of the woman is at risk. Abortion should not be permitted under any
                circumstances.

                There has been much talk recently about whether gays and lesbians should have the legal right
                to marry someone of the same sex. Which of the following options comes closest to your
NAES     2008   position on this issue? I support full marriage rights for gay and lesbian couples. I support civil
                unions or domestic partnerships, but not gay marriage. I do not support any form of legal
                recognition of the relationships of gay and lesbian couples.




                                          (c) Sweden

Survey   Year   Question

                What is your opinion on the following proposal that has appeared in the political debate:
SNES     2014
                introducing a grade in order and behavior at school?




                                    (d) United Kingdom

Survey   Year   Question

                Thinking of the Single European Currency, which of the following statements on this card would
 BES     2001
                come closest to your own view?

                Some people feel that Britain should do all it can to unite fully with the European Union. Other
 BES     2016   people feel that Britain should do all it can to protect its independence from the European Union.
                Where would you place yourself on this scale?

                Some people think that the UK should allow many more immigrants to come to the UK to live
 BES     2016   and others think that the UK should allow many fewer immigrants. Where would you place
                yourself on this scale?

                In politics people sometimes talk of left and right. Where would you place yourself on the
 BES     2016
                following scale?




                                              27
                                                     (e) Germany

    Survey        Year     Question

                           Some people would like to see lower taxes even if that means some reduction in health,
                           education and social benefits; others would like to see more government spending on health,
     GLES         2009
                           education and social benefits even if it means some increases in taxes. How would you describe
                           your own views on this issue?

                           How would you describe your views on the issue of nuclear energy? Should more nuclear
     GLES         2009
                           power stations be built or should all nuclear power stations be closed down today?

                           To what extent do you agree with the statement: "The German Armed Forces should be pulled
     GLES         2009
                           out of Afghanistan immediately"?

                           And what do you think of the following statements: "Immigrants should be obliged to
     GLES         2013
                           assimilate into the German culture"?

                           And what do you think of the following statements: "The government should take measures to
     GLES         2013
                           reduce the discrepancies in income"?

                           And what do you think of the following statements: "In times of the European debt crisis,
     GLES         2013     Germany should provide financial support for the EU member states with financial and
                           economic difficulties"?

                           And what do you think of the following statements: "The government should take meausres to
     GLES         2017
                           reduce discrepancies in income"?

                           And what do you think of the following statements: "Germany should provide financial support
     GLES         2017
                           for EU member states experiencing financial and economic difficulties"?

                           In politics people sometimes talk of left and right. Where would you place yourself on a scale
     GLES         2017
                           from 1 to 11 where 1 means the left and 11 means the right?




                                                     (f) Canada

    Survey        Year     Question

                           Now we would like to get your views on abortion. We know that this is a sensitive question. Of
     CES          1988     the following three positions, which is closest to your own opinion: abortion should never be
                           permitted or should be a matter of the woman's personal choice?

                           Now I would like to ask you about the Meech Lake Accord, reached by the federal and
     CES          1988
                           provincial governments. Do you support the accord or oppose it?

                           As we have already mentioned, the government has made a number of changes to the tax
     CES          1988
                           system. On the whole, do you support or oppose these changes?

                           Do you agree or disagree with the proposal to recognize the right of Canada's aboriginal peoples
     CES          1992
                           to govern themselves?

                           Quebec has been guaranteed one quarter of the seats in the House of Commons. Do you agree or
     CES          1992
                           disagree with this proposal?

     CES          1992     Do you agree or disagree with the proposal to recognize Quebec as a distinct society?

                           If you had to choose, should each province have an equal number of Senators or should bigger
     CES          1992
                           provinces have more Senators?

     CES          1992     Does the agreement give the Senate too much, too little, or about the right amount of power?



Notes: We report the exact wording of all policy questions included in the study, based on the survey
codebooks. These questions were asked using the same wording and proposed the same range of
answers in the pre- and post-electoral surveys. Other notes as in Table A.1.



                                                          28
                Table A.4: List of belief questions by country
                                      (a) United States

Survey   Year   Question

                Some people feel that the government in Washington should see to it that every person has a job
                and a good standard of living. Suppose that these people are at one end of this scale ­ at point
ANES     1976   number 1. Others think the government should just let each person get ahead on his own.
                Suppose that these people are at the other end ­ at point number 7. And, of course, some other
                people have opinions in between. Where would you place the Democratic Party on this scale?

ANES     1976   Where would you place the Republican Party on this scale?

ANES     1976   Where would you place Gerarl Ford on this scale?

ANES     1976   Where would you place Jimmy Carter on this scale?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors making the recent tax cuts permanent ­ George W.
NAES     2004
                Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors eliminating tax breaks for overseas profits of
NAES     2004   American corporations and using the money to cut corporate income taxes ­ George W. Bush,
                John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, which candidate favors increasing the $5.15 minimum wage
NAES     2004
                employers must pay their workers ­ George W. Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors the federal government helping to pay for health
NAES     2004   insurance for all children and helping employers pay the cost of the workers' health insurance ­
                George W. Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors changing the recently passed Medicare prescription
NAES     2004   drug law to allow re-importing drugs from Canada ­ George W. Bush, John Kerry, both, or
                neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, which candidate favors allowing the federal government to
NAES     2004   negotiate with drug companies for lower prescription drug prices for senior citizens ­ George W.
                Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors allowing workers to invest some of their Social
NAES     2004
                Security contributions in the stock market ­ George W. Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors reinstating the military draft ­ George W. Bush, John
NAES     2004
                Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who favors laws making it more difficult for a woman to get an
NAES     2004
                abortion ­ George W. Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, which candidate wants to make additional stem cell lines from
NAES     2004   human embryos available for federally funded research on diseases like Parkinson's ­ George W.
                Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who urges Congress to extend the federal law banning assault
NAES     2004
                weapons ­ George W. Bush, John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, which candidate favors placing limits on how much people can
NAES     2004   collect when a jury finds that a doctor has committed medical malpractice ­ George W. Bush,
                John Kerry, both, or neither?

                To the best of your knowledge, who is a former prosecutor ­ George W. Bush, John Kerry, both,
NAES     2004
                or neither?




                                                29
                                   (b) United Kingdom

Survey   Year   Question

 BES     2010   Which party is best able to handle the issue you find the most important?

 BES     2010   How well do you think the Labour government has handled Britain's education system?

 BES     2010   How well do you think the Labour government has handled immigration?

 BES     2010   How well do you think the Labour government has handled the National Health Service?

 BES     2010   How well do you think the Labour government has handled the current financial crisis?

 BES     2010   How well do you think the Labour government has handled the economy in general?

 BES     2010   How well do you think the Labour government has handled the level of taxation?

 BES     2015   Which party is best able to handle the issue you find the most important?

                How well do you think Conservatives are able to handle the single most important issue facing
 BES     2015
                the country?

 BES     2015   What about the Labour Party?

 BES     2015   What about the Liberal Democrats?

 BES     2015   What about UKIP?

 BES     2015   What about the Green Party?

                Some people think that the UK should allow many more immigrants to come to the UK to live
 BES     2016   and others think that the UK should allow many fewer immigrants. Where would you place the
                Conservative party on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the Labor party on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the Liberal Democrats on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the SNP on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place Plaid Cymru on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place UKIP on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the Greens on this scale?

                Some people feel that Britain should do all it can to unite fully with the European Union. Other
 BES     2016   people feel that Britain should do all it can to protect its independence from the European Union.
                Where would you place the Conservative Party on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the Labour party on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the Liberal Democrats on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place SNP on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place Plaid Cymru on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place UKIP on this scale?

 BES     2016   And where would you place the Greens on this scale?




                                              30
                                          (c) Austria

Survey   Year   Question

AUTNES   2013   Party best able to handle the issue you find the most important?

AUTNES   2013   Party with best proposals: financial and euro crisis?

AUTNES   2013   Party with best proposals: education?

AUTNES   2013   Party with best proposals: unemployment?

AUTNES   2013   Party with best proposals: immigration?

AUTNES   2013   Party with best proposals: fighting corruption?

AUTNES   2013   Party with most statements: financial and euro crisis?

AUTNES   2013   Party with most statements: education?

AUTNES   2013   Party with most statements: unemployment?

AUTNES   2013   Party with most statements: immigration?

AUTNES   2013   Party with most statements: fighting corruption?




                                        (d) Germany

Survey   Year   Question

 GLES    2009   And which political party do you think is best able to solve the issue you find most important?

                In your view, using a scale from 1 to 11, what is the position of the CDU on this socioeconomic
 GLES    2009
                dimension?

                In your view, using a scale from 1 to 11, what is the position of the SPD on this socioeconomic
 GLES    2009
                dimension?

                In your view, using a scale from 1 to 11, what is the position of the FDP on this socioeconomic
 GLES    2009
                dimension?

                In your view, using a scale from 1 to 11, what is the position of the Green Party on this
 GLES    2009
                socioeconomic dimension?

                In your view, using a scale from 1 to 11, what is the position of the Die Linke on this
 GLES    2009
                socioeconomic dimension?

 GLES    2009   In your view, what is the position of the CDU on the use of nuclear energy?

 GLES    2009   In your view, what is the position of the SPD on the use of nuclear energy?

 GLES    2009   In your view, what is the position of the FDP on the use of nuclear energy?

 GLES    2009   In your view, what is the position of the Green Party on the use of nuclear energy?

 GLES    2009   In your view, what is the position of Die Linke on the use of nuclear energy?

 GLES    2013   And which political party do you think is best able to solve the issue you find most important?

 GLES    2017   And which political party do you think is best able to solve the issue you find most important?




                                              31
                                                  (e) Switzerland

    Survey        Year     Question

                           In your opinion, which party is the best qualified to resolve the issue you find the most
   SELECTS        2011
                           important?




                                                    (f) Canada

    Survey        Year     Question

     CES          2004     Do you happen to recall which party is promising to get rid of the gun registry?

     CES          2004     Which party is promising to do away with the Federal Sales Tax on family essentials?

     CES          2004     Which party is promising to increase military spending by 2 billion dollars each year?

     CES          2004     Which party is promising to spend 250 million for fighting AIDS in poor countries?

                           Do you happen to recall which party is promising to spend 4 billion dollars to reduce waiting
     CES          2004
                           times for surgeries?

     CES          2004     Which party is promising an inheritance tax on estates over 1 million dollars?



Notes: We report the exact wording of all belief questions included in the study, based on the survey
codebooks. These questions were asked using the same wording and proposed the same list of answers
in the pre- and post-electoral surveys. Other notes as in Table A.1.




                                                        32
                        Table A.5: List of parties and candidates by country
                                       (a) United States 1952-1996
Election date   Election type               Candidate                Incumbent   Small   New

 4-Nov-52        Governor                Democratic Party              N/A        No     No
 4-Nov-52        Governor                Republican Party              N/A        No     No
 4-Nov-52       Lower House              Democratic Party               Yes       No     No
 4-Nov-52       Lower House              Republican Party               No        No     No
 4-Nov-52        President                Adlai Stevenson               Yes       No     No
 4-Nov-52        President             Dwight D. Eisenhower             No        No     No
 4-Nov-52       Upper House              Democratic Party               No        No     No
 4-Nov-52       Upper House              Republican Party               No        No     No
 6-Nov-56        President                Adlai Stevenson               No        No     No
 6-Nov-56        President             Dwight D. Eisenhower             Yes       No     No
 8-Nov-60        President                John F. Kennedy               No        No     No
 8-Nov-60        President                Richard Nixon                 Yes       No     No
 3-Nov-64        President               Lyndon B. Johnson              Yes       No     No
 3-Nov-64        President                Barry Goldwater               No        Yes    No
 5-Nov-68        President               Hubert Humphrey                Yes       No     No
 5-Nov-68        President                Richard Nixon                 No        No     No
 5-Nov-68        President                George Wallace                No        Yes    No
 7-Nov-72        President               George McGovern                No        No     No
 7-Nov-72        President                Richard Nixon                 Yes       No     No
 7-Nov-72        President                John G. Schmitz               No        Yes    No
 2-Nov-76        President                 Jimmy Carter                 No        No     No
 2-Nov-76        President                  Gerald Ford                 Yes       No     No
 2-Nov-76        President               Eugene McCarthy                No        Yes    No
 2-Nov-76        President                Lester Maddox                 No        Yes    No
 4-Nov-80        President                 Jimmy Carter                 Yes       No     No
 4-Nov-80        President                Ronald Reagan                 No        No     No
 4-Nov-80        President               John B. Anderson               No        Yes    No
 6-Nov-84        President                Walter Mondale                No        No     No
 6-Nov-84        President                Ronald Reagan                 Yes       No     No
 8-Nov-88        President               Michael Dukakis                No        No     No
 8-Nov-88        President                 George Bush                  Yes       No     No
 3-Nov-92        President                 George Bush                  Yes       No     No
 3-Nov-92        President                  Bill Clinton                No        No     No
 3-Nov-92        President                  Ross Perot                  No        Yes    No
 5-Nov-96       Lower House              Democratic Party               No        No     No
 5-Nov-96       Lower House              Republican Party               Yes       No     No
 5-Nov-96        President                  Bill Clinton                Yes       No     No
 5-Nov-96        President                   Bob Dole                   No        No     No
 5-Nov-96        President                  Ross Perot                  No        Yes    Yes




                                                  33
                                     (b) United States 2000-2016
Election date   Election type              Candidate                   Incumbent        Small   New

 7-Nov-00        President                  Al Gore                        Yes           No     No
 7-Nov-00        President              George W. Bush                     No            No     No
 7-Nov-00        President               Pat Buchanan                      No            Yes    No
 7-Nov-00        President               Ralph Nader                       No            Yes    No
 2-Nov-04        President                John Kerry                       No            No     No
 2-Nov-04        President              George W. Bush                     Yes           No     No
 2-Nov-04        President               Ralph Nader                       No            Yes    No
 4-Nov-08        President               Barack Obama                      No            No     No
 4-Nov-08        President                 Bob Barr                        No            Yes    No
 4-Nov-08        President               John McCain                       Yes           No     No
 4-Nov-08        President               Ralph Nader                       No            Yes    No
 6-Nov-12        Governor              Democratic Party               Varies by state    No     No
 6-Nov-12        Governor              Republican Party               Varies by state    No     No
 6-Nov-12       Lower House            Democratic Party                    No            No     No
 6-Nov-12       Lower House            Republican Party                    Yes           No     No
 6-Nov-12       Lower House             Independent(s)                     No            Yes    No
 6-Nov-12        President               Barack Obama                      Yes           No     No
 6-Nov-12        President               Mitt Romney                       No            No     No
 6-Nov-12       Upper House            Democratic Party                    Yes           No     No
 6-Nov-12       Upper House            Republican Party                    No            No     No
 8-Nov-16        Governor              Democratic Party               Varies by state    No     No
 8-Nov-16        Governor              Republican Party               Varies by state    No     No
 8-Nov-16       Lower House            Democratic Party                    No            No     No
 8-Nov-16       Lower House            Republican Party                    Yes           No     No
 8-Nov-16        President              Hillary Clinton                    Yes           No     No
 8-Nov-16        President              Donald Trump                       No            No     No
 8-Nov-16        President               Gary Johnson                      No            Yes    No
 8-Nov-16        President                  Jill Stein                     No            Yes    No
 8-Nov-16       Upper House            Democratic Party                    No            No     No
 8-Nov-16       Upper House            Republican Party                    Yes           No     No




                                               (c) Austria
Election date   Election type               Candidate                   Incumbent       Small   New

 29-Sep-13      Lower House      Alliance for the Future of Austria         No           Yes    No
 29-Sep-13      Lower House         Freedom Party in Carinthia              No           Yes    No
 29-Sep-13      Lower House               Freedom Party                     No           No     No
 29-Sep-13      Lower House             Communist Party                     No           Yes    No
 29-Sep-13      Lower House     The New Austria and Liberal Forum           No           Yes    Yes
 29-Sep-13      Lower House          Austrian People's Party                No           No     No
 29-Sep-13      Lower House                Pirate Party                     No           Yes    Yes
 29-Sep-13      Lower House          Social Democratic Party                Yes          No     No
 29-Sep-13      Lower House               Team Stronach                     No           Yes    Yes
 29-Sep-13      Lower House     The Greens - The Green Alternative          No           No     No




                                                    34
                                         (d) United Kingdom
Election date   Election type               Candidate               Incumbent   Small   New

  7-Jun-01      Lower House             Conservative Party             No        No     No
  7-Jun-01      Lower House                Green Party                 No        Yes    No
  7-Jun-01      Lower House               Labour Party                 Yes       No     No
  7-Jun-01      Lower House             Liberal Democrat               No        Yes    No
  7-Jun-01      Lower House                Plaid Cymru                 No        Yes    No
  7-Jun-01      Lower House           Scottish National Party          No        Yes    No
 6-May-10       Lower House           British National Party           No        Yes    No
 6-May-10       Lower House             Conservative Party             No        No     No
 6-May-10       Lower House                Green Party                 No        Yes    No
 6-May-10       Lower House               Labour Party                 Yes       No     No
 6-May-10       Lower House             Liberal Democrat               No        No     No
 6-May-10       Lower House                Plaid Cymru                 No        Yes    No
 6-May-10       Lower House           Scottish National Party          No        Yes    No
 6-May-10       Lower House     United Kindom Independence Party       No        Yes    No
 7-May-15       Lower House           British National Party           No        Yes    No
 7-May-15       Lower House             Conservative Party             Yes       No     No
 7-May-15       Lower House                Green Party                 No        Yes    No
 7-May-15       Lower House               Labour Party                 No        No     No
 7-May-15       Lower House             Liberal Democrat               No        Yes    No
 7-May-15       Lower House                Plaid Cymru                 No        Yes    No
 7-May-15       Lower House           Scottish National Party          No        Yes    No
 7-May-15       Lower House     United Kingdom Independence Party      No        No     No
 23-Jun-16      Referendum                Leave the EU                N/A       N/A     N/A
 23-Jun-16      Referendum            Stay/Remain in the EU           N/A       N/A     N/A



                                                (e) Italy
Election date   Election type               Candidate               Incumbent   Small   New

 24-Feb-13      Lower House             Democratic Centre              No        Yes    Yes
 24-Feb-13      Lower House           Act to Stop the Decline          No        Yes    Yes
 24-Feb-13      Lower House            Future and Freedom              No        Yes    Yes
 24-Feb-13      Lower House              Brothers of Italy             No        Yes    Yes
 24-Feb-13      Lower House                 The Right                  No        Yes    No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House             Northern League                No        Yes    No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House            Five Star Movement              No        No     No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House             Democratic Party               No        No     No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House           The People of Freedom            Yes       No     No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House              Civil Revolution              No        Yes    No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House                Civic Choice                No        No     Yes
 24-Feb-13      Lower House           Left Ecology Freedom             No        Yes    No
 24-Feb-13      Lower House            Union of the Centre             No        Yes    No




                                                  35
                                            (f) Canada
Election date   Election type             Candidate              Incumbent   Small   New

 21-Nov-88      Lower House     Progressive Conservative Party      Yes       No     No
 21-Nov-88      Lower House             Liberal Party               No        No     No
 21-Nov-88      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No
 26-Oct-92      Referendum                   No                    N/A       N/A     N/A
 26-Oct-92      Referendum                   Yes                   N/A       N/A     N/A
 25-Oct-93      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        No     Yes
 25-Oct-93      Lower House     Progressive Conservative Party      Yes       No     No
 25-Oct-93      Lower House             Liberal Party               No        No     No
 25-Oct-93      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        Yes    No
 25-Oct-93      Lower House             Reform Party                No        No     No
  2-Jun-97      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        No     No
  2-Jun-97      Lower House             Liberal Party               Yes       No     No
  2-Jun-97      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No
  2-Jun-97      Lower House     Progressive Conservative Party      No        No     No
  2-Jun-97      Lower House             Reform Party                No        No     No
 27-Nov-00      Lower House             Alliance Party              No        No     Yes
 27-Nov-00      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-00      Lower House     Progressive Conservative Party      No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-00      Lower House             Liberal Party               Yes       No     No
 27-Nov-00      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        Yes    No
 28-Jun-04      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        No     No
 28-Jun-04      Lower House          Conservative Party             No        No     Yes
 28-Jun-04      Lower House              Green Party                No        Yes    No
 28-Jun-04      Lower House             Liberal Party               Yes       No     No
 28-Jun-04      Lower House            Marijuana Party              No        Yes    No
 28-Jun-04      Lower House     Progressive Conservative Party      No        Yes    No
 28-Jun-04      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No
 23-Jan-06      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        No     No
 23-Jan-06      Lower House          Conservative Party             No        No     No
 23-Jan-06      Lower House              Green Party                No        Yes    No
 23-Jan-06      Lower House             Liberal Party               Yes       No     No
 23-Jan-06      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No
 14-Oct-08      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        No     No
 14-Oct-08      Lower House          Conservative Party             Yes       No     No
 14-Oct-08      Lower House              Green Party                No        Yes    No
 14-Oct-08      Lower House             Liberal Party               No        No     No
 14-Oct-08      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No
 2-May-11       Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        No     No
 2-May-11       Lower House          Conservative Party             Yes       No     No
 2-May-11       Lower House              Green Party                No        Yes    No
 2-May-11       Lower House             Liberal Party               No        No     No
 2-May-11       Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No
 19-Oct-15      Lower House            Bloc Québécois               No        Yes    No
 19-Oct-15      Lower House          Conservative Party             Yes       No     No
 19-Oct-15      Lower House              Green Party                No        Yes    No
 19-Oct-15      Lower House             Liberal Party               No        No     No
 19-Oct-15      Lower House         New Democratic Party            No        No     No

                                               36
                                               (g) Netherlands
Election date   Election type                  Candidate                   Incumbent   Small   New

 6-May-98       Lower House             General Elderly Alliance              No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House           Christian Democratic Appeal             No        No     No
 6-May-98       Lower House                Centre Democrats                   No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House                  Democrats 66                     No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House                   The Greens                      No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House            Reformed Political League              No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House                    Green Left                     No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House               Mobile Netherlands                  No        Yes    Yes
 6-May-98       Lower House                   Labour Party                    Yes       No     No
 6-May-98       Lower House          Reforming Political Federation           No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House             Political Reformed Party              No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House                  Socialist Party                  No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House                   Seniors 2000                    No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House                    Union 55+                      No        Yes    No
 6-May-98       Lower House           Progressive Integration Party           No        Yes    N/A
 6-May-98       Lower House     People's Party for Freedom and Democracy      No        No     No
 15-May-02      Lower House           Christian Democratic Appeal             No        No     No
 15-May-02      Lower House                 Christian Union                   No        Yes    No
 15-May-02      Lower House                  Democrats 66                     No        Yes    No
 15-May-02      Lower House                    Green Left                     No        Yes    No
 15-May-02      Lower House               Livable Netherlands                 No        Yes    Yes
 15-May-02      Lower House                 Pim Fortuyn List                  No        No     Yes
 15-May-02      Lower House                   Labour Party                    Yes       No     No
 15-May-02      Lower House             Political Reformed Party              No        Yes    No
 15-May-02      Lower House                  Socialist Party                  No        Yes    No
 15-May-02      Lower House     People's Party for Freedom and Democracy      No        No     No
 15-May-02      Lower House               United Seniors Party                No        Yes    Yes
 22-Nov-06      Lower House           Christian Democratic Appeal             Yes       No     No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                 Christian Union                   No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                  Democrats 66                     No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                 One Netherlands                   No        Yes    Yes
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                 Pim Fortuyn List                  No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                    Green Left                     No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House               Party for the Animals               No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                Party for Freedom                  No        Yes    Yes
 22-Nov-06      Lower House             Party for the Netherlands             No        Yes    Yes
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                   Labour Party                    No        No     No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House            Politically Reformed Party             No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House                  Socialist Party                  No        Yes    No
 22-Nov-06      Lower House     People's Party for Freedom and Democracy      No        No     No




                                                     37
                                                  (h) Germany
Election date   Election type                    Candidate                      Incumbent   Small   New

                                Christian Democratic Union / Christian Social
 27-Sep-09      Lower House                                                        Yes       No     No
                                              Union in Bavaria
 27-Sep-09      Lower House                       The Left                         No        No     Yes
 27-Sep-09      Lower House                Free Democratic Party                   No        Yes    No
 27-Sep-09      Lower House               Alliance 90s/The Greens                  No        No     No
 27-Sep-09      Lower House        National Democratic Party of Germany            No        Yes    No
 27-Sep-09      Lower House                Pirate Party Germany                    No        Yes    Yes
 27-Sep-09      Lower House                   The Republicans                      No        Yes    No
 27-Sep-09      Lower House          Social Demoratic Party of Germany             No        No     No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House               Alternative for Germany                  No        Yes    Yes
 22-Sep-13      Lower House             Christian Democratic Union                 Yes       No     No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House                       The Left                         No        Yes    No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House                Free Democratic Party                   No        Yes    No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House               Alliance 90s/The Greens                  No        No     No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House        National Democratic Party of Germany            No        Yes    No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House                Pirate Party Germany                    No        Yes    No
 22-Sep-13      Lower House          Social Demoratic Party of Germany             No        No     No
 24-Sep-17      Lower House               Alternative for Germany                  No        Yes    No
                                Christian Democratic Union / Christian Social
 24-Sep-17      Lower House                                                        Yes       No     No
                                              Union in Bavaria
 24-Sep-17      Lower House                       The Left                         No        Yes    No
 24-Sep-17      Lower House                Free Democratic Party                   No        Yes    No
 24-Sep-17      Lower House               Alliance 90s/The Greens                  No        Yes    No
 24-Sep-17      Lower House          Social Demoratic Party of Germany             No        No     No



                                                 (i) Switzerland
Election date   Election type                    Candidate                      Incumbent   Small   New

 23-Oct-11      Lower House            Conservative Democratic Party               No        Yes    Yes
 23-Oct-11      Lower House         Christian Democratic People's Party            No        No     No
 23-Oct-11      Lower House                   FDP.The Liberals                     No        No     No
 23-Oct-11      Lower House                 Green Liberal Party                    No        Yes    No
 23-Oct-11      Lower House                     Green Party                        No        Yes    No
 23-Oct-11      Lower House               Social Democratic Party                  No        No     No
 23-Oct-11      Lower House                 Swiss People's Party                   Yes       No     No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House            Conservative Democratic Party               No        Yes    No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House         Christian Democratic People's Party            No        No     No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House                   FDP.The Liberals                     No        No     No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House                 Green Liberal Party                    No        Yes    No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House                     Green Party                        No        Yes    No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House               Social Democratic Party                  No        No     No
 18-Oct-15      Lower House                 Swiss People's Party                   Yes       No     No




                                                       38
                                          (j) New Zealand
Election date   Election type              Candidate               Incumbent   Small   New

 12-Oct-96      Lower House                  ACT                      No        Yes    Yes
 12-Oct-96      Lower House                 Alliance                  No        No     No
 12-Oct-96      Lower House           Christian Coalition             No        Yes    Yes
 12-Oct-96      Lower House              Labour Party                 No        No     No
 12-Oct-96      Lower House          McGillicuddy Serious             No        Yes    No
 12-Oct-96      Lower House             National Party                Yes       No     No
 12-Oct-96      Lower House            New Zealand First              No        No     No
 12-Oct_96      Lower House            Progressive Green              No        Yes    Yes
 12-Oct-96      Lower House                 United                    No        Yes    Yes
 27-Nov-99      Lower House                  ACT                      No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House                 Alliance                  No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House            Christian Heritage             No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House               Green Party                 No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House              Labour Party                 No        No     No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House             National Party                Yes       No     No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House            New Zealand First              No        Yes    No
 27-Nov-99      Lower House                 United                    No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House             National Party                No        No     No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House                  ACT                      No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House                 Alliance                  No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House            Christian Heritage             No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House               Green Party                 No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House             Independent(s)                No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House     Jim Anderton's Progressive Party      No        Yes    Yes
  27-Jul-02     Lower House            New Zealand First              No        Yes    No
  27-Jul-02     Lower House           Outdoor Recreation              No        Yes    Yes
  27-Jul-02     Lower House              United Future                No        Yes    Yes
  27-Jul-02     Lower House              Labour Party                 Yes       No     No




                                                39
                                                (k) Sweden
  Election date   Election type               Candidate                  Incumbent    Small       New

   25-May-14       European                  Centre Party                   No         Yes        No
   25-May-14       European              Chrisitian Democrats               No         Yes        No
   25-May-14       European               Feminist Initiative               No         No         No
   25-May-14       European                  Green Party                    No         No         No
   25-May-14       European                    June List                    No         Yes        No
   25-May-14       European                    Left Party                   No         No         No
   25-May-14       European                 Moderate Party                  No         Yes        No
   25-May-14       European              Liberal People's Party             No         No         No
   25-May-14       European                   Pirate Party                  No         Yes        No
   25-May-14       European                Social Democrats                 Yes        No         No
   25-May-14       European               Sweden Democrats                  No         Yes        No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House                Centre Party                   No         Yes        No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House            Chrisitian Democrats               No         Yes        No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House             Feminist Initiative               No         Yes        No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House                Green Party                    No         No         No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House                  Left Party                   No         No         No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House               Moderate Party                  Yes        No         No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House            Liberal People's Party             No         No         No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House              Social Democrats                 No         No         No
  14-Sept-2014    Lower House             Sweden Democrats                  No         No         No



Notes: We report the list of candidates or parties included as possible answers to questions on pre-
electoral vote intention and post-electoral vote choice in each survey. We also report, for elections
that are not referenda, whether they are the incumbent candidate (for presidential and gubernatorial
elections) or party (for lower and upper house elections), whether they are a small candidate or party
that had an average predicted vote share lower than 10% in the first five days of the survey, and whether
the party (or candidate's party) was absent from any previous election of the same type. In elections for
lower house and upper house, the incumbent is defined as the party that had a plurality of seats in
the house before the election (in the U.S.) of the party of the incumbent prime minister (in all other
countries). For gubernatorial election in the U.S., the incumbent is defined as the incumbent governor
in each state, and is left blank when we do not know in which state the respondent is registered. Options
such as "Other candidate" or "Blank/Invalid vote" are not reported in this list but included in some of
our analyses.




                                                    40
            Table A.6: List of TV debates by country
                            (a) United States

 Survey       Debate date                Election type   # days before election

ANES 1960       26-Sep                    President               43

ANES 1960        7-Oct                    President               32

ANES 1960       13-Oct                    President               26

ANES 1960       21-Oct                    President               18

ANES 1976       23-Sep                    President               40

ANES 1976        6-Oct                    President               27

ANES 1976       22-Oct                    President               11

ANES 1980       21-Sep                    President               44

ANES 1980       28-Oct                    President                7

ANES 1984        7-Oct                    President               30

ANES 1984       21-Oct                    President               16

ANES 1988       25-Sep                    President               44

ANES 1988       13-Oct                    President               26

ANES 1992       11-Oct                    President               23

ANES 1992       15-Oct                    President               19

ANES 1992       19-Oct                    President               15

ANES 1996        6-Oct                    President               30

ANES 1996       16-Oct                    President               20

ANES 2000        3-Oct                    President               35

NAES 2000          "                            "                  "

ANES 2000       11-Oct                    President               27

NAES 2000          "                            "                  "

ANES 2000       17-Oct                    President               21

NAES 2000          "                            "                  "

ANES 2004        8-Oct                    President               25

NAES 2004          "                            "                  "

ANES 2004       30-Sep                    President               33

NAES 2004          "                            "                  "

ANES 2004       13-Oct                    President               20

NAES 2004          "                            "                  "

ANES 2008       26-Sep                    President               39

NAES 2008          "                            "                  "

ANES 2008        7-Oct                    President               28

NAES 2008          "                            "                  "

ANES 2008       15-Oct                    President               20

NAES 2008          "                            "                  "

ANES 2012        3-Oct                    President               34

ANES 2012       16-Oct                    President               21

ANES 2012       22-Oct                    President               15

ANES 2016       26-Sep                    President               43

ANES 2016        9-Oct                    President               30

ANES 2016       19-Oct                    President               20


                                  41
                                                  (b) Austria

          Survey               Debate date                  Election type       # days before election

       AUTNES 2013               29-Aug                     Lower House                  31




                                              (c) United Kingdom

          Survey               Debate date                  Election type       # days before election

         BES 2010                 15-Apr                    Lower House                  21

         BES 2010                 22-Apr                    Lower House                  14

         BES 2010                 29-Apr                    Lower House                   7

         BES 2015                 2-Apr                     Lower House                  35

         BES 2015                 16-Apr                    Lower House                  21

         BES 2015                 30-Apr                    Lower House                   7




                                                  (d) Canada

          Survey               Debate date                  Election type       # days before election

         CES 2015              17-Sep-2015                  Lower House                  32

         CES 2015              24-Sep-2015                  Lower House                  25

         CES 2015              28-Sep-2015                  Lower House                  21

         CES 2015               2-Oct-2015                  Lower House                  17




                                                (e) Netherlands

          Survey               Debate date                  Election type       # days before election

         DPES 1998             24-Apr-1998                  Lower House                  12

         DPES 2002             27-Apr-2002                  Lower House                  18

         DPES 2006              3-Nov-2006                  Lower House                  19




                                                 (f) Germany

          Survey               Debate date                  Election type       # days before election

         GLES 2009             13-Sep-2009                  Lower House                  14

         GLES 2013              1-Sep-2013                  Lower House                  21

         GLES 2017              3-Sep-2017                  Lower House                  21




                                               (g) New Zealand

          Survey               Debate date                  Election type       # days before election

        NZES 1996              26-Sep-1996                  Lower House                  16

        NZES 1996               7-Oct-1996                  Lower House                   5

        NZES 1999              27-Oct-1999                  Lower House                  31

        NZES 1999               1-Nov-1999                  Lower House                  26

        NZES 2002               15-Jul-2002                 Lower House                  12

        NZES 2002               22-Jul-2002                 Lower House                   5




Notes: For each TV debate included in the study, we indicate the date when the debate was held and the
number of days separating the debate from the election. We exclude debates held less than three days
from one another, debates held before the beginning of the corresponding survey, and debates held just
one day before the election, after which no respondent was surveyed. Other notes as in Table A.1.
B     Additional Results

B.1   Formation of Vote Choice: Additional Results

          Figure B.1: Number of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election

                        10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                        0




                                                         -60      -40                       -20         0
                                                                Number of days before the election



Notes: We show the point estimates and the 95% confidence interval from a regression of the number of
days separating the post-electoral survey from the election on 60 fixed effects indicating the number of
days separating the pre-electoral survey from the election. We control for election fixed effects as well
as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the survey level. The sample includes all respondents surveyed before and
after the election who said that they intended to vote, in the first survey. N=186,639.



                   Figure B.2: Vote choice consistency and vote share accuracy
                  1
                  .9
                  .8
                  .7
                  .6
                  .5




                       -60                                       -40                       -20              0
                                                               Number of days before the election

                                                                   Individual vote choice consistency
                                                                   Aggregate vote share accuracy



Notes: We show the point estimates and the 95% confidence interval from regressions of individual
vote choice consistency and one minus the distance between predicted and final vote shares on 60 fixed
effects indicating the number of days relative to the election. Other notes as in Figure 1.


                                                                             43
                                Figure B.3: Certainty of vote intention




                  1
                  .9
                  .8
                  .7
                  .6
                  .5




                       -60                 -40                       -20                 0
                                         Number of days before the election


Notes: We show the point estimates and 95% confidence interval from a regression of the certainty of the
stated vote intention on 60 fixed effects indicating the number of days relative to the election. People's
certainty of their vote intention is normalized to range from 0 to 1 across all surveys when available. We
control for election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral
survey took place. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the survey level. The sample includes
all respondents surveyed before the election who said that they intended to vote, stated a vote intention,
and were asked how certain they were about this intention. N=133,022.




                                                      44
                             Table B.1: Sociodemographic characteristics over time


                       More education                                             2nd income    3rd income    4th income
                      than high school   College degree     Male        Age         quartile      quartile      quartile   Not employed
                             (1)               (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)
  Time to election        0.0005            0.0004          0.0000    -0.0235       -0.0002      0.0002       0.0006        -0.0008
                          (0.0002)          (0.0002)       (0.0001)    (0.0112)    (0.0002)      (0.0001)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)
  Observations            190719            185834         215968     216542        163850       163850        163850         193301
  R2                       0.088             0.085          0.010      0.043         0.015        0.016         0.009          0.018
  Mean at day -1          0.6134            0.3970         0.4888     49.7849       0.2349       0.2468        0.2462         0.4015



Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). Time is defined as minus the number of days separating the pre-
electoral survey from the election (so that higher values indicate closer proximity to the election). The
sample includes all respondents surveyed before the election who said that they intended to vote. We
control for election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral
survey took place.




                                             Table B.2: Sample selection tests


                                               Turnout                Sample,                   Sample, vote
                                              intention            vote intention             choice consistency
                                                     (1)                   (2)                          (3)
                     Time                     0.0010                   0.0006                      0.0009
                                               (0.0002)                (0.0003)                     (0.0002)
                     Observations               312672                  312672                       259001
                     R2                          0.074                   0.079                        0.078
                     Mean at day -1             0.8519                  0.8071                       0.7873


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively). Time is defined as minus the number of days separating the pre-electoral
survey from the election (so that higher values indicate closer proximity to the election). In column 1, the
sample includes all respondents surveyed before the election who were asked if they intended to vote,
and the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent said yes. In column 2, the sample includes all
respondents surveyed before the election who were asked if they intended to vote, and the outcome is a
dummy equal to 1 if the respondent said yes and answered the vote intention question (including if they
said they did not know whom they would vote for). In column 3, the sample includes all respondents
surveyed before and after the election who were asked if they indended to vote, in the first survey, and
if they actually voted, in the second. The outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent said that they
intended to vote and answered the vote intention question, in the first survey, and reported that they
actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second. We control for election fixed effects as
well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. We also control
for fixed effects for the number of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election in column
3.




                                                                      45
    Table B.3: Vote choice consistency across voter types with more detailed age categories

                                                            (1)           (2)
                   Time                                  0.0027       0.0029
                                                         (0.0003)      (0.0004)
                   Above median age                      0.0226        0.0163
                                                          (0.0068)     (0.0075)
                   Time * Above median age              -0.0006       -0.0006
                                                         (0.0002)      (0.0002)
                   25 years old or younger                0.0039        -0.0005
                                                         (0.0102)      (0.0096)
                   Time * 25 years old or younger        0.0007        0.0006
                                                         (0.0003)      (0.0004)
                   College degree                                       0.0029
                                                                       (0.0053)
                   Time * College degree                              -0.0005
                                                                       (0.0002)
                   Male                                               0.0336
                                                                       (0.0044)
                   Time * Male                                          -0.0000
                                                                       (0.0002)
                   Above median income                                  0.0005
                                                                       (0.0066)
                   Time * Above median income                           -0.0002
                                                                       (0.0002)
                   Not employed                                       0.0221
                                                                       (0.0054)
                   Time* Not employed                                   0.0001
                                                                       (0.0002)
                   Observations                           200916       200916
                   R2                                      0.072        0.075
                   Mean at day -1                         0.8768       0.8768

Notes: Same notes as in Table 2. We include an additional dummy for being 25 years old or younger and
its interaction with the linear time trend.




                                                 46
             Table B.4: Vote intention and conditional consistency across voter types

                                                Vote intention       Conditional consistency
                                                      (1)                     (2)
         Time                                      0.0011                     0.0023
                                                    (0.0003)                   (0.0004)
         College degree                             0.0098                     -0.0011
                                                    (0.0045)                   (0.0048)
         Time * College degree                       -0.0002                  -0.0004
                                                    (0.0002)                   (0.0002)
         Above median age                          0.0141                       0.0065
                                                    (0.0052)                   (0.0065)
         Time * Above median age                    -0.0003                  -0.0006
                                                    (0.0002)                  (0.0002)
         Male                                      0.0360                     0.0063
                                                    (0.0050)                  (0.0027)
         Time * Male                                 -0.0002                    0.0001
                                                    (0.0002)                   (0.0001)
         Above median income                         0.0058                    -0.0008
                                                    (0.0038)                   (0.0062)
         Time * Above median income                  -0.0001                   -0.0002
                                                    (0.0001)                   (0.0002)
         Not employed                              0.0174                     0.0088
                                                    (0.0044)                   (0.0032)
         Time* Not employed                          0.0002                    -0.0000
                                                    (0.0002)                   (0.0001)
         Observations                                253489                    178176
         R2                                           0.080                     0.043
         Mean at day -1                              0.9157                    0.9346
Notes: In column 1, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before the election who said that they
intended to vote. In column 2, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election
who said that they intended to vote and stated a vote intention, in the first survey, and who reported
that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration, in the second. We control for election fixed
effects as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. We
also control for fixed effects for the number of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election
in column 2. Other notes as in Table 2.




                                                    47
B.2   Formation of Beliefs, Policy Preferences, and Issue Salience: Additional
      Results

                                Figure B.4: Vote share concentration
                  .5
                  .4
                  .3
                  .2
                  .1
                  0




                       -60                -40                       -20                0
                                        Number of days before the election


Notes: We show the point estimates and the 95% confidence interval from a regression of the vote share
concentration on 60 fixed effects indicating the number of days relative to the election. The outcome is
computed based on all respondents surveyed before the election who said that they intended to vote
and stated a vote intention different from voting blank or null. We weight each observation by the
number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at
the same relative time to the election. We control for election fixed effects and fixed effects for the day
of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at
the survey level. N=3,138.




                                                     48
Table B.5: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates across
voter types

                                      Policy preferences     Issue salience   Beliefs on candidates
                                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)
   Time                                     -0.0001              0.0005                0.0021
                                            (0.0002)            (0.0011)              (0.0015)
   College degree                          0.0232                -0.0057             0.0302
                                           (0.0081)             (0.0136)             (0.0123)
   Time * College degree                     0.0001              -0.0002              -0.0003
                                            (0.0001)            (0.0006)              (0.0003)
   Above median age                          0.0058              -0.0182             0.0148
                                            (0.0117)            (0.0205)              (0.0043)
   Time * Above median age                  -0.0000              0.0003               -0.0001
                                            (0.0001)            (0.0006)              (0.0002)
   Male                                     0.0125               0.0079              0.0383
                                            (0.0067)            (0.0208)             (0.0149)
   Time * Male                              -0.0001              0.0007               -0.0005
                                            (0.0001)            (0.0007)              (0.0003)
   Above median income                      0.0154             0.0527                0.0223
                                            (0.0076)            (0.0090)             (0.0071)
   Time * Above median income                0.0002              0.0008              0.0003
                                            (0.0001)            (0.0004)             (0.0001)
   Not employed                              0.0015             -0.0289               -0.0001
                                            (0.0068)            (0.0132)              (0.0041)
   Time* Not employed                        0.0001              -0.0001              -0.0000
                                            (0.0001)            (0.0005)              (0.0001)
   Observations                             228562               46108                478039
   R2                                        0.051               0.050                 0.084
   Mean at day -1                           0.8488               0.7392               0.8119

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). We regress consistency in policy preferences, issue salience and
beliefs on candidates (respectively) on a linear time trend and its interaction with dummies for being a
type-a voter (having a college degree, being above the median age, a male, above the median income,
and not employed) as opposed to a type-b voter (not having a college degree, being below the median
age, a female, below the median income, and employed). Dummies for being a type-a voter as well
as dummies for whether the characteristics are missing and their interaction with the time trend are
also included. We control for question fixed effects (colums 1 and 3) or election fixed effects (column
2) as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place and for
the number of days separating the pre- and post-electoral survey. The sample includes all respondents
surveyed before and after the election who stated a policy preference (column 1), a salient issue (column
2), or a belief on candidates (column 3) in the second survey.




                                                   49
           Table B.6: Consistency in beliefs on candidates' issue positions and quality
                                    (a) Beliefs on candidates' issue positions

                               Consistency       Giving an answer            Conditional consistency
                                   (1)                  (2)                           (3)
          Time                    0.0013               0.0007                        0.0012
                                 (0.0013)               (0.0002)                    (0.0013)
          Observations            294791                460655                       265245
          R2                       0.040                 0.074                        0.072
          Mean at day -1          0.7774                0.7857                       0.8527

                                        (b) Beliefs on candidates' quality

                               Consistency       Giving an answer            Conditional consistency
                                   (1)                  (2)                           (3)
          Time                    0.0030               0.0005                        0.0029
                                 (0.0019)               (0.0000)                    (0.0019)
          Observations            183248                348382                       175526
          R2                       0.124                 0.034                        0.112
          Mean at day -1          0.8449                0.9395                       0.8666


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively). We use one observation per respondent per belief question. In column
1, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a belief on
candidates' issue positions (Panel a), or a belief on candidates' quality (Panel b), in the second survey.
In column 2, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before the election. In column 3, the sample
includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who stated a belief on candidates' issue
positions (Panel a) or a belief on candidates' quality (Panel b) in both the first and the second surveys.
We control for question fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-
electoral survey took place. In columns 1 and 3, we also control for fixed effects for the number of days
separating the pre- and post-electoral survey.




                                                       50
                                  Table B.7: Voting for lesser-known candidates

                                            Voted for a            Voted for a                Voted for a
                                            challenger           small candidate             new candidate
                                                (1)                     (2)                       (3)
                  Time                          0.0001                   0.0000                   -0.0000
                                               (0.0001)                 (0.0001)                  (0.0000)
                  Observations                  174996                  175606                     172891
                  R2                             0.085                   0.108                      0.137
                  Mean at day -1                0.6656                  0.1491                     0.0215

Notes: The sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they
intended to vote, in the first survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice
declaration different from voting blank or null, in the second. Referenda are excluded. We control for
election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey
took place and for the number of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election. Other
notes as in Table 5




          Table B.8: Vote choice consistency across voters voting for different candidates

                                       Voted for a challenger      Voted for a small        Voted for a new
                                        vs. the incumbent       vs. a bigger candidate   vs. known candidate     All         All
                                                 (1)                      (2)                     (3)            (4)         (5)
  Time                                       0.0016                   0.0019                  0.0024           0.0014      0.0014
                                              (0.0002)                 (0.0003)                (0.0003)         (0.0003)    (0.0003)
  Voted for a challenger                     -0.0417                                                            -0.0147     -0.0124
                                              (0.0124)                                                         (0.0141)    (0.0136)
  Time * Voted for a challenger              0.0017                                                            0.0011      0.0011
                                              (0.0004)                                                          (0.0004)    (0.0003)
  Voted for a small candidate                                         -0.0834                                  -0.0718     -0.0719
                                                                       (0.0322)                                 (0.0345)    (0.0312)
  Time * Voted for a small candidate                                  0.0049                                   0.0035      0.0035
                                                                       (0.0010)                                 (0.0010)    (0.0009)
  Voted for a new candidate                                                                   -0.0160           0.0030      0.0009
                                                                                              (0.0572)         (0.0442)    (0.0441)
  Time * Voted for a new candidate                                                            0.0038           0.0018      0.0018
                                                                                               (0.0012)         (0.0006)    (0.0006)
  Observations                                200916                   200916                  200916           200916      200916
  R2                                           0.078                    0.095                   0.082            0.100       0.105
  Mean at day -1                              0.8768                   0.8768                  0.8768           0.8768      0.8768
  Sociodemographic controls                                                                                                    X


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). The linear time trend is interacted with dummies for voting for
a lesser-known candidate (challenger, small candidate, or new candidate). Dummies for voting for a
lesser-known candidate and for an undefined candidate type are also included. The sample includes
all respondents surveyed before and after the election who said that they intended to vote, in the first
survey, and who reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice declaration different from
voting blank or null, in the second. Referenda are excluded. We control for election fixed effects as well
as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place and for the number
of days separating the post-electoral survey from the election.




                                                                 51
B.3   Impact of TV Debates: Additional Results

                        Figure B.5: Vote choice consistency in debate sample


                 1
                 .9
                 .8
                 .7
                 .6
                 .5




                      -60                -40                       -20               0
                                       Number of days before the election


Notes: The sample is restricted to the 34 elections included in the debate sample. N=109,754. Other notes
as in Figure 1.




                                                    52
Figure B.6: Debates' effects on consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on
candidates
                           (a) Consistency in policy preferences                                              (b) Consistency in issue salience
  .1




                                                                                      .1
  .075




                                                                                      .075
  .05




                                                                                      .05
  .025




                                                                                      .025
  0




                                                                                      0
  -.075 -.05 -.025




                                                                                      -.075 -.05 -.025
  -.1




                                                                                      -.1
                     -3        -2       -1           0             1         2   3                       -3    -2       -1           0             1         2   3
                                    Number of days before/after the debate                                          Number of days before/after the debate




                          (c) Consistency in beliefs on candidates
  .1
  .075
  .05
  .025
  0
  -.075 -.05 -.025
  -.1




                     -3        -2       -1           0             1         2   3
                                    Number of days before/after the debate



Notes: We show point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of consistency in policy
preferences and issue salience on dummy variables for being surveyed one, two, or three days before the
debate, as well as dummies for being surveyed one, two, or three days after the debate. We also include
dummies for being surveyed four days or more before or after the debate, respectively, and omit the
dummy for being surveyed on the day of the debate. We control for debate × question fixed effects in
Figures B.6a and B.6c and for debate × election fixed effects in Figure B.6b, as well as fixed effects for the
number of days relative to the election, the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place,
and the number of days separating the pre- and post-electoral survey. For each debate and election,
our estimation uses all respondents in samples defined as in Figure 3. Standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the debate level. There are 12 debates (N=346,231) in Figure B.6a, seven debates (N=51,821)
in Figure B.6b, and 16 debates (N=546,861) in Figure B.6c after excluding debates held less than three
days from one another.




                                                                                     53
                                Table B.9: Campaign exposure over time


                                                                                Political    Contact by   Visit by
                   Newspapers    Television    Radio     Internet    Polls     discussions    a party     a party
                      (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
  Time               0.0004      0.0007       0.0007     0.0006     0.0046      0.0042        0.0043      0.0030
                    (0.0003)      (0.0002)    (0.0003)   (0.0002)   (0.0018)     (0.0003)     (0.0016)    (0.0010)
  Observations       147119       140040      101015      119596    38355        103805        59259      41301
  R2                  0.139        0.189       0.109       0.091    0.084         0.097        0.137      0.017
  Mean at day -1     0.3715       0.5162      0.2676      0.2372    0.7424       0.5591        0.4770     0.1599



Notes: Standard errors clustered at the survey level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). Time is defined as minus the number of days separating the pre-
electoral survey from the election (so that higher values indicate closer proximity to the election). The
outcomes are dummies for getting information frequently from newspapers, TV, radio, and the Internet,
having seen election polls recently, discussing politics frequently with others, having been contacted
by a party recently, and having been visited by a party recently. The sample includes all respondents
surveyed before the election who said that they intended to vote. We control for election fixed effects as
well as fixed effects for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey took place.




                                                         54
                                                                Table B.10: Balance checks around TV debates

                                       More education                                         2nd income   3rd income   4th income                  Watching    Strong party
                                      than high school   College degree    Age      Male        quartile     quartile     quartile   Not employed   debates    identification
                                             (1)               (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)           (10)
            Before -3                      0.006             0.014        0.737      -0.000      0.004        0.000        0.002        0.015         0.002        0.004
                                          (0.009)           (0.010)       (0.405)   (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.005)
            -3                             0.007             0.011        0.648      -0.011      -0.003       0.006        0.000         0.005        -0.006      -0.009
                                          (0.011)           (0.007)       (0.338)   (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.009)
            -2                            -0.015            -0.002        0.835      -0.007      0.005        0.005       -0.009        0.025         0.005        0.006
                                          (0.008)           (0.009)       (0.369)   (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.011)      (0.013)      (0.009)
            -1                             0.003             0.002        0.595      -0.000      0.005        0.002       -0.003        0.022         -0.006      -0.008
                                          (0.008)           (0.007)       (0.283)   (0.008)     (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.008)
            +1                            -0.007            -0.001        -0.001     -0.004      0.003       -0.008        0.000         0.011        0.013       -0.002
                                          (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.318)   (0.008)     (0.010)      (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.007)
            +2                             0.003             0.008         0.472     -0.002      0.001       -0.002        0.009         0.011       -0.003        0.001
                                          (0.008)           (0.010)       (0.441)   (0.007)     (0.011)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.012)      (0.010)      (0.009)




55
            +3                             0.006             0.004         0.430     -0.009      0.006       -0.005       -0.002        0.026         -0.013       0.005
                                          (0.009)           (0.013)       (0.416)   (0.008)     (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.009)
            After +3                       0.001            -0.003         0.351     -0.001      0.001       -0.001       -0.002         0.009       -0.014        0.007
                                          (0.009)           (0.011)       (0.406)   (0.006)     (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.007)
            Observations                  279567            253308        303051    304519      242745      242745       242745         250543       80930        214027
            R2                             0.052             0.045         0.020     0.005       0.015       0.022        0.010          0.016       0.044         0.062
            Mean, day of the debate        0.606             0.388        50.160     0.489       0.231       0.229        0.227          0.423       0.759         0.298
            Number of debates                50                50           56         56          50          50           50             47          28            41
            F-stat                         2.254             1.421         1.877     0.683       0.400       1.225        0.989          1.367       2.437         0.796
            P-val                          0.053             0.226         0.101     0.664       0.875       0.310        0.443          0.248       0.052         0.578

     Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). For each debate
     and election, our estimation uses all respondents surveyed before the election who said that they intended to vote. In columns 9 and 10, the sample is further
     restricted to respondents also surveyed after the election, since the outcomes are constructed from questions asked in the post-electoral survey exclusively.
     We control for debate × election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the number of days relative to the election and for the day of the week in which the
     pre-electoral survey took place. We report the F-stat and p-value of a test of joint significance of the six relative days dummies, from three days before the debate
     to three days after.
                                         Table B.11: Debates' effects on campaign exposure and political engagement

                                                                                                                       Political    Contact by   Visit by
                                                          Newspapers     Television   Radio     Internet    Polls     discussions    a party     a party
                                                             (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
              Before -3                                       0.002         0.005      0.008     0.003      0.063        -0.001       0.004      -0.005
                                                             (0.007)       (0.009)    (0.008)   (0.005)    (0.037)      (0.012)      (0.018)     (0.012)
              -3                                             -0.000         0.012      0.003     0.008      0.042        -0.007      -0.005       0.001
                                                             (0.009)       (0.008)    (0.012)   (0.009)    (0.036)      (0.011)      (0.017)     (0.003)
              -2                                             -0.000         0.006      0.009     0.013      0.041        0.006       -0.004      -0.000
                                                             (0.011)       (0.010)    (0.012)   (0.010)    (0.029)      (0.013)      (0.006)     (0.016)
              -1                                             -0.004         0.012      0.015     0.000     0.072         0.003        0.006      -0.000
                                                             (0.006)       (0.010)    (0.009)   (0.009)     (0.016)     (0.010)      (0.017)     (0.011)
              +1                                             -0.015         0.011     -0.005    -0.002      0.097        -0.000      -0.015       -0.006
                                                             (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.011)   (0.009)    (0.053)      (0.011)      (0.007)     (0.008)
              +2                                             -0.007         0.013      0.002     0.004      0.025        0.014       -0.001      -0.001




56
                                                             (0.010)       (0.009)    (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.031)      (0.013)      (0.005)     (0.007)
              +3                                              0.008         0.014     -0.007     0.002      -0.022       0.015       -0.009       0.000
                                                             (0.010)       (0.009)    (0.013)   (0.009)    (0.035)      (0.012)      (0.007)     (0.005)
              After +3                                        0.002         0.013      0.010     0.006      0.069        0.003       -0.012       0.005
                                                             (0.007)       (0.008)    (0.010)   (0.005)    (0.048)      (0.011)      (0.014)     (0.008)
              Observations                                   212884        219246     173741    192123      23632       119225        77961       62545
              R2                                              0.161         0.247       0.132    0.115      0.083        0.071        0.129       0.012
              Mean, day of the debate                         0.330         0.521      0.260     0.248      0.525        0.437        0.494       0.150
              Number of debates                                 31            35         19        22         9            18           12          7
              Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1      -0.002         0.010      0.009     0.007     0.052         0.001       -0.001       0.000
              .                                              (0.007)       (0.008)    (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.023)      (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.010)
              Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3        -0.005         0.013      -0.003    0.002      0.033        0.009       -0.008      -0.003
              .                                              (0.009)       (0.008)    (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.036)      (0.011)      (0.005)     (0.006)

     Notes: Same notes as in Table B.10. The mean value of the three pre-debate dummies and the mean value of the three post-debate dummies are reported, along
     with their standard errors.
                            Table B.12: Sample selection around debates


                                                                        Sample,         Sample, vote
                                                Turnout intention    vote intention   choice consistency
                                                      (1)                  (2)                (3)
   Before -3                                           -0.002            -0.002              0.005
                                                      (0.008)            (0.009)            (0.008)
   -3                                                  0.010              0.009              0.008
                                                      (0.009)            (0.009)            (0.009)
   -2                                                  0.002              0.003              0.009
                                                      (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.008)
   -1                                                  -0.005            -0.002              0.001
                                                      (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.008)
   +1                                                  0.009              0.009              0.010
                                                      (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.007)
   +2                                                  0.009              0.009              0.014
                                                      (0.007)            (0.008)            (0.010)
   +3                                                  0.002              0.006             0.013
                                                      (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.007)
   After +3                                            0.006              0.006              0.010
                                                      (0.008)            (0.009)            (0.009)
   Observations                                       396349             396349             329783
   R2                                                  0.065              0.073              0.036
   Mean, day of the debate                             0.835              0.821              0.794
   Number of debates                                     56                 56                 56
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1           0.002              0.003              0.006
   .                                                  (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.007)
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3             0.007              0.008             0.012
   .                                                  (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.007)


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). In column 1, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before
the election who were asked if they intended to vote, and the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the
respondent said yes. In column 2, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before the election who
were asked if they intended to vote, and the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent said yes
and answered the vote intention question (including if they said they did not know whom they would
vote for). In column 3, the sample includes all respondents surveyed before and after the election who
were asked if they indended to vote, in the first survey, and if they actually voted, in the second. The
outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent said that they intended to vote and answered the
vote intention question, in the first survey, and reported that they actually voted and gave a vote choice
declaration, in the second. We control for debate × election fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the
number of days relative to the election and for the day of the week in which the pre-electoral survey
took place. We also control for fixed effects for the number of days separating the post-electoral survey
from the election in column 3. The mean value of the three pre-debate dummies and the mean value of
the three post-debate dummies are reported, along with their standard errors.




                                                    57
Table B.13: Debates' effects on consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on
candidates

                                               Consistency in        Consistency in         Consistency in
                                              policy preferences     issue salience      beliefs on candidates
                                                (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
  Before -3                                   -0.001        -0.001   -0.012    -0.011    -0.005      -0.006
                                              (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.006)
  -3                                          -0.006        -0.006   -0.010    -0.009    -0.000      0.001
                                              (0.004)      (0.004)   (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.005)    (0.005)
  -2                                          -0.007        -0.006   -0.012    -0.011    -0.010      -0.010
                                              (0.005)      (0.005)   (0.015)   (0.014)   (0.006)    (0.006)
  -1                                          -0.003        -0.002   -0.005    -0.004    -0.005      -0.005
                                              (0.004)      (0.003)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.005)
  +1                                          -0.000        -0.000   -0.010    -0.010    -0.009      -0.008
                                              (0.003)      (0.002)   (0.009)   (0.010)   (0.006)    (0.006)
  +2                                           0.004        0.003    -0.004    -0.004     0.003      0.003
                                              (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.010)   (0.009)   (0.004)    (0.004)
  +3                                           0.002        0.003    -0.010    -0.009    -0.005      -0.005
                                              (0.002)      (0.003)   (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.006)    (0.006)
  After +3                                    -0.005        -0.005    0.001     0.002     0.001      0.001
                                              (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.003)    (0.003)
  Observations                                346231       346231    51821      51821    546861     546861
  R2                                           0.048        0.054    0.069       0.074    0.093      0.100
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.837        0.837    0.719      0.719     0.807      0.807
  Number of debates                              12           12       7           7       16          16
  Sociodemographic controls                                    X                   X                    X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1   -0.005        -0.005    -0.009    -0.008    -0.005     -0.005
  .                                           (0.004)      (0.004)   (0.011)   (0.010)   (0.005)    (0.005)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      0.002        0.002     -0.008    -0.007    -0.004     -0.003
  .                                           (0.001)      (0.002)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.005)    (0.005)

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). For each debate and election, our estimation uses all respondents in
samples defined as in Table 3. In columns 1 and 2, we use one observation per respondent per policy
question and control for debate × policy question fixed effects instead of debate × election fixed effects.
In columns 5 and 6, we use one observation per respondent per belief question and control for debate ×
belief question fixed effects instead of debate × election fixed effects. Other notes as in Table 7.




                                                      58
 Table B.14: Debates' effects on distance to final vote shares across debate and election types

                                            First vs.       Close vs.      Fluctuating vs.      U.S. vs.         Plurality vs.
                                           next debate   less-close race     stable race     other countries   proportional rule
                                               (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
  -3*type-b                                   -0.000        -0.007              0.001             0.002             -0.016
                                             (0.004)        (0.006)            (0.004)           (0.005)            (0.017)
  -2*type-b                                   0.001         -0.003             -0.001             0.004              0.000
                                             (0.003)        (0.006)            (0.003)           (0.004)            (0.016)
  -1*type-b                                   0.001         -0.006             -0.002             0.000             -0.020
                                             (0.004)        (0.007)            (0.004)           (0.005)            (0.016)
  +1*type-b                                   0.004         -0.006              0.005            0.006              -0.013
                                             (0.004)        (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.015)
  +2*type-b                                  0.008          -0.009              0.004             0.007             -0.002
                                             (0.004)        (0.006)            (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.009)
  +3*type-b                                   0.005         -0.004              0.003             0.003             -0.005
                                             (0.006)        (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.005)            (0.015)
  -3*type-a                                   -0.000         0.005             -0.002             -0.006             0.003
                                             (0.008)        (0.005)            (0.008)           (0.006)            (0.004)
  -2*type-a                                   -0.002         0.003              0.003             -0.008             0.001
                                             (0.008)        (0.003)            (0.008)           (0.006)            (0.003)
  -1*type-a                                   -0.010         0.002             -0.001             -0.007             0.001
                                             (0.009)        (0.004)            (0.010)           (0.007)            (0.004)
  +1*type-a                                   -0.002        0.008              -0.004            -0.006              0.004
                                             (0.007)        (0.004)            (0.006)           (0.007)            (0.004)
  +2*type-a                                 -0.016           0.008             -0.005            -0.012              0.001
                                             (0.007)        (0.005)            (0.007)           (0.006)            (0.004)
  +3*type-a                                   -0.006         0.007             -0.001             -0.000             0.003
                                             (0.006)        (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.005)
  Observations                                 3802           3802              3802               3802              3802
  R2                                          0.582           0.581             0.583             0.587              0.584
  Mean, day of the debate                     0.046           0.046             0.046             0.046              0.046
  Number of debates                             56              56                56                56                 56
  Sociodemographic controls                      X              X                 X                  X                 X
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-b       0.001          -0.005            -0.000             0.002             -0.012
  .                                          (0.003)        (0.006)            (0.003)           (0.004)            (0.014)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-b      0.006          -0.006             0.004             0.005             -0.007
  .                                          (0.004)        (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.009)
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-a       -0.004          0.003            -0.000             -0.007             0.001
  .                                          (0.007)        (0.003)            (0.007)           (0.005)            (0.003)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-a      -0.008          0.008            -0.003             -0.006             0.003
  .                                          (0.005)        (0.005)            (0.005)           (0.006)            (0.003)


Notes: We interact the relative days dummies with indicators for type-a debate or election (first debate,
close race, fluctuating race, U.S. bipartisan system, and plurality rule) and type-b debate or election (next
debates, less-close race, more stable race, multiparty system, and proportional rule). Dummies for being
surveyed four days or more before or after the debate interacted with the type-a and type-b indicators
were included in the regressions but are not shown, for presentation clarity. We use one observation per
debate per day, and we weight each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed from,
relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. Other notes
as in Table 8 (columns 1 and 2).




                                                             59
              Table B.15: Debates' effects on distance to final vote shares across voter types
                                          Debate watchers vs.    Strong vs. weak       College degree vs.   Above median age   Male vs.   Above median income   Not employed vs.
                                            non-watchers        party identification   no college degree       vs. below       female          vs. below           employed
                                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                 (4)           (5)               (6)                (7)
 -3*type-b                                      -0.003                -0.004                -0.001                0.007        -0.003           -0.003               -0.004
                                                (0.012)               (0.005)               (0.006)              (0.006)       (0.007)          (0.011)              (0.004)
 -2*type-b                                       0.017                -0.005                -0.002                0.011        -0.002           -0.001                0.003
                                                (0.018)               (0.004)               (0.005)              (0.007)       (0.007)          (0.008)              (0.006)
 -1*type-b                                       0.014                -0.010                 -0.001               0.007         -0.010           -0.005               -0.003
                                                (0.012)               (0.005)               (0.005)              (0.007)       (0.007)          (0.008)              (0.008)
 +1*type-b                                       0.004                -0.003                -0.002                0.004        -0.000           -0.002                0.005
                                                (0.019)               (0.005)               (0.006)              (0.007)       (0.007)          (0.011)              (0.006)
 +2*type-b                                       0.012                -0.005                 0.008                0.006        -0.003            0.008                0.003
                                                (0.014)               (0.006)               (0.006)              (0.005)       (0.007)          (0.008)              (0.006)
 +3*type-b                                       0.021                -0.007                 0.001                0.007        -0.004           -0.005                0.006
                                                (0.014)               (0.004)               (0.006)              (0.008)       (0.007)          (0.007)              (0.008)
 -3*type-a                                      -0.015                 0.006                 -0.004               -0.005       -0.002            -0.003               0.001
                                                (0.008)               (0.005)               (0.005)              (0.007)       (0.007)          (0.006)              (0.010)
 -2*type-a                                       -0.006                0.007                 0.005                -0.007        0.003            0.003               -0.001
                                                (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.005)       (0.005)          (0.007)              (0.007)
 -1*type-a                                     -0.019                  0.004                 0.002                -0.008        0.003            -0.004              -0.005
                                                (0.008)               (0.009)               (0.007)              (0.006)       (0.007)          (0.007)              (0.008)
 +1*type-a                                       -0.014               0.016                  0.002                -0.000        0.006            0.001               -0.005
                                                (0.009)               (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.006)       (0.005)          (0.006)              (0.008)
 +2*type-a                                     -0.018                 0.015                  -0.007               -0.003        0.008            -0.001               0.001
                                                (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.006)              (0.005)       (0.006)          (0.006)              (0.008)
 +3*type-a                                     -0.013                 0.017                  0.006                -0.004        0.002            0.005               -0.005
                                                (0.006)               (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.005)       (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.007)
 Observations                                    3503                   4988                 6608                  7556          7553            6465                  6637
 R2                                              0.321                 0.512                 0.435                0.456         0.464            0.439                 0.462
 Mean, day of the debate                         0.062                 0.047                 0.054                0.058         0.056            0.058                0.055
 Number of debates                                 28                    41                    50                   56            56               50                   47
 Sociodemographic controls                         X                     X                     X                    X              X               X                     X
 Average pre-debate dummies for type-b           0.009                -0.006                -0.002                0.008         -0.005          -0.003                -0.001
 .                                              (0.012)               (0.003)               (0.005)              (0.006)       (0.006)          (0.008)              (0.005)
 Average post-debate dummies for type-b          0.012                 -0.005                0.002                0.006         -0.002           0.001                0.005
 .                                              (0.011)               (0.004)               (0.005)              (0.006)       (0.006)          (0.008)              (0.006)
 Average pre-debate dummies for type-a         -0.013                  0.006                 0.001               -0.007         0.001           -0.001               -0.002
 .                                              (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.005)              (0.005)       (0.005)          (0.005)              (0.007)
 Average post-debate dummies for type-a        -0.015                 0.016                  0.000                -0.002         0.006           0.002                -0.003
 .                                              (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.006)              (0.004)       (0.005)          (0.005)              (0.006)



Notes: We interact the relative days dummies with indicators for type-a voter (debate watcher, voter with
strong party identification, with a college degree, above the median age, male, above the median income,
and not employed) and type-b voter (non-debate watcher, voter with weak or no party identification,
without college degree, below the median age, female, below the median income, and employed) and
also control for the dummy for being a type-a voter, uninteracted. Dummies for being surveyed four
days or more before or after the debate interacted with the type-a and type-b indicators were included
in the regressions but are not shown, for presentation clarity. We use one observation per debate per
day per voter type, and we weight each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed
from, relative to the total number of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. Other
notes as in Table 8 (columns 1 and 2).




                                                                                        60
Table B.16: Debates' effects on likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and on vote share
concentration

                                                                       Small               New               Vote share
                                                Challenger           candidate           candidate         concentration
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
  Before -3                                    0.002     0.003     0.006     0.006    -0.000     -0.000    -0.003   -0.002
                                              (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.005)
  -3                                           0.007     0.007    -0.001     0.000     0.001     0.001     -0.002   -0.002
                                              (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.005)   (0.005)
  -2                                           0.009     0.010     0.005     0.006    -0.002     -0.002    -0.003   -0.004
                                              (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.005)
  -1                                           0.001     0.002     0.002     0.003     0.001     0.001     -0.002   -0.002
                                              (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.005)
  +1                                           0.008     0.008     0.005     0.005     0.003     0.003     -0.004   -0.004
                                              (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.006)   (0.006)
  +2                                           0.003     0.004     0.007     0.007     0.003     0.003     -0.007   -0.006
                                              (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.005)   (0.005)
  +3                                           0.000     0.000     0.005     0.005     0.001     0.001     -0.004   -0.003
                                              (0.009)   (0.010)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.006)   (0.006)
  After +3                                     0.005     0.005     0.002     0.002     0.000     0.000     -0.001   -0.000
                                              (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.004)
  Observations                                294615    294615    294615    294615    290799    290799    3802       3802
  R2                                           0.042     0.049     0.084     0.091     0.076      0.077   0.921      0.923
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.634     0.634     0.148     0.148     0.007     0.007    0.324      0.324
  Number of debates                              56        56        56        56       56         56       56         56
  Sociodemographic controls                                X                   X                    X                  X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1    0.006     0.006     0.002     0.003     -0.000    -0.000    -0.003   -0.002
  .                                           (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.004)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      0.004     0.004     0.006     0.006     0.002     0.002     -0.005   -0.004
  .                                           (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.005)


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the debate level are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). In columns 1 through 6, we use the set of respondents as defined
in Table 5, columns 1 through 3. In columns 7 and 8, we use one observation per election per day,
vote shares are computed based on the set of respondents used in Table 5, column 4, and we weight
each observation by the number of respondents it was constructed from, relative to the total number
of respondents surveyed at the same relative time to the debate. We control for debate × election fixed
effects as well as fixed effects for the number of days relative to the election and for the day of the week
in which the pre-electoral survey took place. The mean value of the three pre-debate dummies and the
mean value of the three post-debate dummies are reported, along with their standard errors. .




                                                          61
C      Additional Robustness Checks

C.1     Rolling Cross-sections

    Table C.1: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares, rolling cross-sections

                        Vote choice                Vote               Conditional         Distance between predicted
                        consistency              intention            consistency            and final vote shares
                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
    Time             0.0028     0.0062      0.0012     0.0034      0.0019     0.0038      -0.0008       -0.0013
                     (0.0004)   (0.0010)    (0.0002)   (0.0007)    (0.0003)   (0.0008)    (0.0002)       (0.0005)
    Time2                       0.0001                 0.0000                 0.0000                     -0.0000
                                 (0.0000)               (0.0000)               (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
    Observations     136211      136211     175514      175514     120611      120611       1418          1418
    R2                0.083       0.084      0.075       0.075      0.049       0.050      0.618          0.620
    Mean at day -1   0.8814      0.8814     0.9166      0.9166     0.9378      0.9378      0.0509        0.0509

Notes: The sample is restricted to the 31 surveys designed as rolling cross-sections. Other notes as in
Table 1.




                                                             62
Table C.2: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates, rolling
cross-sections
                                             (a) Policy preferences

                             Consistency        Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)
         Time                   0.0001                  0.0001                  0.0001
                               (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)
         Observations           212626                  312673                  207048
         R2                      0.043                   0.075                   0.038
         Mean at day -1         0.8493                  0.9616                  0.8696

                                               (b) Issue salience

                             Consistency        Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)
         Time                  0.0015                  0.0006                  0.0010
                               (0.0006)                (0.0003)                (0.0004)
         Observations           46108                   60713                   44049
         R2                      0.046                  0.063                    0.054
         Mean at day -1         0.7392                  0.9212                  0.7676

                                            (c) Beliefs on candidates

                             Consistency        Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)
         Time                   0.0019                0.0006                    0.0019
                               (0.0016)                (0.0001)                (0.0016)
         Observations           473464                  801910                  436510
         R2                      0.075                   0.101                   0.095
         Mean at day -1         0.8121                  0.8690                  0.8602


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 3 and C.1.




                                                      63
Table C.3: Likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and vote share concentration, rolling
cross-sections

                          Support for           Support for              Support for                Vote share
                          challenger          small candidate           new candidate             concentration
                                (1)                     (2)                       (3)                      (4)
   Time                     0.00050               0.00039                   0.00003                     -0.00019
                            (0.00020)             (0.00019)                (0.00004)                    (0.00009)
   Observations              121728                   121728                119517                        1418
   R2                         0.031                    0.083                 0.154                       0.956
   Mean at day -1            0.67300                  0.14707               0.02105                     0.55664

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 5 and C.1.




              Table C.4: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency, rolling cross-sections

                                              Vote choice consistency    Vote intention       Conditional consistency
                                                (1)             (2)       (3)           (4)     (5)              (6)
  Before -3                                   -0.017          -0.017     0.002      0.001     -0.016        -0.017
                                              (0.007)         (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.007)        (0.007)
  -3                                           -0.010          -0.010    0.008      0.008     -0.010         -0.010
                                              (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.008)       (0.008)
  -2                                           -0.001          -0.002    0.007      0.006     -0.002         -0.003
                                              (0.011)         (0.010)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.009)       (0.009)
  -1                                           -0.005          -0.006    0.005      0.004     -0.004         -0.005
                                              (0.010)         (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.006)       (0.006)
  +1                                           -0.013          -0.013    0.009      0.009     -0.013         -0.013
                                              (0.009)         (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.008)       (0.008)
  +2                                           -0.015          -0.015    -0.001     -0.002    -0.012         -0.012
                                              (0.010)         (0.010)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.009)       (0.009)
  +3                                           -0.005          -0.006   0.010      0.009       -0.009       -0.009
                                              (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.006)       (0.006)
  After +3                                     -0.005          -0.006    0.009      0.008     -0.008         -0.008
                                              (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.006)       (0.006)
  Observations                                211105          211105    264252     264252     192493        192493
  R2                                           0.074           0.078     0.071      0.078      0.040         0.042
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.810           0.810     0.892      0.892      0.886         0.886
  Number of debates                              27              27        27         27         27            27
  Sociodemographic controls                                       X                   X                         X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1    -0.005          -0.006    0.006      0.006     -0.005         -0.006
  .                                           (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.007)       (0.007)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      -0.011          -0.011    0.006      0.006     -0.011         -0.011
  .                                           (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.007)       (0.007)

Notes: The sample is restricted to the 27 debates covered by surveys designed as rolling cross-sections.
Other notes as in Table 7.




                                                         64
              Table C.5: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares, rolling cross-sections

                                                Distance between predicted      Daily change in
                                                   and final vote shares     predicted vote shares
                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)
   Before -3                                    0.008          0.009           0.011      0.010
                                                (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.007)    (0.007)
   -3                                            0.004          0.006          0.007      0.007
                                                (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.010)    (0.011)
   -2                                            0.004          0.006          0.009      0.008
                                                (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)
   -1                                            0.002          0.005        0.019      0.019
                                                (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.006)    (0.006)
   +1                                            0.005          0.006          0.007      0.006
                                                (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)
   +2                                            0.007          0.008         0.021      0.021
                                                (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.010)    (0.010)
   +3                                            0.006          0.008         0.014       0.014
                                                (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.008)    (0.008)
   After +3                                      0.005          0.005          0.007      0.006
                                                (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.005)    (0.005)
   Observations                                  1689           1689          1665        1665
   R2                                            0.668          0.678         0.604       0.609
   Mean, day of the debate                       0.040          0.040         0.071       0.071
   Number of debates                               27             27            27          27
   Sociodemographic controls                                      X                         X
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1     0.004          0.006         0.012      0.011
   .                                            (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.006)    (0.006)
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      0.006          0.007          0.014      0.014
   .                                            (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 8 and C.4.




                                                  65
C.2   Sociodemographic Controls

Table C.6: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares, with sociodemographic
controls

                      Vote choice                Vote               Conditional         Distance between predicted
                      consistency              intention            consistency            and final vote shares
                     (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
  Time             0.0025     0.0062      0.0010     0.0032      0.0018     0.0039      -0.0008       -0.0013
                   (0.0003)   (0.0008)    (0.0002)   (0.0005)    (0.0003)   (0.0007)    (0.0002)       (0.0005)
  Time2                       0.0001                 0.0000                 0.0000                     -0.0000
                               (0.0000)               (0.0000)               (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
  Observations     200916      200916     253489      253489     178176      178176       3125          3125
  R2                0.075       0.077      0.080       0.080      0.043       0.043      0.522          0.524
  Mean at day -1   0.8768      0.8768     0.9157      0.9157     0.9346      0.9346      0.0324        0.0324

Notes: Each sociodemographic characteristic from Table B.1 and a dummy indicating whether it is
missing are included. Other notes as in Table 1.




                                                           66
Table C.7: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates, with
sociodemographic controls
                                             (a) Policy preferences

                             Consistency        Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)
         Time                   0.0001                  0.0001                  0.0001
                               (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)
         Observations           228562                  330843                  222785
         R2                      0.052                   0.088                   0.041
         Mean at day -1         0.8488                  0.9615                  0.8689

                                               (b) Issue salience

                             Consistency        Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)
         Time                  0.0013                  0.0006                  0.0008
                               (0.0006)                (0.0003)                (0.0004)
         Observations           46108                   60713                   44049
         R2                      0.050                  0.084                    0.060
         Mean at day -1         0.7392                  0.9212                  0.7676

                                            (c) Beliefs on candidates

                             Consistency        Giving an answer        Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)
         Time                   0.0018                0.0006                    0.0017
                               (0.0014)                (0.0001)                (0.0014)
         Observations           478039                  809037                  440771
         R2                      0.084                   0.138                   0.097
         Mean at day -1         0.8119                  0.8690                  0.8601


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 3 and C.6.




                                                      67
Table C.8: Likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and vote share concentration, with
sociodemographic controls

                        Support for           Support for           Support for             Vote share
                        challenger          small candidate        new candidate          concentration
                             (1)                   (2)                      (3)                   (4)
   Time                  0.00044               0.00035                    0.00005           -0.00019
                         (0.00017)             (0.00014)                 (0.00004)           (0.00009)
   Observations            189733               190329                   187068                   3138
   R2                       0.086                0.094                    0.147                  0.933
   Mean at day -1          0.66015              0.14837                  0.02083                0.33637

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 5 and C.6.




          Table C.9: Drivers of vote choice formation, with sociodemographic controls
                                      (a) Mean vote choice consistency

                                                                (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
    Mean consistency in policy preferences                    -0.108                               -0.141
                                                              (0.121)                              (0.127)
    Mean consistency in issue salience                                     0.260                   0.252
                                                                           (0.098)                 (0.098)
    Mean consistency in beliefs on candidates                                           0.132      0.123
                                                                                        (0.066)    (0.066)
    Observations                                               3129         3129        3129        3129
    R2                                                         0.808        0.810       0.809       0.811


                               (b) Mean probability of stating a vote intention

                                                                   (1)            (2)     (3)            (4)
   Mean probability of stating a policy preference              -0.016                              -0.044
                                                                (0.152)                             (0.151)
   Mean probability of stating a salient issue                              0.201                  0.204
                                                                             (0.057)                (0.056)
   Mean probability of stating a belief on candidates                                   0.221      0.226
                                                                                        (0.083)     (0.081)
   Observations                                                  3144        3144        3144           3144
   R2                                                            0.842       0.843       0.843          0.844


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 6 and C.6. We control for the daily average of each sociodemographic
characteristic from Table B.1.



                                                     68
C.3      Wild Cluster Bootstrap Standard Errors

 Table C.10: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares, wild cluster bootstrap

                               Vote choice              Vote              Conditional        Distance between predicted
                               consistency            intention           consistency           and final vote shares
                             (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)     (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)
  Time                     0.0025     0.0061     0.0010     0.0031     0.0018     0.0038     -0.0008       -0.0013
                             [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.00]        [0.04]
  Time2                               0.0001                0.0000                0.0000                    -0.0000
                                        [0.00]                [0.00]                [0.00]                   [0.17]
  Observations             200916     200916     253489      253489    178176     178176       3125          3125
  R2                        0.070      0.071      0.072       0.073     0.041      0.041      0.520          0.523
  Mean at day -1           0.8768     0.8768     0.9157      0.9157    0.9346     0.9346      0.0324        0.0324
  Number of replications    1000       1000       1000        1000      1000       1000        1000          1000


Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron et al. (2008) to allow for
correlation of the error terms at the survey level, and report the corresponding p-value in brackets. We
use 1,000 bootstrap replications. Other notes as in Table 1.




                                                            69
Table C.11: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates, wild
cluster bootstrap
                                             (a) Policy preferences

                                   Consistency        Giving an answer   Conditional consistency
                                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)
         Time                         0.0001                0.0001              0.0001
                                      [0.28]                [0.51]                [0.00]
         Observations                 228562                330843               222785
         R2                            0.047                 0.078                0.040
         Mean at day -1               0.8488                0.9615               0.8689
         Number of replications        1000                  1000                 1000

                                               (b) Issue salience

                                   Consistency        Giving an answer   Conditional consistency
                                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)
         Time                         0.0015                0.0006               0.0010
                                       [0.08]                [0.10]               [0.07]
         Observations                 46108                 60713                44049
         R2                            0.046                0.063                 0.054
         Mean at day -1               0.7392                0.9212               0.7676
         Number of replications        1000                  1000                 1000

                                         (c) Beliefs on candidates

                                   Consistency        Giving an answer   Conditional consistency
                                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)
         Time                         0.0018               0.0006                0.0017
                                      [0.44]                 [0.00]              [0.46]
         Observations                 478039                809037               440771
         R2                            0.074                 0.101                0.095
         Mean at day -1               0.8119                0.8690               0.8601
         Number of replications        1000                  1000                 1000


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 3 and C.10.




                                                      70
Table C.12: Likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and vote share concentration, wild
cluster bootstrap

                                 Support for            Support for        Support for                Vote share
                                 challenger           small candidate     new candidate             concentration
                                       (1)                    (2)                  (3)                   (4)
   Time                            0.00046               0.00038                 0.00006              -0.00021
                                     [0.03]               [0.03]                  [0.13]                [0.06]
   Observations                     189733                190329                 187068                 3138
   R2                                0.076                 0.089                  0.145                0.932
   Mean at day -1                   0.6602                0.1484                 0.0208                0.3364
   Number of replications            1000                  1000                   1000                  1000

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 5 and C.10.




          Table C.13: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency, wild cluster bootstrap

                                              Vote choice consistency   Vote intention      Conditional consistency
                                                (1)             (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)
  Before -3                                   -0.014       -0.015       0.003     0.002     -0.015       -0.016
                                               [0.03]       [0.01]      [0.61]    [0.69]     [0.02]       [0.02]
  -3                                          -0.009          -0.010    0.003     0.003     -0.005        -0.006
                                              [0.17]          [0.15]    [0.61]    [0.64]    [0.46]        [0.42]
  -2                                          -0.001          -0.002    0.007     0.007     -0.004        -0.004
                                              [0.87]          [0.78]    [0.15]    [0.15]    [0.64]        [0.58]
  -1                                          -0.001          -0.002    0.005     0.005     -0.001        -0.002
                                              [0.82]          [0.74]    [0.38]    [0.45]    [0.91]        [0.79]
  +1                                          -0.009          -0.009    0.007     0.007     -0.008        -0.008
                                              [0.26]          [0.26]    [0.38]    [0.35]    [0.29]        [0.29]
  +2                                          -0.007          -0.008    0.002     0.001     -0.007        -0.008
                                              [0.35]          [0.30]    [0.80]    [0.85]    [0.35]        [0.32]
  +3                                          -0.006          -0.006    0.007     0.007     -0.006        -0.006
                                              [0.30]          [0.27]    [0.14]    [0.14]    [0.25]        [0.22]
  After +3                                    -0.002          -0.003    0.008     0.008     -0.005        -0.005
                                              [0.69]          [0.62]    [0.19]    [0.21]    [0.35]        [0.29]
  Observations                                263681          263681    330621    330621    240826       240826
  R2                                           0.072           0.077     0.069     0.076     0.042        0.044
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.811           0.811     0.811     0.811     0.887        0.887
  Number of debates                              56              56        56        56        56           56
  Sociodemographic controls                                      X                   X                      X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1   -0.004          -0.005    0.005      0.005    -0.003       -0.004
  .                                           [0.58]           [0.48]   [0.25]     [0.27]   [0.58]        [0.51]
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3     -0.007          -0.008    0.005      0.005    -0.007       -0.007
  .                                           [0.18]           [0.16]   [0.33]     [0.31]   [0.24]        [0.21]
  Number of replications                       1000             1000     1000       1000     1000          1000

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron et al. (2008) to allow for
correlation of the error terms at the debate level, and report the corresponding p-value in brackets. We
use 1,000 bootstrap replications. Other notes as in Table 7.




                                                         71
          Table C.14: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares, wild cluster bootstrap

                                               Distance between predicted      Daily change in
                                                  and final vote shares     predicted vote shares
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)
   Before -3                                    0.005         0.006          0.009      0.007
                                               [0.254]       [0.204]        [0.160]    [0.246]
   -3                                          -0.001         0.000         -0.003     -0.004
                                               [0.796]       [0.980]        [0.792]    [0.704]
   -2                                          -0.000         0.000          0.001     -0.001
                                               [0.972]       [0.906]        [0.952]    [0.898]
   -1                                          -0.003         -0.002        0.013      0.012
                                               [0.410]       [0.640]        [0.030]    [0.056]
   +1                                           0.002         0.002          0.008      0.006
                                               [0.554]       [0.498]        [0.256]    [0.428]
   +2                                           0.000         0.001         0.022      0.021
                                               [0.966]       [0.844]        [0.048]    [0.050]
   +3                                           0.001         0.002          0.011      0.009
                                               [0.826]       [0.658]        [0.288]    [0.368]
   After +3                                     0.002         0.002          0.006      0.005
                                               [0.636]       [0.546]        [0.216]    [0.312]
   Observations                                3802           3802          3749         3749
   R2                                          0.575         0.581          0.470       0.477
   Mean, day of the debate                     0.046         0.046          0.085       0.085
   Number of debates                             56            56             56          56
   Sociodemographic controls                                    X                         X
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1   -0.001        -0.000         0.004       0.002
   .                                           [0.63]        [0.88]         [0.63]      [0.79]
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      0.001        0.002          0.014       0.012
   .                                           [0.76]        [0.60]         [0.11]      [0.17]
   Number of replications                       1000          1000           1000        1000

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 8 and C.13.




                                                 72
C.4    Standard Errors Adjusted for Clustering at the Election Date Level

  Table C.15: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares, election date clusters

                      Vote choice               Vote              Conditional        Distance between predicted
                      consistency             intention           consistency           and final vote shares
                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)
  Time             0.0025     0.0061     0.0010     0.0031     0.0018     0.0038     -0.0008       -0.0013
                   (0.0003)   (0.0008)   (0.0002)   (0.0005)   (0.0003)   (0.0007)   (0.0002)       (0.0005)
  Time2                       0.0001                0.0000                0.0000                    -0.0000
                              (0.0000)              (0.0000)              (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
  Observations     200916     200916     253489     253489     178176     178176       3125          3125
  R2                0.070      0.071      0.072      0.073      0.041      0.041      0.520          0.523
  Mean at day -1   0.8768     0.8768     0.9157     0.9157     0.9346     0.9346      0.0324        0.0324

Notes: Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the election date level. Other notes as in Table 1.




                                                          73
Table C.16: Consistency in policy preferences, issue salience, and beliefs on candidates, election
date clusters
                                             (a) Policy preferences

                             Consistency        Giving an answer      Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                     (3)
         Time                   0.0001                 0.0001                 0.0001
                               (0.0001)               (0.0001)               (0.0001)
         Observations           228562                 330843                 222785
         R2                      0.047                  0.078                  0.040
         Mean at day -1         0.8488                 0.9615                 0.8689

                                               (b) Issue salience

                             Consistency        Giving an answer      Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                     (3)
         Time                  0.0015                 0.0006                 0.0010
                               (0.0006)               (0.0003)               (0.0004)
         Observations           46108                  60713                  44049
         R2                      0.046                 0.063                   0.054
         Mean at day -1         0.7392                 0.9212                 0.7676

                                          (c) Beliefs on candidates

                             Consistency        Giving an answer      Conditional consistency
                                 (1)                   (2)                     (3)
         Time                   0.0018                0.0006                  0.0017
                               (0.0015)                (0.0001)              (0.0014)
         Observations           478039                 809037                 440771
         R2                      0.074                  0.101                  0.095
         Mean at day -1         0.8119                 0.8690                 0.8601


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 3 and C.15.




                                                      74
Table C.17: Likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and vote share concentration,
election date clusters

                         Support for            Support for               Support for              Vote share
                         challenger           small candidate            new candidate           concentration
                               (1)                       (2)                      (3)                     (4)
  Time                    0.00046                 0.00038                    0.00006                  -0.00021
                           (0.00017)              (0.00016)                 (0.00004)                 (0.00011)
  Observations              189733                 190329                    187068                       3138
  R2                         0.081                  0.089                     0.145                      0.932
  Mean at day -1            0.66015                0.14837                   0.02083                    0.33637
Notes: Same notes as in Tables 5 and C.15.




             Table C.18: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency, election date clusters

                                              Vote choice consistency     Vote intention      Conditional consistency
                                                 (1)             (2)        (3)         (4)     (5)             (6)
  Before -3                                   -0.014           -0.015      0.003     0.002    -0.015       -0.016
                                               (0.007)         (0.007)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.006)       (0.006)
  -3                                            -0.009         -0.010      0.003     0.003     -0.005       -0.006
                                               (0.005)         (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)       (0.005)
  -2                                            -0.001          -0.002    0.007     0.007      -0.004       -0.004
                                               (0.006)         (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)       (0.006)
  -1                                            -0.001          -0.002     0.005     0.005     -0.001        -0.002
                                               (0.006)         (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.005)       (0.006)
  +1                                            -0.009          -0.009     0.007     0.007     -0.008        -0.008
                                               (0.008)         (0.008)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.007)       (0.007)
  +2                                            -0.007          -0.008     0.002     0.001     -0.007        -0.008
                                               (0.007)         (0.007)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.006)       (0.006)
  +3                                            -0.006          -0.006    0.007     0.007      -0.006       -0.006
                                               (0.006)         (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.007)       (0.007)
  After +3                                      -0.002          -0.003    0.008      0.008     -0.005       -0.005
                                               (0.006)         (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)       (0.005)
  Observations                                 263681          263681     330621    330621    240826        240826
  R2                                            0.072           0.077      0.069     0.076     0.042         0.044
  Mean, day of the debate                       0.811           0.811      0.896     0.896     0.887         0.887
  Number of debates                               56              56         56        56        56            56
  Sociodemographic controls                                        X                   X                        X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1     -0.004          -0.005     0.005     0.005    -0.003         -0.004
  .                                            (0.005)         (0.005)    (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)       (0.004)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3       -0.007          -0.008     0.005     0.005    -0.007         -0.007
  .                                            (0.006)         (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.006)       (0.006)

Notes: Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the election date level. Other notes as in Table 7.




                                                          75
          Table C.19: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares, election date clusters

                                               Distance between predicted      Daily change in
                                                  and final vote shares     predicted vote shares
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)
   Before -3                                    0.005         0.006         0.009        0.007
                                               (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.005)
   -3                                          -0.001         0.000         -0.003      -0.004
                                               (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.007)     (0.006)
   -2                                          -0.000         0.000          0.001      -0.001
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.008)     (0.009)
   -1                                          -0.003         -0.002        0.013        0.012
                                               (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.007)     (0.007)
   +1                                           0.002         0.002         0.008        0.006
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.005)
   +2                                           0.000         0.001         0.022      0.021
                                               (0.004)       (0.005)         (0.006)    (0.007)
   +3                                           0.001         0.002          0.011       0.009
                                               (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.008)     (0.008)
   After +3                                     0.002         0.002          0.006       0.005
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)     (0.005)
   Observations                                3802            3802          3749        3749
   R2                                          0.575          0.581          0.470       0.477
   Mean, day of the debate                     0.046          0.046          0.085       0.085
   Number of debates                             56             56             56          56
   Sociodemographic controls                                     X                         X
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1   -0.001         -0.000         0.004       0.002
   .                                           (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.006)     (0.007)
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      0.001         0.002         0.014       0.012
   .                                           (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)     (0.005)

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 8 and C.18.




                                                 76
C.5   Including Unlikely Voters

Table C.20: Vote choice consistency and distance to final vote shares, including unlikely voters

                      Vote choice                Vote                Conditional        Distance between predicted
                      consistency              intention             consistency           and final vote shares
                     (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)
  Time             0.0027      0.0066     0.0011      0.0037      0.0019     0.0040     -0.0008       -0.0013
                   (0.0003)    (0.0007)   (0.0002)     (0.0005)   (0.0003)   (0.0007)    (0.0002)      (0.0004)
  Time2                        0.0001                 0.0000                 0.0000                    -0.0000
                               (0.0000)                (0.0000)              (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
  Observations     218269       218269    293913       293913     190927      190927      3125           3125
  R2                0.069        0.071     0.065        0.066      0.042       0.042     0.537           0.539
  Mean at day -1   0.8633       0.8633    0.8961       0.8961     0.9280      0.9280     0.0329         0.0329

Notes: The sample includes all respondents who were asked whom they intended to vote for, including
those who said they were unlikely to vote. Other notes as in Table 1.




Table C.21: Likelihood to vote for lesser-known candidates and vote share concentration,
including unlikely voters

                           Support for         Support for                 Support for             Vote share
                           challenger        small candidate              new candidate          concentration
                                 (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
   Time                       0.00041                0.00035                  0.00005               -0.00017
                              (0.00016)              (0.00016)               (0.00004)              (0.00010)
   Observations               214137                 214757                  210885                   3140
   R2                          0.076                  0.087                   0.149                  0.939
   Mean at day -1             0.65852                0.14933                 0.02273                0.33192

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 5 and C.20.




                                                           77
       Table C.22: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency, including unlikely voters

                                              Vote choice consistency   Vote intention      Conditional consistency
                                                (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
  Before -3                                   -0.015      -0.016         -0.001    -0.002   -0.015      -0.016
                                              (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  -3                                           -0.009         -0.010     0.002     0.001    -0.004        -0.005
                                              (0.006)        (0.007)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)      (0.006)
  -2                                           -0.004         -0.005     0.002     0.002    -0.005        -0.006
                                              (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.006)      (0.006)
  -1                                           -0.007         -0.008     0.001     0.001    -0.004        -0.005
                                              (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)      (0.006)
  +1                                           -0.010         -0.010     0.006     0.006    -0.009        -0.009
                                              (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)      (0.007)
  +2                                           -0.009         -0.011     -0.000    -0.001   -0.008        -0.009
                                              (0.009)        (0.009)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.007)      (0.007)
  +3                                           -0.005         -0.006     0.004     0.004    -0.005        -0.006
                                              (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  After +3                                     -0.002         -0.003     0.005     0.005    -0.004        -0.005
                                              (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  Observations                                284942         284942     378317    378317    257507       257507
  R2                                           0.073          0.079      0.066     0.077     0.042        0.045
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.795          0.795      0.878     0.878     0.880        0.880
  Number of debates                              56             56         56        56        56           56
  Sociodemographic controls                                      X                   X                       X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1    -0.006         -0.007     0.002     0.002    -0.005        -0.006
  .                                           (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.005)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      -0.008         -0.009     0.003     0.003    -0.007        -0.008
  .                                           (0.007)        (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.005)      (0.005)

Notes: The sample includes all respondents who were asked whom they intended to vote for, including
those who said they were unlikely to vote. Other notes as in Table 7.




                                                        78
        Table C.23: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares, including unlikely voters

                                               Distance between predicted      Daily change in
                                                  and final vote shares     predicted vote shares
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)
   Before -3                                    0.002         0.003          0.005      0.004
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)    (0.006)
   -3                                          -0.002         -0.001        -0.005     -0.006
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.008)    (0.008)
   -2                                          -0.004         -0.003        -0.001     -0.003
                                               (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.008)    (0.008)
   -1                                          -0.004         -0.003         0.008      0.008
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)    (0.006)
   +1                                           0.001         0.002          0.008      0.006
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)    (0.005)
   +2                                          -0.004         -0.004        0.017      0.016
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.008)    (0.008)
   +3                                           0.000         0.001         0.013       0.012
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)
   After +3                                    -0.001         0.000          0.006      0.005
                                               (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.004)    (0.004)
   Observations                                3802            3802         3753        3753
   R2                                          0.589          0.594         0.480       0.488
   Mean, day of the debate                     0.049          0.049         0.082       0.082
   Number of debates                             56             56            56          56
   Sociodemographic controls                                     X                        X
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1   -0.003         -0.002         0.001     -0.000
   .                                           (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.006)    (0.006)
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3     -0.001         -0.000        0.013      0.011
   .                                           (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.005)    (0.005)

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 8 and C.22.




                                                 79
C.6    Event Study with Five-Day Window

              Table C.24: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency, five-day window

                                                      Vote choice consistency   Stating vote intention   Conditional consistency
                                                        (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
  Before -5                                           -0.018      -0.019         -0.002     -0.003       -0.015      -0.016
                                                       (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.006)     (0.006)
  -5                                                   -0.012          -0.013    0.005       0.004       -0.015      -0.016
                                                      (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.008)     (0.008)
  -4                                                  -0.014          -0.015     -0.001     -0.001        -0.010       -0.011
                                                      (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.009)      (0.009)
  -3                                                   -0.006          -0.007    0.001       0.000        -0.001       -0.002
                                                      (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)
  -2                                                   0.001           -0.000   0.008       0.008         -0.001      -0.002
                                                      (0.009)         (0.009)   (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.007)      (0.007)
  -1                                                   0.001           0.001     0.005       0.005        0.002        0.002
                                                      (0.006)         (0.006)   (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)
  +1                                                   -0.007          -0.007    0.008       0.008        -0.006       -0.006
                                                      (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)
  +2                                                   -0.006          -0.007    0.001      -0.000        -0.004       -0.005
                                                      (0.009)         (0.009)   (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.008)
  +3                                                   -0.004          -0.004    0.005       0.005        -0.003       -0.003
                                                      (0.007)         (0.006)   (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.006)
  +4                                                   0.002           0.002     0.003       0.002        0.004        0.003
                                                      (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.007)      (0.007)
  +5                                                   -0.008          -0.008    -0.001     -0.001        -0.004       -0.004
                                                      (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.007)
  After +5                                             -0.003          -0.004    0.005       0.004        -0.003       -0.004
                                                      (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.006)
  Observations                                        225519          225519    280927      280927       207744       207744
  R2                                                   0.064           0.068     0.066       0.073        0.038        0.040
  Mean, day of the debate                              0.827           0.827     0.913       0.913        0.891        0.891
  Number of debates                                     45               45       45           45          45            45
  Sociodemographic controls                                               X                    X                          X
  Average pre-debate dummies -5, -4, -3, -2, and -1    -0.006          -0.007    0.004       0.003       -0.005        -0.006
  .                                                   (0.006)         (0.006)   (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.006)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5         -0.004          -0.005    0.003       0.003       -0.003        -0.003
  .                                                   (0.006)         (0.006)   (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)


Notes: The set of relative days dummies includes dummy variables for being surveyed one, two, three,
four, or five days before the debate, as well as dummies for being surveyed one, two, three, four, or five
days after the debate. Debates held less than five days from one another are excluded. Other notes as in
Table 7.




                                                                 80
              Table C.25: Debates' effect on aggregate vote shares, five-day window

                                                      Distance between predicted      Daily change in
                                                         and final vote shares     predicted vote shares
                                                           (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)
  Before -5                                             0.005        0.005          0.008      0.006
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)
  -5                                                    -0.003       -0.002         0.013      0.011
                                                       (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.011)    (0.011)
  -4                                                    0.004        0.004          0.003      0.002
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.009)    (0.009)
  -3                                                    -0.003       -0.003         -0.003    -0.004
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.011)    (0.011)
  -2                                                    -0.003       -0.002         -0.001    -0.003
                                                       (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.010)    (0.010)
  -1                                                  -0.007        -0.007          0.010      0.009
                                                       (0.003)      (0.004)        (0.006)    (0.007)
  +1                                                    -0.000       0.000          0.010      0.008
                                                       (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.007)    (0.008)
  +2                                                    -0.004       -0.003         0.019      0.017
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.012)    (0.012)
  +3                                                    -0.003       -0.002         0.008      0.006
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.010)    (0.010)
  +4                                                    -0.003       -0.003         -0.004    -0.005
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)
  +5                                                    0.002        0.002          -0.005    -0.006
                                                       (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.008)    (0.008)
  After +5                                              -0.002       -0.002         0.006      0.004
                                                       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.007)    (0.007)
  Observations                                         3010          3010          2971        2971
  R2                                                   0.568         0.573         0.504       0.511
  Mean, day of the debate                              0.043         0.043         0.080       0.080
  Number of debates                                     45             45            45          45
  Sociodemographic controls                                            X                         X
  Average pre-debate dummies -5, -4, -3, -2, and -1     -0.002      -0.002          0.005      0.003
  .                                                    (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.008)    (0.008)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5          -0.002      -0.001          0.005      0.004
  .                                                    (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.007)    (0.007)

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 8 and C.24.




                                                      81
Table C.26: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency across debate and election types, five-
day window

                                            First vs.       Close vs.      Fluctuating vs.      U.S. vs.         Plurality vs.
                                           next debate   less-close race     stable race     other countries   proportional rule
                                               (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
  -5*type-b                                   -0.009         0.004             -0.016            -0.019             -0.012
                                             (0.009)        (0.010)            (0.009)           (0.011)            (0.021)
  -4*type-b                                   -0.003        -0.004             -0.008           -0.024             -0.052
                                             (0.010)        (0.012)            (0.009)           (0.012)            (0.016)
  -3*type-b                                   -0.005        -0.008             -0.003             -0.011            -0.027
                                             (0.008)        (0.013)            (0.008)           (0.009)            (0.025)
  -2*type-b                                   0.010         -0.003              0.008             -0.005            -0.020
                                             (0.011)        (0.014)            (0.011)           (0.011)            (0.025)
  -1*type-b                                   0.008         -0.001              0.003             0.003             -0.007
                                             (0.007)        (0.009)            (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.024)
  +1*type-b                                   -0.002        -0.007             -0.002             -0.011            -0.032
                                             (0.007)        (0.010)            (0.007)           (0.010)            (0.030)
  +2*type-b                                   -0.007         0.006             -0.006             -0.009            -0.014
                                             (0.011)        (0.014)            (0.011)           (0.011)            (0.018)
  +3*type-b                                   -0.002         0.002             -0.001             -0.005            -0.027
                                             (0.007)        (0.010)            (0.007)           (0.008)            (0.022)
  +4*type-b                                   -0.001         0.010              0.003             -0.003             0.002
                                             (0.008)        (0.011)            (0.008)           (0.008)            (0.019)
  +5*type-b                                   -0.010        -0.004             -0.002             -0.013            -0.035
                                             (0.008)        (0.014)            (0.007)           (0.011)            (0.028)
  -5*type-a                                   -0.020        -0.028             -0.012            -0.004             -0.014
                                             (0.016)         (0.011)           (0.017)           (0.013)            (0.009)
  -4*type-a                                 -0.033          -0.024            -0.031              0.001             -0.009
                                             (0.014)         (0.009)           (0.013)           (0.009)            (0.008)
  -3*type-a                                   -0.011        -0.006             -0.018             0.003             -0.004
                                             (0.014)        (0.007)            (0.015)           (0.013)            (0.007)
  -2*type-a                                 -0.024           0.002             -0.020             0.009              0.002
                                             (0.011)        (0.010)            (0.013)           (0.013)            (0.009)
  -1*type-a                                   -0.015         0.002             -0.006             -0.002             0.001
                                             (0.011)        (0.008)            (0.012)           (0.010)            (0.006)
  +1*type-a                                   -0.019        -0.008             -0.017             -0.001            -0.004
                                             (0.015)        (0.009)            (0.016)           (0.011)            (0.007)
  +2*type-a                                   -0.006        -0.016             -0.008             -0.002            -0.005
                                             (0.012)        (0.009)            (0.014)           (0.011)            (0.009)
  +3*type-a                                   -0.009        -0.008             -0.011             -0.001            -0.001
                                             (0.013)        (0.008)            (0.014)           (0.010)            (0.006)
  +4*type-a                                   0.005         -0.004              0.001             0.012              0.002
                                             (0.012)        (0.007)            (0.014)           (0.010)            (0.008)
  +5*type-a                                   -0.004        -0.011             -0.019             0.002             -0.005
                                             (0.017)        (0.008)            (0.018)           (0.007)            (0.007)
  Observations                               225519         225519             225519            225519             225519
  R2                                          0.068           0.068             0.068             0.069              0.068
  Mean, day of the debate                     0.827           0.827             0.827             0.827              0.827
  Number of debates                             45              45                45                45                 45
  Sociodemographic controls                      X              X                 X                  X                 X
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-b       0.000          -0.002            -0.003             -0.011            -0.024
  .                                          (0.007)        (0.009)            (0.007)           (0.008)            (0.017)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-b      -0.005         0.001             -0.002             -0.008            -0.021
  .                                          (0.007)        (0.009)            (0.006)           (0.008)            (0.015)
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-a     -0.021          -0.011             -0.017             0.001             -0.005
  .                                          (0.010)        (0.007)            (0.011)           (0.008)            (0.006)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-a      -0.007         -0.009            -0.011             0.002             -0.003
  .                                          (0.011)        (0.006)            (0.012)           (0.007)            (0.006)


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 9 and C.24.



                                                             82
 Table C.27: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency across voter types, five-day window
                                             Debate watchers vs.    Strong vs. weak       College degree vs.   Above median age   Male vs.    Above median income   Not employed vs.
                                               non-watchers        party identification   no college degree       vs. below       female           vs. below           employed
                                                     (1)                   (2)                    (3)                 (4)           (5)                (6)                (7)
    -5*type-b                                       0.001                -0.017                -0.012               -0.018          0.006           -0.004               -0.015
                                                   (0.027)               (0.011)               (0.010)              (0.013)        (0.013)          (0.016)              (0.010)
    -4*type-b                                       0.007                -0.011                -0.020               -0.028         -0.016           -0.003              -0.022
                                                   (0.022)               (0.011)               (0.009)              (0.014)        (0.012)          (0.015)              (0.010)
    -3*type-b                                       -0.011                -0.006                -0.011              -0.020          0.001            0.002                -0.011
                                                   (0.023)               (0.008)               (0.011)              (0.012)        (0.012)          (0.015)              (0.009)
    -2*type-b                                       0.002                 0.014                 -0.009               -0.008         0.016            0.017               -0.008
                                                   (0.022)               (0.013)               (0.009)              (0.014)        (0.014)          (0.013)              (0.011)
    -1*type-b                                       0.013                 0.010                 -0.002               -0.003         0.016            0.007               -0.001
                                                   (0.025)               (0.009)               (0.009)              (0.014)        (0.010)          (0.015)              (0.008)
    +1*type-b                                       -0.033                0.005                 -0.011               -0.021         0.001            0.014               -0.011
                                                   (0.023)               (0.009)               (0.009)              (0.013)        (0.012)          (0.015)              (0.010)
    +2*type-b                                      -0.010                 0.000                -0.021                -0.005         0.004            -0.000               -0.013
                                                   (0.016)               (0.013)               (0.012)              (0.015)        (0.015)          (0.014)              (0.009)
    +3*type-b                                       0.015                 0.010                 -0.010               -0.007         0.007            0.002               -0.007
                                                   (0.022)               (0.011)               (0.009)              (0.011)        (0.012)          (0.015)              (0.011)
    +4*type-b                                       0.021                 0.003                -0.006                0.002          0.011            0.019                0.000
                                                   (0.020)               (0.010)               (0.011)              (0.013)        (0.011)          (0.012)              (0.010)
    +5*type-b                                       -0.031                0.004                 -0.018              -0.023          0.008            0.007                -0.017
                                                   (0.023)               (0.009)               (0.011)              (0.013)        (0.012)          (0.016)              (0.010)
    -3*type-a                                       0.006                -0.002                -0.001                0.003         -0.015           -0.003                0.004
                                                   (0.013)               (0.009)               (0.008)              (0.011)        (0.010)          (0.011)              (0.013)
    -2*type-a                                       -0.009                -0.004                0.018                0.006        -0.017             -0.000               0.012
                                                   (0.012)               (0.010)               (0.011)              (0.010)        (0.008)          (0.012)              (0.013)
    -1*type-a                                       -0.018                -0.006                0.013                0.004        -0.016             0.002                0.012
                                                   (0.013)               (0.008)               (0.010)              (0.008)        (0.007)          (0.011)              (0.012)
    +1*type-a                                       0.006                 -0.012                0.010                0.004        -0.016             -0.004               0.006
                                                   (0.013)               (0.010)               (0.010)              (0.009)        (0.009)          (0.010)              (0.011)
    +2*type-a                                       0.010                 -0.016               0.018                 -0.007       -0.017             -0.001               0.002
                                                   (0.009)               (0.010)               (0.008)              (0.010)        (0.009)          (0.011)              (0.014)
    +3*type-a                                      -0.012                -0.012                -0.005               -0.001         -0.014           -0.011               -0.001
                                                   (0.014)               (0.011)               (0.011)              (0.007)        (0.009)          (0.009)              (0.014)
    +4*type-a                                       0.013                -0.007                 0.012                0.002         -0.008           -0.001                0.006
                                                   (0.010)               (0.008)               (0.009)              (0.009)        (0.007)          (0.013)              (0.014)
    +5*type-a                                       -0.001                -0.012                -0.006               0.003        -0.025             -0.008               -0.013
                                                   (0.009)               (0.010)               (0.011)              (0.012)        (0.010)          (0.012)              (0.015)
    Observations                                    76951                188908                176539               224902          225425          171399              186778
    R2                                              0.089                 0.086                 0.056                0.068           0.068           0.055               0.076
    Mean, day of the debate                         0.799                 0.833                  0.839               0.827           0.827           0.834               0.825
    Number of debates                                 26                    34                     39                  45              45              39                  39
    Sociodemographic controls                         X                      X                     X                   X               X               X                    X
    Average pre-debate dummies for type-b           0.002                 -0.002                -0.011              -0.016           0.005           0.004               -0.011
    .                                              (0.019)               (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.011)         (0.010)         (0.013)             (0.007)
    Average post-debate dummies for type-b         -0.008                 0.004                -0.013               -0.011           0.006           0.009               -0.010
    .                                              (0.013)               (0.008)               (0.008)              (0.011)         (0.011)         (0.012)             (0.007)
    Average pre-debate dummies for type-a          -0.008                 -0.007                 0.002              -0.000        -0.019            -0.004               0.004
    .                                              (0.011)               (0.007)               (0.006)              (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.009)             (0.011)
    Average post-debate dummies for type-a          0.003                 -0.012                 0.006               0.000         -0.016           -0.005               -0.000
    .                                              (0.009)               (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.009)             (0.010)



Notes: Same notes as in Tables 10 and C.24.




                                                                                           83
C.7    Event Study with Balanced Panel on Three-Day Window

             Table C.28: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency, balanced panel

                                              Vote choice consistency   Vote intention      Conditional consistency
                                                (1)             (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
  -3                                           -0.008          -0.009    0.007     0.007    -0.007        -0.008
                                              (0.009)         (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.008)      (0.008)
  -2                                           -0.011          -0.012    0.009     0.009    -0.011        -0.012
                                              (0.011)         (0.011)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.010)      (0.010)
  -1                                           -0.010          -0.010    0.007     0.007    -0.002        -0.003
                                              (0.012)         (0.012)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.009)      (0.009)
  +1                                           -0.011          -0.011    0.014     0.014    -0.014       -0.014
                                              (0.008)         (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.008)      (0.008)
  +2                                          -0.020      -0.021         0.008     0.008    -0.024      -0.025
                                               (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.008)
  +3                                          -0.021      -0.022        0.011     0.011     -0.022      -0.023
                                               (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.008)     (0.008)
  Observations                                 41536        41536       50980      50980     37751        37751
  R2                                           0.062        0.066       0.066      0.073     0.036        0.038
  Mean, day of the debate                      0.814        0.814       0.900      0.900     0.887        0.887
  Number of debates                              54           54         54          54        53           53
  Sociodemographic controls                                    X                     X                       X
  Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1     -0.010      -0.010       0.008     0.008      -0.007      -0.008
  .                                            (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.007)
  Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3     -0.017      -0.018        0.011      0.011    -0.020      -0.020
  .                                            (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.007)

Notes: The sample is restricted to debates for which respondents are surveyed on each day within the
-3/+3-days window. Respondents surveyed earlier than three days before the debate or later than three
days after the debate are excluded. Debate fixed effects are replaced by election fixed effects. Other
notes as in Table 7.




                                                         84
              Table C.29: Debates' effects on aggregate vote shares, balanced panel

                                               Distance between predicted      Daily change in
                                                  and final vote shares     predicted vote shares
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)
   -3                                           0.003         0.003         -0.008     -0.012
                                               (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.011)    (0.012)
   -2                                           0.004         0.004         -0.005     -0.011
                                               (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.014)    (0.015)
   -1                                           0.002         0.002          0.012      0.008
                                               (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.011)    (0.011)
   +1                                           0.004         0.003          0.008      0.003
                                               (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.009)    (0.008)
   +2                                           0.002         0.000         0.034      0.028
                                               (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.013)    (0.012)
   +3                                           0.004         0.003          0.014      0.011
                                               (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.015)    (0.014)
   Observations                                 490            490           483         483
   R2                                          0.662          0.670         0.611       0.628
   Mean, day of the debate                     0.046          0.046         0.087       0.087
   Number of debates                             53             53            52          52
   Sociodemographic controls                                    X                         X
   Average pre-debate dummies -3, -2, and -1    0.003         0.003          -0.000    -0.005
   .                                           (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.010)    (0.011)
   Average post-debate dummies 1, 2, and 3      0.003         0.002         0.019       0.014
   .                                           (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.010)    (0.009)

Notes: Same notes as in Tables 8 and C.28.




                                                 85
Table C.30: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency across debate and election types,
balanced panel

                                            First vs.       Close vs.      Fluctuating vs.      U.S. vs.         Plurality vs.
                                           next debate   less-close race     stable race     other countries   proportional rule
                                               (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
  -3*type-b                                   -0.015        -0.011             -0.008            -0.022             -0.010
                                             (0.010)        (0.010)            (0.013)           (0.013)            (0.021)
  -2*type-b                                   -0.003        -0.016             -0.003           -0.032              -0.010
                                             (0.013)        (0.012)            (0.016)           (0.015)            (0.023)
  -1*type-b                                   -0.000        -0.021             -0.001             -0.028            -0.019
                                             (0.013)        (0.013)            (0.013)           (0.020)            (0.024)
  +1*type-b                                   0.001         -0.018             -0.003           -0.038             -0.049
                                             (0.009)        (0.010)            (0.011)           (0.012)            (0.021)
  +2*type-b                                  -0.019         -0.008            -0.032            -0.050              -0.042
                                             (0.009)        (0.011)            (0.009)           (0.014)            (0.023)
  +3*type-b                                 -0.024          -0.017            -0.039            -0.037              -0.022
                                             (0.011)        (0.009)            (0.010)           (0.014)            (0.016)
  -3*type-a                                   -0.009        -0.006             -0.006             0.008             -0.011
                                             (0.013)        (0.012)            (0.011)           (0.013)            (0.010)
  -2*type-a                                 -0.032          -0.008             -0.016             0.006             -0.014
                                             (0.014)        (0.018)            (0.010)           (0.014)            (0.012)
  -1*type-a                                  -0.028          0.002             -0.017             0.007             -0.010
                                             (0.014)        (0.013)            (0.014)           (0.012)            (0.012)
  +1*type-a                                 -0.037          -0.006            -0.021              0.014             -0.007
                                             (0.011)        (0.011)            (0.011)           (0.011)            (0.009)
  +2*type-a                                  -0.023        -0.033              -0.007             0.009             -0.017
                                             (0.012)        (0.011)            (0.012)           (0.012)            (0.009)
  +3*type-a                                 -0.021         -0.028              -0.009             0.000            -0.023
                                             (0.010)        (0.009)            (0.011)           (0.010)            (0.009)
  Observations                                41536          41536              41536             41536               41536
  R2                                          0.066           0.066              0.066            0.066               0.066
  Mean, day of the debate                     0.814           0.814              0.814            0.814               0.814
  Number of debates                             54              54                 54               54                  54
  Sociodemographic controls                      X              X                  X                X                   X
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-b       -0.006         -0.016             -0.004           -0.027              -0.013
  .                                          (0.010)        (0.010)            (0.011)           (0.014)             (0.019)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-b     -0.014         -0.015            -0.025            -0.042             -0.037
  .                                          (0.007)        (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.010)             (0.012)
  Average pre-debate dummies for type-a      -0.023          -0.004             -0.013            0.007              -0.012
  .                                          (0.012)        (0.012)            (0.010)           (0.010)             (0.009)
  Average post-debate dummies for type-a    -0.027         -0.022               -0.012            0.008             -0.016
  .                                          (0.009)        (0.008)            (0.009)           (0.009)             (0.008)


Notes: Same notes as in Tables 9 and C.28.




                                                             86
  Table C.31: Debates' effects on vote choice consistency across voter types, balanced panel
                                          Debate watchers vs.    Strong vs. weak       College degree vs.   Above median age   Male vs.   Above median income   Not employed vs.
                                            non-watchers        party identification   no college degree       vs. below       female          vs. below           employed
                                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                 (4)           (5)               (6)                (7)
 -3*type-b                                      -0.027                -0.011                -0.005               -0.015         0.002            0.001               -0.002
                                                (0.040)               (0.012)               (0.014)              (0.012)       (0.013)          (0.016)              (0.011)
 -2*type-b                                      -0.011                 0.013                -0.007               -0.016         0.011            0.001               -0.011
                                                (0.038)               (0.016)               (0.012)              (0.014)       (0.014)          (0.015)              (0.011)
 -1*type-b                                      -0.002                 0.001                -0.002               -0.010         0.011           -0.001               -0.009
                                                (0.025)               (0.018)               (0.011)              (0.015)       (0.015)          (0.019)              (0.012)
 +1*type-b                                      -0.017                 0.003                -0.008              -0.023         -0.002            0.010               -0.016
                                                (0.023)               (0.010)               (0.010)              (0.011)       (0.012)          (0.014)              (0.011)
 +2*type-b                                      -0.036                -0.016                -0.029               -0.020        -0.013           -0.025              -0.023
                                                (0.035)               (0.014)                (0.013)             (0.011)       (0.014)          (0.015)              (0.011)
 +3*type-b                                       0.014                -0.009                -0.013               -0.018        -0.007           -0.027               -0.018
                                                (0.032)               (0.014)               (0.009)              (0.011)       (0.012)          (0.017)              (0.013)
 -3*type-a                                      -0.005                -0.012                -0.007               -0.003        -0.014           -0.003               -0.002
                                                (0.028)               (0.012)               (0.011)              (0.014)       (0.012)          (0.012)              (0.018)
 -2*type-a                                      -0.020                -0.029                -0.000               -0.003        -0.023            -0.011               -0.003
                                                (0.033)               (0.022)               (0.015)              (0.014)       (0.013)          (0.014)              (0.018)
 -1*type-a                                      -0.044                -0.021                 0.011                -0.005       -0.022            0.002                0.001
                                                (0.021)               (0.017)               (0.014)              (0.015)       (0.013)          (0.013)              (0.016)
 +1*type-a                                       0.015                -0.023                 0.001                0.001        -0.019            -0.003               -0.001
                                                (0.025)               (0.013)               (0.012)              (0.010)       (0.010)          (0.012)              (0.012)
 +2*type-a                                       0.001               -0.039                  0.003               -0.025        -0.028            -0.016               -0.023
                                                (0.034)               (0.016)               (0.013)              (0.014)        (0.012)         (0.012)              (0.017)
 +3*type-a                                      -0.025               -0.045                  -0.010             -0.022         -0.029           -0.028               -0.020
                                                (0.034)               (0.017)               (0.014)              (0.010)        (0.011)          (0.013)             (0.014)
 Observations                                    11785                 35069                 31201                40676          40622           31843                31728
 R2                                              0.068                 0.089                 0.071                0.065          0.065           0.060                0.078
 Mean, day of the debate                         0.814                 0.817                  0.820               0.815          0.814           0.821                 0.810
 Number of debates                                 16                    38                     43                  52             50              45                   40
 Sociodemographic controls                         X                      X                     X                   X               X              X                     X
 Average pre-debate dummies for type-b          -0.013                 0.001                 -0.005              -0.013          0.008           0.001                -0.007
 .                                              (0.029)               (0.012)               (0.010)              (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.015)              (0.009)
 Average post-debate dummies for type-b         -0.013                 -0.007               -0.016              -0.020           -0.007         -0.014              -0.019
 .                                              (0.026)               (0.010)               (0.009)              (0.009)        (0.011)         (0.014)              (0.009)
 Average pre-debate dummies for type-a          -0.023                 -0.020                 0.001              -0.004         -0.020          -0.004                -0.002
 .                                              (0.025)               (0.014)               (0.010)              (0.012)        (0.010)         (0.011)              (0.015)
 Average post-debate dummies for type-a         -0.003               -0.036                  -0.002              -0.015        -0.025           -0.015                -0.015
 .                                              (0.030)               (0.014)               (0.010)              (0.010)        (0.008)         (0.011)              (0.012)



Notes: Same notes as in Tables 10 and C.28.




                                                                                        87
