                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE SOE PREMIUM AND GOVERNMENT SUPPORT IN CHINA'S CREDIT MARKET

                                          Zhe Geng
                                           Jun Pan

                                     Working Paper 26575
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26575


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 2019, Revised October 2020




This paper was previously circulated under the title, "Price Discovery and Market Segmentation
in China's Credit Market." We benefited from extensive discussions with Darrell Duffie and
valuable comments from Chong-En Bai, Wei Li, Jun Liu, Yongxiang Wang, and the seminar
participants at SAIF Brownbag, MIT Finance Student Workshop, and CUHK Shenzhen. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Zhe Geng and Jun Pan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The SOE Premium and Government Support in China's Credit Market
Zhe Geng and Jun Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 26575
December 2019, Revised October 2020
JEL No. G0,G1,G10,G12,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how perceived government support for state-owned enterprises (SOEs), can shut out
non-SOEs in China's credit market, causing severe segmentation in credit pricing. Since 2018Q2,
amid government-led credit tightening, the SOE premium ­ the difference in credit spreads
between non-SOE and SOE issuers of the same rating, exploded from a stable level of 20 bps to
well over 100 bps. Using issuer-level information on government equity ownership, we find that
this sharp increase in SOE premium was driven by the increased importance of government
support in credit pricing above and beyond the SOE label. Examining the real impact of this
deepening allocational inefficiency, we find that, since 2018Q2, non-SOEs in China have lost
their advantage in profitability and fundamental strength over SOEs. This segmentation also
drives price discovery in two dimensions ­ non-SOE bonds became significantly more
informative of credit quality, while SOE bonds became sensitive to government support. Overall,
our results find a market of improved price efficiency, and, paradoxically, worsening
segmentation as government support emerges as an important factor in credit pricing.

Zhe Geng
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
211 West Huai Hai Road
Shanghai
China
zgeng.15@saif.sjtu.edu.cn

Jun Pan
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
and NBER
junpan@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
1       Introduction
In this paper, we study how perceived government support for state-owned enterprises (SOE)
can shut out non-state firms (NSOE) in China's credit market, causing severe segmentation
in credit pricing. While the presence of SOEs in China has been studied extensively in the
context of resource misallocations and the ensuing welfare losses, there have been relatively
few studies documenting the extent of the misallocation.1 Anecdotally, SOEs in China are
known to have preferential access to bank loans, but the actual magnitudes, in loan volumes
and particularly in loan pricing, have not been adequately recorded in the literature owing
to limited data on bank loans.2 Without knowing the magnitude of the misallocations, any
further discussions on the ensuing welfare losses are qualitative in nature. Moreover, as our
results show, the extent of the misallocation is itself time-varying due to varying economic
conditions and changing government policies, further complicating the message from the
existing literature.
    Our paper aims to contribute to this important discussion by focusing on the tension
between SOEs and non-SOEs in the openness of the credit market. In contrast to the
opaqueness of bank loans, market prices are transparent and readily observable. Unlike loan
officers in large SOE banks in China, markets are unburdened by political connections or
career concerns, and are driven instead by concerns over risk and return. As such, the SOE
credit misallocation documented in our paper is on the most visible slice of a firm's debt
financing, which also happens to be the most efficiently priced and allocated. And yet, as
shown by our results, it is the efficiency of the market that exacerbates the inefficiency of the
credit misallocation, especially in times of crisis. Studying the information content of credit
spreads in China, we find a market of improved price efficiency, and, paradoxically, worsening
segmentation between SOEs and non-SOEs, as the market discovers and incorporates the
increasing importance of government support in China. Absent of detailed information
on bank loans and shadow-banking activities, such findings from the credit market can be
viewed as the tip of an iceberg, uncovering the economic impact of the otherwise opaque
credit allocation between SOEs and non-SOEs in China.
    Our study is made possible by the emergence of China's credit market that involves both
    1
    For example, the seminal paper by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) takes as given the misallocations of capital
in China and India and study their impact on the total factor productivity at the aggregate level.
    2
     Among others, studies on China's credit allocations to SOEs and non-SOEs include Dollar and Wei
(2007) using survey data, Lardy (2019) using aggregate loan volume data from China Banking Society,
and Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) using confidential loan-level volume data during the 2009-2010
stimulus. To our knowledge, there have not been any comprehensive studies on the SOE misallocation using
loan pricing data.



                                                    2
SOEs and non-SOEs. From 2008 through 2019, domestic debt securities issued by China's
non-financial companies increased from a negligible level to $3.6 trillion, second only to the
US.3 For China's bank-dominated financial system, the presence of this market-based credit
channel has a profound impact ­ it has allowed firms to access a form of debt financing that
is cheaper and more efficient than the traditional bank loans. The emergence of this onshore
market has increased, for non-financial firms in China, the ratio of market-based bonds to
bank-based loans from 3.8% in 2008 to 20.9% in 2019. Important for our study, SOE as well
as non-SOE borrowers have benefited from this shift.
    We quantify the extent of SOE's preferential access to the credit market using the SOE
premium, measured as the difference in credit spreads between non-SOE and SOE issuers,
controlling for credit ratings and other bond characteristics. Prior to 2018, the SOE premium
for listed firms in China fluctuated around a stable level of 20 bps, indicating a moderate
but non-trivial premium enjoyed by SOEs due to their perceived government support. Post
2018Q2, we find a rapidly worsening segmentation between SOE and non-SOE issuers ­ the
SOE premium exploded, over just one quarter, from 22 bps to an unprecedented 104 bps
in 2018Q2. Since November 2018, recognizing the adverse effects on the private sector, the
Chinese government offered reassurances and devised policies to support the private sector,
but the SOE premium, or the non-SOE discount, deteriorated further, peaking at 165 bps
in 2019Q3. It has since come down to below 100 bps and is at 61 bps as of 2020Q2.
    Behind this explosive SOE premium were government-led credit tightening policies, in-
cluding the sequence of de-leveraging campaigns around 2017 and, more importantly, the
April 2018 release of "New Regulations on Asset Management," which severely weakened
the demand for corporate bonds from the asset-management industry in China and shrunk
the financing and re-financing channels of corporate issuers. Amid heightened concerns over
default risk, the non-SOE issuers were clearly more vulnerable than their SOE counterparts,
and, akin to a run on non-SOEs, investors sought safety in SOE bonds and shunned non-
SOE bonds. Competing with this explanation is the view that the fundamental health of
the non-SOE firms was already weak due to their over-borrowing and over-expanding during
the credit boom of 2014-2016. As a result, non-SOEs were ill-prepared for the severe credit
contraction in 2018.
    To better understand the drivers behind the SOE premium, whether it is changing credit
quality or increasing importance of government support, we create issuer-level proxies for
   3
     In a time of accommodative monetary policy, US companies have dramatically increased their borrowing
in the form of debt securities. From 2008 to 2019, debt securities issued by U.S. non-financial corporations
increased by $3.02 trillion to a record level of $6.56 trillion. Relative to the global domestic-bond market
for non-financial firms, however, the presence of the US market decreased from 53.15% in 2008 to 44.76% in
2019, while that for China increased from 2.94% to 24.64%.


                                                     3
both credit quality and government support. Focusing first on credit quality, we use the
default model of Merton (1974) to construct default measures by incorporating information
from the firm's financial statements and stock valuations. Central to our default measure
is the firm's stock return volatility, book leverage, and asset growth. Intuitively, firms with
higher volatility, higher leverage, and lower asset growth are of lower credit quality and their
default measures are higher. Studying the SOE premium using our default measures, we
find that, although credit quality plays an increasingly important role in credit pricing, it
cannot explain the SOE premium. From 2014Q1 to 2018Q1, the SOE premium was 21 bps
(t-stat=3.58) before, and 25 bps (t-stat=4.32) after controlling for default measures. The
slight increase in SOE premium after the control is due to the fact that non-SOE issuers
were in fact stronger in credit quality than their SOE counterparts of the same credit ratings.
Likewise, for the time period from 2018Q2 through 2020Q2, controlling for default measures
has a negligible effect on the severely elevated SOE premium of 106 bps (t-stat=7.78).
   To capture the extent of government support, we construct, from the ground up, an
issuer-level measure of government holdings using information on government's equity stakes
in SOEs as well as non-SOEs. Compared with the SOE dummy, which identifies whether or
not an issuer is controlled by government, our measure of government holdings is a continuous
variable with much richer information. Instead of treating the SOE and non-SOE samples as
two solid blocks, it captures the strength of government support both across and within the
two samples. For the SOE sample, it ranges from 10% to 100%, with a mean of 51.9% and
standard deviation of 16.8%, and for the non-SOE sample, the mean is 5.1% and the standard
deviation is 8.4%. Studying the SOE premium using our government-holdings measure, we
find some rather interesting results. Prior to 2018Q2, controlling for the SOE dummies,
government holdings were not important in explaining the pre-2018Q2 credit spreads and
adding government holdings as an additional explanatory variable has no impact on the SOE
premium. In other words, prior to 2018Q2, what matters for credit-market pricing was the
label of SOE.
   Applying the same analysis to the post-2018Q2 period reveals a structural shift. Amid
the rapidly worsening segmentation, the richer information contained in our government-
holdings measure started to matter in an important way. Studying the SOE premium using
our government-holdings measure, we find that the sharp increase in the SOE premium was
actually driven by the emergence of credit-market sensitivity to government support. Con-
trolling for government holdings, the post-2018Q2 SOE premium shrank from the elevated
level of 106 bps (t-stat=7.78) to -0.09 bps (t-stat=-0.48). Contributing to this significant re-
duction in SOE premium is the increased sensitivity of credit spreads to government holdings,
which was -8 bps (t-stat=-0.37) before 2018Q2, and -281 bps (t-stat=-7.82) after 2018Q2.

                                               4
In other words, all else equal, moving the government-holdings measure from 0 to 100% can
reduce credit spread by as much as 281 bps post 2018Q2, while the effect was essentially
zero before 2018Q2.
   Our results on the SOE premium indicate that the sharp increase in the SOE premium
was driven not by the SOE label, but by the richer information contained in our measure of
government holdings. Conversely, as investors reacted to the credit-market stress by pricing
government support into the credit market, the segmentation between SOEs and non-SOEs
further deepened. Paradoxically, the efficiency of the credit-market pricing results in further
inefficiency in credit misallocation, which could have real economic consequences on the
non-SOE issuers. Indeed, amid this unprecedented explosion in SOE premium (or non-SOE
discount), new issuance by non-SOEs, which in 2017Q1 accounted for 29% of the total new
issuance in the corporate bond market (excluding Chengtou bonds), dropped to a mere 8%
in 2019Q3. Prior to 2018Q2, non-SOE issuers were significantly healthier than their SOE
counterparts of the same credit ratings, as measured by our default measure. Post 2018Q2,
that advantage disappeared for non-SOEs. Studying other aspects of the firms fundamental,
including returns on asset, we find further evidences of the negative impact of this severe
segmentation on non-SOEs.
   Using our proxies for credit quality and government support, we further study the ef-
ficiency of price discovery in China's credit market by focusing on the SOE and non-SOE
samples separately. Overall, we find a market of improved price efficiency as investors take
into account the developing risk factors ­ default risk as well as the extent of government
support, and price them into the credit market. Prior to 2014, default had never occurred in
China's credit market, resulting in the strongly held belief that bond would always be paid
in full. Not surprisingly, prior to 2014, default measures were not important in explaining
credit spreads above and beyond credit ratings, this is true for both SOEs and non-SOEs.
As defaults started to occur post 2014, concerns over credit risk began to take hold, and our
default measures became important in explaining credit spreads above and beyond credit
ratings. From 2014Q1 to 2018Q1, one standard deviation increase in default measure is
associated with an increase in credit spread of 24 bps for non-SOE bonds (t-stat=2.88) and
20 bps for SOE bonds (t-stat=3.84).
   Interestingly, amid the worsening segmentation of 2018Q2, the extent as well as the
contents of price discovery started to differ for SOE and non-SOE bonds. Credit spreads
of non-SOEs became significantly more informative with respect to credit quality, while
the extent of government support became important for SOEs bonds. From 2018Q2 to
2020Q2, one standard deviation increase in default measure is associated with an increase
in credit spread of 87 bps for non-SOE bonds (t-stat=3.83), a marked improvement in

                                              5
both economic significance and statistical significance, and the explanatory power of default
measure also improved post 2018Q2. By contrast, the price discovery for SOE bonds with
respect to credit quality saw no improvement in economic significance and a reduction in
statistical significance. This result is consistent with the observation that, during this severe
segmentation, investors are forced to be more discriminating against the non-SOE bonds
because of their perceived vulnerability. Conversely, counting on the outside government
support, investors are less pressured to differentiate against the SOE bonds. As such, price
discovery with respect to credit quality became a more pressing issue for the non-SOE bonds,
while the extent of government support became a pressing issue for SOE bonds. Indeed, this
is what we find for the sample of SOEs bonds. Effectively, investors are learning what
matters for each segment of the credit market and price accordingly.
    Our paper contributes to the macroeconomics literature on the SOE-related credit mis-
allocations and their impact on China's growth (Dollar and Wei (2007), Hsieh and Klenow
(2009), Brandt and Zhu (2000), Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), and Lardy (2019)).4
While the focus has so far been on the preferential access of SOEs to the amount of bank
loans, our paper is the first to document the extent of the SOE misallocations using pricing
information from the credit market. Important in our results of the SOE premium is the
dynamic nature of the SOE misallocation ­ the SOE-NSOE segmentation in credit pricing
can worsen sharply in times of crisis, putting undue pressure on the non-SOEs and desta-
bilizing the credit market. While the existing studies in this literature are encumbered by
the opaqueness of bank-loan distributions, we use the transparency of the capital markets
to trace the worsening misallocation directly to the increased importance of government
support in credit pricing. In examining the SOE and non-SOE tension, our paper is also
related to Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008), who documented how bailout of zombie
firms can cause congestion and hurt non-zombie firms. In our paper, the tension arose out of
the perceived government support for SOEs during government-led credit tightening, which
dramatically increased the financing costs for the non-SOEs. Akin to the congestion story,
the otherwise healthy non-SOEs were hurt because of the congestion in the credit market,
while the SOEs with weaker credit quality remained intact. Overall, our findings can be
informative for policy makers in China as they set to better balance the credit allocation
among the SOEs and non-SOEs.
    Our paper contributes to the asset-pricing literature as the first comprehensive study on
   4
     Recent studies on China's credit allocation include Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019), who find
that the stimulus-driven credit expansion of 2009-2010 disproportionately favored SOEs; Huang, Pagano,
and Panizza (2020), who find that local public debt crowded out the investment of private firms while leaving
SOEs unaffected; Li, Wang, and Zhou (2018), who find that China's recent anti-corruption campaign helps
credit reallocation from SOEs to non-SOEs.


                                                     6
the information content of credit spreads in China. For the US market, the link between
credit spreads and credit quality has been well established ­ controlling for credit ratings, a
significant portion of the variation in credit spreads can be explained by issuer-level variables
known to affect the credit quality of a firm.5 For the Chinese market, however, this topic
has not yet been systematic studied, and our paper fills the gap. By using China's first
credit-market default in 2014 as a shock, our paper is the first to document how increased
awareness of default risk can improve price discovery. Our paper is also the first to study how
the tension between SOEs and non-SOEs in the credit market can impact price discovery
­ as investors abandoned non-SOE bonds and sought safety in SOEs, the non-SOE credit
spreads became more informative with respect to credit quality while the SOEs saw no
improvements.
    By introducing government support to the study of price discovery, our paper is closely
related to that of Berndt, Duffie, and Zhu (2019), who examine the information content of
credit spreads of US banks with respect to the likelihood of government bailout. They find
large post-Lehman reductions in market-implied probabilities of government bailout, and,
after controlling for credit quality, they find big increases in debt financing costs for the
US banks. In our paper, the presence of government support plays an important role in
driving the SOE-NSOE segmentation in credit pricing. While the existing studies have so
far been focused on the distinction between SOEs and non-SOEs, we take one step further by
constructing the government-holdings measure to better capture the extent of government
support. Post 2018Q2, along with the increasing importance of government support in
China's credit market, our government-holdings measure emerged as an important factor
in explaining credit spreads in China, both between SOEs and non-SOEs and within the
respective samples of SOEs and non-SOEs.
    Finally, our paper is related to the growing literature studying the Chinese credit market.6
Jin, Wang, and Zhang (2018) study the value of implicit government guarantee in SOE bonds,
Bai and Zhou (2018) and Liu, Lyu, and Yu (2017) investigate the importance of government
guarantee in the pricing of Chengtou bonds, and Chen, He, and Liu (2020) study the link
between the growth of Chengtou bonds and the 2009 stimulus package in China.
   5
     Among others, empirical studies on the determinants of credit spreads include Collin-Dufresne, Gold-
stein, and Martin (2001), Campbell and Taksler (2003), Bao (2009), and Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011).
   6
      For overviews on the Chinese credit market, see Hu, Pan, and Wang (2019) and Amstad and He (2019).
Recent empirical studies include Mo and Subrahmanyam (2019) on China's credit bond liquidity, Chen
et al. (2018) on the value of pledgeability in Chinese corporate bonds, Wang, Wei, and Zhong (2015) on the
pricing implications of China's yield-chasing retail investors, Ding, Xiong, and Zhang (2020) on the issuance
overpricing of Chinese corporate bonds, Gao et al. (2015) on the determinants of loan defaults in China,
Huang, Liu, and Shi (2020) on the determinants of short-term credit spreads, Gao, Huang, and Mo (2020)
on the effect of credit enhancement on bond pricing.


                                                     7
    The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the data on China's
credit market and provides background information. Section 3 details the constructions
of our proxies for credit quality and government support. Section 4 documents the SOE
premium, its time-series variation, and its driver. Section 5 examines the information content
of the credit spreads with respect to credit quality and government support, and Section 6
concludes. Further details are provided in the appendices.


2     Data and Background Information
2.1    The Corporate Bond Sample
Excluding financial bonds, the Chinese credit market for non-financial companies stands
at RMB 23 trillion by the end of June 2020. As shown in the top panel of Figure 1,
the credit instruments in this market are categorized into four groups: corporate bonds,
Chengtou bonds, commercial papers, and other instruments including private placement
bonds, convertible bonds, and asset-backed securities. The group of corporate bonds, similar
in structure to the US corporate bonds, is the main focus of our paper. It is made up of
three types of bonds: Medium-Term Notes account for the largest portion and are traded
in the inter-bank market; Corporate Bonds are the second largest and are exchange traded;
and Enterprise Bonds, traded in both markets, account for only a very small portion of our
sample. By June 2020, the total amount outstanding of our corporate bond sample is RMB
8 trillion, accounting for 34% of the credit market. Chengtou bonds, as shown in Figure 1
to be an important component of the credit market, are excluded from our analysis because
of their unique association with local governments in China. Issued by local government
financing vehicles (LGFV), Chengtou bonds enjoy a rather special status in China's credit
market and are not the best credit instruments for our purpose. We exclude commercial
papers from our analysis due to their short duration, and the other credit instruments due
to their non-standard structures and limited market size.
    We further sort the corporate bond sample by issuer type into four groups along two
dimensions. First, we consider whether the bond issuer is publicly listed or unlisted. This
differentiation is important because listed firms are in general larger and more important to
the economy. More importantly, being listed firms, they disclose quarterly financial state-
ments and are monitored by equity investors as well as bond investors. For our purpose, such
publicly available information is essential for us to measure the credit quality of the bond
issuers. Although unlisted firms issuing bonds in China are also required to disclose financial
statements, the quality of the issuer-level information cannot be compared with what listed


                                              8
firms can offer. Moreover, the lack of equity market information makes it impossible for us
to construct credit quality measures.
   Second, we consider whether the bond issuer is a state-owned enterprise (SOE) or NSOE.
Unlike SOEs, the NSOEs are perceived to be vulnerable because of their lack of outside
government support. This differentiation turns out to be the most important segmentation
in our data, especially under credit-market stress. When necessary, we further differentiate
the SOEs into local and central government SOEs (LSOEs and CSOEs).
   The bottom panel of Figure 1 outlines the overall size of our corporate bond sample, and
summarizes the relative size of the four issuer types. The publicly listed issuers, including
both listed SOE and listed NSOE, account for 30% of the corporate sample, while the listed
issuers account for the rest. This pattern is contrary to what is observed in the US corporate
bond market, where larger listed firms generally have better access to the corporate bond
market. Another stark contrast to the US market is the dominance of the SOE issuers.
Within the listed sample, a significant gap exists between listed SOE and listed NSOE. The
ratio in amount outstanding of listed SOE to listed NSOE bonds is 13 in 2010. As the credit
market expands in size and diversity, this ratio has decreased steadily to a level close to
1.6 in 2018, but then the improvement flattens out. Not surprisingly, the gap within the
unlisted sample is even more astounding: the ratio of SOE to NSOE is 57 in 2010 and then
decreases to 6 in 2018. The fact that the unlisted SOEs continue to dominate the market
share is an unhealthy situation for this market. In a way, their presence sucks the oxygen
out of an otherwise healthy market.


2.2    Bond-Level Data
Data used in this paper are from the Wind database. Our bond data includes quarterly bond
prices with bond characteristics and bond trading variables. For each bond and during each
quarter, we consider its yield to maturity using the last trading-day price of this bond in
the quarter. Following the convention in the Chinese market, we use the yield curve of the
Chinese Development Bank (CDB) bonds as the reference curve to calculate credit spreads.
Specifically, credit spread is measured as the difference between the corporate bond yield
and CDB yield of the same maturity.
   We only include fixed-rate bonds in the form of medium-term notes, corporate bonds,
and enterprise bonds issued by non-financial listed companies. Bonds without any trading
during a quarter are excluded from that quarter. Bonds with less than one year to maturity
are excluded from our sample. Bonds whose issuer has less than 10 trading days in the equity
market during a quarter or has missing financial statements during a quarter are excluded


                                              9
from that quarter. Defaulted bonds are excluded from our data sample starting from the
quarter before the actual default date. We adopt this conservative treatment because we
are not sure of the accuracy of the official default dates. This is particularly troubling as
we observe, for some bonds, extremely large yield spreads even before the actual default
date. Moreover, in China, default occurs at the bond level. But we also exclude other,
not yet defaulted, bonds issued by the same firm starting from the quarter before the first
default date, once the firm has defaulted on at least one bond. The reasoning is similar ­
we are not sure of the accuracy of the official default dates and the defaulted bonds usually
have a spillover effect on other existing bonds issued by the same firms. This treatment has
the effect of cutting down extremely large credit spreads and under-biases our results. In
practice, this treatment has a rather negligible effect on our results, given the limited number
of defaulted issuers in our sample (28 issuers for the listed NSOE sample, and 2 issuers for
the listed SOE sample). Finally, we winsorize the credit spreads at 0.5% and 99.5% on all
the sample.
   Since our main focus is on the corporate bonds issued by listed firms, we choose our
sample period to start from January 1, 2010 through June 30, 2019. Prior to 2010, there are
not enough listed NSOE issuers for us to perform our empirical analysis. We perform our
empirical tests over three time periods. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default
period. Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults, which
occurred mostly to unlisted firms in industries suffering from overcapacity. Phase III, from
2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second and much more severe wave of defaults.
   Table 1 summarizes our bond sample for each of the four groups. Overall, there are
367 listed NSOE issuers with 923 bonds , 403 listed SOE issuers with 1477 bonds, 403
unlisted NSOE issuers with 1518 bonds, and 1795 unlisted SOE issuers with 7061 bonds.
Table 2 further summarizes our sample by phase, and, as we can see, the numbers of issuers
and bonds vary over time as well. In addition to credit spreads, the bond-level variables
reported in the summary tables include bond characteristics such as rating, maturity, age,
issuance size and coupon rate; and bond trading variables such as number of trading days per
quarter (TradingDays), percent of zero trading days per quarter (ZeroDays) and quarterly
turnover. In addition, we also control for issuers' industry in our analysis using the 11
industry categorization from Wind.
   For credit ratings, we merge our sample with the rating dataset of Wind, and update
any changes in rating by the major rating agencies in China.7 We convert the letter grades
into numerical grades by assigning 1 to AAA, 2 to AA+, 3 to AA, 4 to AA-, and so on. In
   7
      The major rating agencies in China includes CCXI, China Lianhe, DaGong Gloabl, and Shanghai
Brilliance.


                                               10
China, AAA is the top grade, with AA+ and AA in the middle, and AA- is generally of low
quality, and very few bonds are below AA-. As shown in Tables 1 and 2, the average credit
ratings varies across the four sub-samples, as well as over the three time periods. Indeed,
credit rating is the most important control variable in all of our empirical analysis.
   A non-trivial amount of the corporate bonds in China are issued with embedded option-
ality. For example, a 2+1 bond is issued with a three-year maturity, but, at the end of the
second year, investors have the option to sell back the bond at its face value while the bond
issuer can choose to modify the coupon rate within a pre-set range to make the bond more
or less attractive. We use the dummy variable Embed to single out the bonds with this
optionality. As shown in Table 1, the average value of this dummy is 63% for listed NSOE,
39% for listed SOE, 56% for unlisted NSOE, and 26% for unlisted SOE. Clearly, the NSOE
issuers are more eager to extend the maturity of their bonds by offering more optionality.
As shown further in Table 2, there is an increasing trend in the issuance of such bonds. For
example, the ratio of bonds with optionality increases from 38% in Phase I to 53% in Phase
II, and to 71% in Phase III for the unlisted NSOE sample. Throughout our analysis, we
control for this optionality since the embedded option has the effect of making bonds more
expensive and lowering yields.
   Another well established feature in China's bond market is the difference between the
inter-bank market, populated by large institutional investors, and the exchanges, populated
by small and medium-size investors. Unlike the US corporate bond market, which is domi-
nated by the over-the-counter trading, the inter-bank market, which is similar to the OTC
market in the US, and the exchanges both claim significant market share in bond trading. We
use the dummy variable Exch to indicate whether the observed bond price is from exchange
trading. As shown in Table 1, exchange-traded bonds account for 69% for listed NSOE, 53%
for listed SOE, 48% for unlisted NSOE, and 21% for unlisted SOE. Given that Medium-
Term Notes trade exclusively on the inter-bank market, Corporate Bonds trade exclusively
on the exchanges, and Enterprise Bonds only account for a small fraction of our sample, this
differentiation in trading venue is very much aligned with the listing venue. Throughout our
analysis, we use the Exch dummy to control for potential differences in investor behavior
between these two markets.
   Comparing the NSOE and SOE samples further, we see that SOE bonds in general have
higher ratings, larger issuance size (RMB 2 billion vs 1 billion for the listed sample), and
with longer maturity and older in age. Because of these differences in bond characteristics, a
direct comparison between their credit spreads is therefore not meaningful. For this reason,
we will later compare their bond pricing after controlling for credit ratings and other bond
characteristics.

                                              11
   The bond trading variables give us a sense of the overall liquidity condition of the market.
TradingDays counts the number of trading days per quarter. As we can see, corporate bonds
are on average infrequently traded across the board. As shown in Table 1, for bonds in our
sample, the average number of trading days per quarter is 15 for listed NSOE, 10 for listed
SOE, 10 for unlisted NSOE, and 8 for unlisted SOE. Moreover, there is a dramatic decrease
in trading activity over the three time periods, as shown in Table 2. Part of this decreasing
trend is due to the crackdown of agent-holding transactions, which is covered extensively in
Mo and Subrahmanyam (2019).


2.3    Issuer-Level Equity Data
Focusing on the sample of bonds issued by listed firms, both listed NSOE and listed SOEs,
we merge the bond data by issuer with equity data from Wind. As shown in Table 3, there
are in total 367 listed NSOE issuers and 403 listed SOE issuers, with the numbers varying
over the three sub-sample periods.
   For each of these firms and during each quarter, we collect information on the total
market value of its equity. EquitySize denotes the logarithm of the equity value. As shown
in Table 3, the average size of the firms in our listed NSOE sample is RMB 13.15 billion,
smaller than the average number of RMB 19.82 billion for the listed SOE sample. Compared
with the universe of stocks in the Chinese equity market, these firms are larger in size. In fact,
a large majority of our equity sample is from the mainboard and they are evenly distributed
in the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges.
   To measure the credit quality of a firm, three important inputs are asset growth, leverage
and volatility. For each firm, we use its daily stock returns during the quarter to calculate
its quarterly equity volatility. As shown in Table 3 the annualized volatility for the listed
firms in our sample is on average 40.4% for NSOE and 36.4% for SOE. To calculate firm
leverage, we collect information on the firm's short- and long-term debt and its total asset,
using quarterly financial statements. Leverage is calculated as the ratio of total current
liabilities plus the total non-current liabilities to the total asset value. As shown in Table 3,
the average leverage for NSOEs is 58.6%, slightly lower than the 61.7% for the SOEs. For
each firm each quarter, we use the average growth rate of the asset value in the past three
years to compute the asset growth. As shown in Table 3, the average asset growth for NSOEs
is 23.0%, higher than the 17.2% for the SOEs.




                                               12
2.4   Corporate Defaults in China
For much of its history, China's credit market was absent of default events, confirming the
deep-rooted belief that debt investors will always be bailed out and default was merely a
concept in theory. The first ever default in 2014 marks the beginning of an erosion to this
rigid belief. The top panel of Figure 2 plots the quarterly default amount to the credit
market, including both corporate bonds, commercial papers, private placement notes and
bonds, and convertible bonds. The first wave of defaults occurred mostly to privately held
issuers, with quarterly default amount ranging from less than RMB 1 billion to 12.2 billion
in 2016Q1. Compared with the total size of the credit market, RMB 16.1 trillion in 2016,
this amount of default is tiny. At the same time, the corporate bond market was expanding
aggressively with RMB 625 billion new issuance in 2016Q1, as shown in the bottom panel
of Figure 2. From 2015Q2 to 2016Q3, the unlisted SOEs were affected more severely than
unlisted NSOEs. It was especially true for the unlisted SOEs in overcapacity industries.
Starting from 2016Q4, the total amount of default in the credit market lessened, and the
fraction of unlisted SOE defaults reduced rather dramatically, from 83% in 2016Q3 to 10%
a quarter later in 2016Q4. From that point on, NSOEs took most of the blunt.
   Starting from 2018Q2, the listed NSOE issuers, who remained largely intact during the
first wave, were severely hit and, at its peak in 2019Q4, accounted for 37% of the total
default amount in the credit market. Meanwhile, the magnitude of the default amount has
also increased rather dramatically. From RMB 14.4 billion in 2018Q2 to over 50 billion in
2018Q4. Still a small amount compared to the overall size of the credit market, the fact that
over 90% of the default occurs to NSOE issuers is a clear signal to the market that these
are the more vulnerable issuers. Around this time, the expression of "faith-based" pricing
became popular among credit-market investors. The faith is hierarchical, with Chengtou
bonds, issued by local government financing vehicles, at the top and there has not been a
real default occurring to this group of Chengtou bonds. To most investors, the listed SOEs
also seem quite safe. Throughout our sample period, there are only two default events for
the listed SOEs with a total default amount of 6.5 billion.
   The overall macroeconomic condition and the government policies are very much related
to this sequence of events. Prior to 2018Q2, the Chinese credit market condition was already
tightening in 2017 due to the continued campaign on financial de-leveraging, but the April
2018 release of "New Regulations on Asset Management" was a discernible trigger for the
rapidly worsening credit conditions. This sequence of tightening policies at the macro-
economic level impacted the corporate bond market by severely weakening the demand for
corporate bonds from the asset-management industry and shrinking the financing and re-


                                             13
financing channels for corporate issuers. Compared with their SOE counterparts, the NSOE
issuers appeared to be more vulnerable due to their lack of outside support from central
and local governments. Indeed, this perceived vulnerability is the driving force behind the
segmentation as investors seek safety in SOE bonds and shun NSOE bonds. As our results
show, this schism, while dormant during normal condition, has the tendency to break open
rapidly during market turmoil, threatening the stability of the market.


3     Measuring Credit Quality and Government Support
3.1    Proxy for Credit Quality: Default Measures
We use Merton (1974) structural model of default to construct our default measure. The
key concept of the model is the distance-to-default, which computes how many standard
deviations a firm is away from the default boundary. A lower distance-to-default indicates
that the firm is closer to the default boundary, and therefore has a higher probability of
default. Under the Merton model, the firm's total asset follows a geometric Brownian motion,

                                  dVt = µ Vt dt + A Vt dZt ,

where Vt is the time-t value of the firm's total asset, Zt is a Brownian motion, µ is the
constant growth rate, and A is the constant volatility. According to the Merton model, the
value of the firm's equity is the European call option on the firm's asset with strike price K
equaling the firm's liability.
    Using this insight and following the approach of Moody's KMV (Kealhofer and Kurbat
(2001)), we estimate the firm's asset value V and its corresponding asset volatility A by
solving the following non-linear equations simultaneously,

                                  Et = Vt N (d1 ) - erT KN (d2 )
                                       V E                                                   (1)
                                  E =        A ,
                                       E V

where Et is the time-t value of the firm's equity, r is the riskfree rate, E is the equity
volatility, and
                                       2
                     ln(Vt /K ) + (r + A /2) T                 ln(Vt /K ) + (r - A
                                                                                 2
                                                                                   /2) T
              d1 =                             ;        d2 =                             ,
                               A T                                       A T

where T is the time-horizon of interest.


                                                   14
   The key inputs to the model are calibrated as follows. We fix the time horizon T = 1 to
focus on the distant-to-default over a one-year horizon. For each quarter, we use the average
growth rate of the asset value in the past three years for µ; the default boundary K equals
the firm's current liabilities plus one half of its long-term debt; the firm's equity value equals
the firm's market capitalization by multiplying the quarter-end stock price by the common
equity shares outstanding. For the equity volatility E , we use daily equity returns within
the quarter, requiring that the issuer has at least 10 trading days in the quarter. For the
risk-free rate, we use the one-year bank deposit rate. With these inputs and the quarterly
estimates for the asset value V and asset volatility A from Equations (1), we compute the
quarter-t distance to default by

                                     ln(Vt /K ) + (µ - A
                                                       2
                                                         /2) T
                            DDt =                              .                              (2)
                                                A T

   The Merton model further translates the distance-to-default to default probability, under
the assumption of normal distribution. The probability calculated from the normal distri-
bution, however, is too low. More importantly, the transformation flattens out much of
cross-issuer variation in the distance-to-default measure. An alternative approach adopted
by Moody's KMV is to calibrate the mapping from distance-to-default to default probability,
using the actual default experiences. The construction of this empirical distribution requires
a large database of historical defaults, which is not feasible for the Chinese corporate bonds
market. In this paper, we use the inverse of the distance-to-default, which we denote as DM
(Default Measure), to measure the firm's default risk.
   In Table 3, we summarize our sample at the issuer level, including the three key inputs
of the models: asset growth µ firm leverage K/V and asset volatility A , as well as the
calibrated default measure (DM). Firms in China in general have higher leverage than those
in the US: the average level is 58.55% for non-SOEs and 61.67% for SOEs, with SOEs on
average more levered than non-SOEs. The average asset volatility, which is backed out from
the equity volatility, is around 22.95% for non-SOEs and 17.18% for SOEs, both are higher
than that in the US. During Phase II, there is a substantial increase in asset volatility, driven
mostly by the 2015 stock-market crash in China. Using these issuer-level measures as inputs
to the Merton model, we obtain the issuer-level default measure (DM). The average level of
DM is 22.56% for SOEs and 21.18% non-SOEs, indicating an overall stronger credit quality
for the non-SOE issuers. In Section 4 we will examine more closely the difference in default
measure between SOEs and non-SOEs and its time-series variation.




                                               15
3.2      Proxies for Government Support
We consider three proxies for government support. The first measure, the NSOE dummy,
takes the standard approach of assigning the state affiliation of a firm by the attribution,
state or non-state, of its ultimate controller, or end-controller. The second measure, robust
government holdings, is our main proxy, which we construct from the ground up using infor-
mation on the government's equity ownership of the firm. The last proxy, the government
end-controller holdings, serves as a robust measure. It focuses on the equity ownership of
the end-controller of the firm. Unlike government holdings, which is relevant for both SOEs
and non-SOEs, this last proxy is an informative proxy for government support only for the
sample of SOE firms.

The Non-SOE Dummy (NSOE)

To understand the extent of government support, one important component of our empirical
analysis is to differentiate the state-owned enterprises from the non-state owned firms. For
this, we create a non-SOE dummy, which equals one for non-SOE firms and zero for SOEs
and this variable is updated quarterly. Key to the SOE classification is whether or not
the end-controller (i.e., the ultimate controller) of a firm is the state, which includes the
state-owned assets supervision and administration commission of the state council (central
SASAC), central government institutions, central SOEs, local SASAC, local government
institutions and local SOEs. A firm is classified as non-SOE if its end-controller is not
the state. While the majority of the non-SOEs are the privately-owned enterprises (POE),
whose end-controllers are individuals or private enterprises in China, the non-SOE sample
also includes a mixture of other firms.
   To construct the NSOE dummy, we use data from Wind Financial Information, which
collects and updates quarterly the end-controllers of all firms with publicly listed equity or
bond issuance. Such firms in China are required to self-report in their annual financial state-
ments the end-controller of the firm and the corresponding attribution ­ whether or not the
end-controller is the state. According to China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC),8
the end-controller of a firm is defined by one of the following criteria: (1) The investor holds
more than 50% of the shares; (2) The investor holds more than 30% of the voting rights;
(3) The investor can nominate more than half of the board members; (4) The investor can
have significant impact on the shareholder meetings; and (5) Others conditions ascertained
by the CSRC. For publicly listed firms, Wind collects and organizes such information in
   8
       See Article 84 of the "Listed Companies Takeover Measures" published by CSRC.



                                                   16
"AShareEquityRelationships" dataset (hereafter Controller Dataset). Our overall classifica-
tion follows that of Wind Financial Information with the exception of six public firms in
the other category of non-SOEs, which we consider as SOEs since the respective government
holdings, as well as end-controller holdings, of these firms are both greater than 50%. Our
results are robust to the re-classification of these six firms.

Government Holdings

To capture the extent of government support above and beyond the non-SOE dummy, we
use information on government holdings of listed firms. For each publicly listed firm, our
government-holdings variable measures the sum of equity holdings by all government-related
entities within the top ten shareholders. Compared with the non-SOE dummy, which treats
SOEs and non-SOEs as two solid blocks, our measure of government holdings is a continuous
variable with richer information on the variation in the strength of government support both
across and within the SOE and non-SOE blocks. While the non-SOE dummy has been
used widely as a measure of government support, our government-holdings variable, to our
knowledge, has not been comprehensively explored in the literature for credit pricing.9
    In constructing the government holdings measure, we piece together shareholder infor-
mation from three separate datasets from Wind Financial Information. The first dataset is
the "AShareInsideHolder" dataset (hereafter Shareholder Dataset), which contains the basic
information of the top 10 shareholders of a listed firm, including their names and holdings.
This dataset is available because the publicly listed firms in China are required to disclose
such information in their financial reports. Using this information, we find that, on average,
top 10 shareholders hold 61.2% of the firms and this holding percentage remains stable over
time during our sample period. For our purpose, the main drawback of this dataset is it
does not contain information on the shareholder's attribution ­ whether or not a top-ten
shareholder is government related.
    To identify the government-related attributions of the top-ten shareholders, we further
merge the Shareholder Dataset with two other datasets from Wind that contains such at-
tribution information. One is the Controller Dataset used earlier to help us construct the
NSOE dummy, and the other is the "CompIntroduction" dataset (hereafter Firm Dataset).

   9
     Using data from Annual Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIF) of the China's National Bureau of Statistics,
Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) measure the extent of state ownership from the share of registered
capital owned by the government and study its connection with loan allocation during the 2009-2010 credit
stimulus. This measure of state-ownership is the same in spirit to our government-holdings measure, but
ASIF suffers from many missing observations in the share of government registered capital, even for large
SOEs. As such, our robust measure of government holdings, compiled from several of the existing data
sources, is valuable for future studies in this area. See Appendix A.1 for further details.


                                                    17
While the Controller Dataset gives us dynamic information on firms' attribution, its collec-
tion of firms is limited as it contains only firms that serve as end-controllers or are related to
end-controllers. The Firm Dataset helps us expand the sample substantially as it contains
attribution information for different types of firms, including listed and unlisted firms.10
Merging the three datasets together, we are able to piece together a rather comprehensive
picture of the shareholder structures for the listed firms in our sample. Our methodology can
match 64.7% (in terms of number of shareholders) and 89.8% (in terms of equity holdings)
of the shareholders' attributions from 2010 through 2020Q2. Using this information, we can
then calculate government holdings for all listed firms in our sample, including SOEs and
NSOEs.
    Using our own construction as a staring point, we further refine the government holdings
measure by taking into account of the information provided by Wind and China Stock
Market Accounting Research (CSMAR), respectively, on government holdings within top ten
shareholders. Specifically, for each issuer, we have three measures of government holdings
from three sources: our own construction, Wind, and CSMAR. If inconsistency arises out
of these three data sources, our assumption is that the more accurate measure is the one
with the highest government holdings. Underlying this assumption is the fact that the most
likely data error occurs out of omission: the failure to assign government attribution to
a government-related shareholder. By contrast, mis-identifying a non-state shareholder as
government related is a less likely error in the three data sources. Appendix A.1 provides
further details in the construction of the government holdings measure and compares the
discrepancy among the three data sources. Using either the initial construction or the refined
version, the main message of our findings remains robust, although the refined version does
help reduce noise and sharpen our findings.
    As reported in Table 3, the average government holdings for the SOE sample is 51.9%
with a standard deviation of 16.8% and remains stable over time. To take a close look at
the government holdings within SOE, we further divide the SOE sample into central SOE
(CSOE) and local SOE (LSOE) based on whether the end-controller is affiliated to the
central government or local government. As Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows, the full-sample
distribution of government holdings are quite disperse for both CSOE and LSOE groups,
ranging from 10% to 100%. In other words, not all SOEs are the same and our government
holdings variable contains much richer information than the SOE dummy. Whether or not
the credit market values such information (under what kind of economic situation) is the
object of our investigation in our empirical analysis.
   10
     The main disadvantage of the Firm Dataset is that information on attribution is more likely to be static,
recorded at the entry point of the firm. Nonetheless, this is the best we can do given the data limitations.


                                                     18
   Moving to the NSOE sample, both Table 3 and Figure 3 show that government holdings
are markedly lower than those of SOEs, but there are some interesting cross-issuer variations
as well. In particular, within our NSOE sample, there are two groups of firms: privately-
owned enterprises (POE) and a mixture of other NSOE firms, some of which are without clear
identifications (mixed). As shown in Panel (a) of Figure 3, there is a relatively small variation
in POEs and a moderate variation among other NSOE group. The average government
holdings is 12.5% with a standard deviation of 12.7% for other NSOE group and 2.8% with
a standard deviation of 4.5% for the POE group. Effectively, the information contained
in government holdings allows us to differentiate not only the SOEs from NSOEs, but also
within the SOE and NSOE samples, respectively.
   Finally, Panel (b) of Figure 3 examines the time-series variations of the government
holdings. Two points are worth mentioning. First, as expected, moving along the dimension
of CSOE, LSOE, mixed, and POE, the government holdings measure exhibits a descending
order, with the median being 57.9%, 50.6%, 9.2% and 1.5%, respectively. Second, the median,
as well as the bottom and upper 25 percentiles, of the government-holdings measure remains
fairly stable over time for these four groups, particularly for the SOEs and POEs.

Government End-Controller Holdings

By using our government holdings measure as a proxy for government support, our underlying
hypothesis is that, with a higher stake invested in a firm, the government is more likely to
extent support, especially in times of crisis. Following this intuition, one important aspect
that can be further explored is the concentration of government holdings. For example, two
firms both with 50% of government holdings might differ quite significantly in government
support if one is held by one government entity while the other is held by a multiple of
government entities. In particular, the one with concentrated government ownership is more
likely to receive government support in times of crisis, while the one with more diverse
government ownership might need more coordination from the various government entities.
   To capture the concentration of the government holdings, we compute the total equity
holdings by the end-controller. Taking into account the possibility that the end-controller can
control the firm through multiple shareholders, we further comb through the layers of equity
holdings structure for the top ten shareholders and calculate the effective total holdings by
the end-controller. Applied to the SOE group, this measure of end-controller holdings can be
used as an alternative proxy for government support. If our government-holdings measure
offers an upper bound of the extent of government support by summing up the holdings
of all government-related top-ten shareholders, then this new measure of government end-


                                               19
controller holdings provides a lower bound by focusing only on the holdings of the end-
controller. All else equal, end-controllers with more at stake would extent more support.
By contrast, applying this end-controller holdings measure to the NSOE group, the message
would be entirely different from the government holdings measure. As the end-controllers
for the NSOE firms are non-state entities, the information content of the end-controller
holdings measure for this group is unrelated to government support. In Appendix A.2, these
hypotheses will be further tested.


4        Empirical Results: The SOE Premium
The differentiation between the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and non-state firms (non-
SOEs) is among the most important frictions in China's economy. The inefficiency of China's
SOEs and their preferential access to banks loans have been widely documented in the
academic literature and popular press. At the same time, the contribution of China's private
sector to the country's economy has also been widely reported.11 For credit-market pricing,
the most apparent differentiation between an SOE and non-SOE is the perceived government
support behind the SOEs. Our focus in this section is to document the extent of this
differentiation, understand its time-variation, and examine its impact on the private sector
in China.


4.1      Measuring the SOE Premium
We measure the SOE premium by estimating the difference in credit spreads between a non-
SOE bond and an SOE bond of the same credit rating and same bond characteristics. Using
the credit spread of bond i in quarter t, we perform the quarterly panel regression:
                                                                  
             CreditSpreadi,t = a + b NSOEi,t + c Ratingi,t +           Controlsk
                                                                               i,t + i,t ,         (3)
                                                                   k


where the NSOE dummy, as defined in Section 3.2, captures the attribution of the end-
controller of bond-i's issuer in quarter t. The SOE premium is measured by the regression
coefficient b associated with the NSOE dummy, taking into account of the differences in credit
ratings and other bond characteristics measured by the control variables. This includes bond
maturity, issuance size, age, coupon rate, optionality, and liquidity. For listed firms, we add
    11
    They contribute 60% of China's GDP, and are responsible for 70% of innovation, 80% of urban employ-
ment and provide 90% of new jobs, as summarized in "The China Private Sector Report 2019" by Zeping
Ren at Evergrande Research Institute.



                                                  20
the log of their equity sizes as a control variable. The panel regression in equation (3) further
includes quarter fixed effect and industry fixed effect to control for potential market-wide
fluctuations and industry differences in credit spreads. The regression results are summarized
in Table 4, with t-stat's reported in squared brackets, using standard errors double clustered
by quarter and bond to take into account of cross-sectional as well as time-series correlations
in credit spreads.
    Using data from 2010Q1 to 2020Q2, we perform our empirical tests over three time
periods defined by two important dates in China's credit market ­ the first default in 2014Q1
and the onset of the worsening SOE premium in 2018Q2. As reported in Table 4, the SOE
premium for the listed sample is 20 bps (t-stat=3.08) and 21 bps (t-stat=3.58), respectively,
in the first two time periods before 2018Q2. Controlling for credit rating and other bond
characteristics and firm size, the SOE issuers on average enjoy a premium of about 20 bps
over their non-SOE counterparts. In other words, the credit-market financing cost for non-
SOE issuers is on average 20 bps higher than their SOE counterparts of the same credit
rating. The difference is significant both economically and statistically. Moreover, the first
default in 2014Q1 does not seem to have any significant adverse effect on the SOE premium.
The top panel of Figure 4 further reports the time-series variation of the SOE premium at
the quarterly frequency. Prior to 2018Q2, the SOE premium fluctuates around 20 bps. With
the exception of 2010 and the first few quarters of 2011, when the credit market is relatively
under-developed with a rather small sample of non-SOE bonds, the SOE premium stays well
below 50 bps prior to 2018Q2.
    Post 2018Q2, the SOE premium explodes rather suddenly. As reported in Table 4, the
average SOE premium increases to 106 bps (t-stat=7.78) in the phase III.12 As shown in
the time-series plot, over just one quarter, the SOE premium rises sharply from 22 bps
in 2018Q1 to an unprecedented 104 bps in 2018Q2. Since November 2018, recognizing
the adverse effects on the private sector, the Chinese governments at various levels offer
reassurances and devise policies to support the private sector, but the SOE premium, or
the non-SOE discount, deteriorates further, peaking at 165 bps in 2019Q3. It has since
come down to below 100 bps and is at 61 bps as of 2020Q2. Behind this dramatic explosion
in segmentation is the fast deteriorating credit-market conditions for non-SOE issuers. As
shown in Table 1, without controlling for bond characteristics, the average credit spread
   12
     To assess the economic significance of a 100 bps difference in credit spread, it is instructive to look
at the difference in credit spread across credit ratings. For the full sample period, the median of credit
spreads are 117, 180, and 207 basis points, respectively, for AAA, AA+, and AA rated non-SOE bonds.
In other words, the severity of the segmentation during Phase III is equivalent of the difference in pricing
of an AAA-rated bond and AA-rated bond. Significant in China is the fact that AA-rated and below are
considered speculative grades.


                                                    21
for non-SOE issuers is 203 bps and 206 bps, respectively, during the first two time periods
before 2018Q2. It then jumps to 357 bps post 2018Q2 in the third time period. By contrast,
the average credit spread for SOE issuers has a modest increase over the three time periods:
121 bps, 132 bps, and 170 bps, respectively.
   Also plotted in the background of Figure 4 are the total quarterly default amounts in
the credit market, which explode to unprecedented levels in 2018Q3 and 2018Q4, following
the 2018Q2 explosion of the SOE premium. Among others, the most notable policy event
happens at the beginning of 2018Q2 in April 2018, when "New Regulations on Asset Man-
agement" was released. Although targeted at the asset-management industry in China, this
policy, along with the earlier deleveraging campaigns to rein in the growth of corporate debt,
severely limits the firms ability to finance and re-finance their debt. As credit-market in-
vestors become more concerned of default risk, they effectively price out the non-SOE bonds
and further exacerbate the tension between SOE and non-SOE bonds, by seeking safety in
the SOE bonds and abandoning the non-SOE bonds.
   Perhaps the most alarming message captured by our time-series plot of the SOE premium
is the fact that the credit misallocation between the two segments of China's economy can
erupt rather suddenly in times of crisis. Such a severe segmentation in pricing is a reflection
of the dire economic reality faced by the non-SOE firms in China. As shown in Figure 2,
along with the unprecedented amounts of default post 2018Q3, the non-SOE issuers account
for an overwhelming fraction. Meanwhile, new issuance by listed non-SOEs as a percentage
of the total new issuance in the corporate bond market (excluding Chengtou bonds) has
decreased from its peak level of 18% to a mere 3% in 2019Q3. The results captured by
our SOE premium can be viewed as a credit-market version of the "state advancing and
private retreating" picture described by Lardy (2019) for bank loans in China. Given the
transparency of the credit market, as well as its price efficiency, the segmentation captured
in our paper is much more severe in magnitude and alarming in its speed of explosion.
   Accompanying the results on credit spreads, we also report in Table 4 the difference in
default measure between non-SOEs and SOEs by performing the quarterly panel regressions
in equation 3 by replacing credit spreads by DMi,t , the default measure for firm i in quarter
t. In this panel regression, parallel to the segmentation regression (at the issuer level), the
coefficient b associated with the NSOE dummy captures the difference in default measure
between the non-SOE and SOE issuers. As shown in Table 4, the difference in default
measure is negative during all three time periods: -1.50% (t-stat=-2.95), -3.08% (t-stat=-
4.23), and -0.55% (tstat=-0.91), indicating that the non-SOEs are in general healthier than
the SOEs, but that advantage shrinks precipitously post 2018Q2. The same pattern of the
shrinking gap in default measure can also be found in the bottom panel of Figure 4. These

                                               22
results point to the possibility that the post-2018Q2 credit-market stress begins to impact
the balance sheet and equity performance of the non-SOEs firms. We will examine more
closely the real impact of the severe segmentation on non-SOE issuers in Section 4.3.
   Finally, along with the alarming segmentation in the listed sample, segmentation between
non-SOE and SOE issuers also exists in the unlisted sample. Table 4 also reports the
SOE premium for bonds issued by unlisted firms: 16 bps in Phase I, 79 bps in Phase
II, and 154 bps in Phase III. Compared with our findings for the listed sample, the most
interesting difference is that the segmentation coefficient actually starts to increase during
Phase II, after the first default in 2014. The top panel in Figure 5 plots the time-series of
the segmentation coefficients for both the listed and unlisted samples. As we can see, the
increase in segmentation for the private sample picks up speed in 2014Q1, consistent with
the fact that the first wave of defaults occurs mostly for the unlisted firms. The bottom panel
of Figure 5 plots the difference in credit spreads between local and central SOEs (LSOEs vs
CSOEs), with the assumption of stronger government support for central SOEs. During the
early sample period, the unlisted LSOEs do pay a higher premium of around 30 bps relative
to their CSOE counterparts of the same rating category. During the credit market stress
in Phase III, these differences become statistically insignificant. As will be shown later in
Section 5.2, during this period, price discovery with respect to government support has in
fact improved above and beyond simple labels such as SOEs, LSOEs, or CSOEs.


4.2    Explaining the SOE Premium
To better understand the SOE Premium, particularly its explosion since 2018Q2, we in-
troduce two important drivers for the credit-market pricing in China: credit quality and
government support. As detailed in Section 3, we use the default measure, DM, constructed
from the Merton model as a proxy for credit quality, and we build, from the ground up, a
new measure of government holdings, GovtHoldings, as a proxy for the extent of government
support.
   Using these two new measures, namely DM and GovtHoldings, Table 5 reports the results
of the quarterly panel regressions:
                                                                                
CreditSpreadi,t = a + b NSOEi,t + c DMi,t + d GovtHoldingsi,t + e Ratingi,t +       Controlsk
                                                                                            i,t + i,t
                                                                                k


Effectively, the regression coefficient b measures the SOE premium after controlling for DM
and GovtHoldings, and the coefficients c and d measure the importance of DM and GovtHold-
ings in explaining the credit spreads in China. Our focus in this section is on the drivers of


                                               23
the SOE premium, particularly its explosion since 2018Q2. A full discussion on the the price
discovery of China's credit market with respect to credit quality and government support
can be found in Section 5.
   As reported in Table 5, controlling for default measure cannot help explain the SOE
premium. From 2014 through 2018Q1, the SOE premium was at 21 bps (t-stat=3.58). After
controlling for DM, the premium increased slightly to 25 bps (t-stat=4.32), as the default
measures of non-SOE issuers were in fact stronger than their SOE counterparts of the same
credit ratings. Likewise, from 2018Q2 through 2020Q2, the SOE premium was estimated
to be 106 bps (t-stat=7.78), and controlling for default measures does not have much of an
impact.
   By contrast, our measure of government holdings is found to be instrumental in explaining
the explosive SOE premium post 2018Q2. As shown in Table 5, GovtHoldings was not
important in explaining the pre-2018Q2 credit spreads, and the SOE premium remained
largely unchanged after controlling for GovtHoldings during Phases I and II. Post 2018Q2,
however, the richer information contained in our government holdings data started to matter.
Controlling for GovtHoldings, the elevated level of the SOE premium shrank from 106 bps
(t-stat=7.78) to -9 bps (t-stat=-0.48). Contributing to this significant reduction in SOE
premium is the increased sensitivity of credit spreads to government holdings, which was -8
bps (t-stat=-0.37) from 2014 through 2018Q1, and became -281 bps (t-stat=-7.82) from
2018Q2 through 2020Q2.
   Our results indicate that, prior to the onset of the severe segmentation of 2018Q2, the
concept of government support is important for credit pricing at the level of whether or not
the end-controller of a firm is government. Investors view SOE and non-SOE as two solid
blocks ­ one with government support and the other without. For them, labeling a firm
as SOE or non-SOE is sufficient information for the purpose of credit pricing. Any further
information with respect to the government ownership of a firm is unimportant and does
not get priced in. In times of crisis, however, the extent of government support becomes
more important and investors react by further differentiating bond issuers using the richer
information contained in government holdings. And this further differentiation gives rise
to the explosive SOE premium post 2018Q2. In this sense, it is ironic that this severe
credit misallocation was driven by the investors efficiently pricing their concerns for default
risk in the credit market. More broadly, our results, gathered from the openness of the
credit market, can be viewed as the tip of an iceberg, revealing the economy-wide credit
misallocations in China, with bank loans and shadow banking as the two other important
components not captured in our paper.



                                              24
4.3    The Real Impact of the Segmentation
To examine the real consequences of the severe segmentation in credit pricing, we extent our
sample to include all listed firms with any types of bond issuance in history and are left with
a larger sample of 1,339 firms. We focus our analysis on firm profitability, as captured by
returns to asset (ROA) and return to equity (ROE). We measure ROA by net profit divided
by lagged book asset, and ROE by net profit divided by lagged book equity.
   Table 6 summarizes our findings over three different phases, with Phase I being the pre-
default period before 2014, Phase III begin the post-2018Q2 period, and Phase II is the in
between period. Panel A examines the difference in firm performance between non-SOEs
and SOEs, using quarterly panel regressions after controlling for firm size, with quarter
and industry fixed effects to control for time-variation as well as industry variation in firm
profitability. Focusing first on ROA and ROE, we find that non-SOEs in China are in general
more profitable than SOEs. During the pre-2018Q2 periods (Phase I and II), the profitability
gap is fairly stable and statistically significant, with the difference in quarterly ROAs between
non-SOEs and SOEs on average 0.56% (t-stat=7.76) in Phase I and 0.52% (t-stat=8.83) in
Phase II. In annualized terms, this gap in ROA is around 2%. Post 2018Q2, the ROA gap
drops rather dramatically to 0.13% (t-stat=1.07) and is statistically insignificant. The same
pattern can be observed using ROEs. Before 2018Q2, the ROE gap between non-SOEs and
SOEs is on average 1.07% (t-stat=6.69) in Phase I and 1.20% (t-stat=7.93) in Phase II, and
then decreases sharply to -0.02% (t-stat=-0.05) in Phase III. Post 2018Q2, amid the severe
credit condition, the non-SOE firms in China has on average lost their superior profitability
relative to the SOE firms.
   To provide further evidence, we also using our government-holdings measure (GovtHold-
ings) to capture the extent of government support. As shown in Panel B of Table 6, higher
government holdings are in general associated with lower ROA and ROE, similar to the
findings in Panel A. Compared with the results in Panel A, where the extent of government
support is captured by the SOE dummy, the results in Panel B using GovtHoldings paint
a very similar picture. The sensitivity of ROA to GovtHoldings is -0.89% and -0.90%, re-
spectively, in Phase I and II, and then drops quickly to -0.26% post 2018Q2 and becomes
statistical insignificant. Consider two hypothetical firms: one non-SOE firm with zero gov-
ernment ownership and one SOE firm with 100% government ownership. Pre 2018Q2, the
quarterly ROA of the non-SOE firm is on average 0.90% higher than that of the SOE firm
and statistical significance of the performance gap is strong. Post 2018Q2, however, the
superior performance drops to a statistically insignificant 26%. Regressing ROE on Gov-
tHoldings gives a similar result. During Phase I and II, the quarterly ROE of the hypothetical


                                               25
non-SOE firm (with zero government ownership) firm is 1.80% and 2.08% higher than that
of the hypothetical SOE firm with 100% government ownership), while, post 2018Q2, this
difference in quarterly ROE becomes to 0.09% and is statistically insignificant.
    In addition to the shrinking gap in profitability, our results also document a shrinking
gap in credit quality. As shown in Panel A of Table 6, the non-SOE firms are stronger in
credit quality and with lower default measure than the SOE firms. The difference in default
measure between non-SOEs and SOEs is on average -2.18% (t-stat=-6.56) and -3.51% (t-
stat=-4.43) during Phase I and II, respectively. Post 2018Q2, during Phase III, the difference
drops to -0.43% and is indistinguishable from zero. The same pattern can be observed when
we use government holdings as a proxy for government support. As shown in Panel B of
Table 6, firms with higher government holdings have higher default measures and lower
credit quality. Again, consider the two hypothetical non-SOE and SOE firms. During Phase
I, the difference in their default measures is 2.45% and is statistical significant. Moving to
Phase II, the difference actually increases to 6.53% with strong statistical significance. In
other words, after the first default in 2014, as investors become more aware of credit risk,
the non-SOEs with access to the credit market actually become markedly healthier than
SOEs. Post 2018Q2, however, the non-SOE firm becomes weaker than the SOE, although
the difference of -0.00% in default measure is statistical insignificant.
    Overall, our results document the extent to which the severe segmentation in credit
pricing could harm the fundamentals of the non-SOE firms in China. It should be emphasized
that our sample of non-SOEs are publicly listed firms with access to the bond market. Our
numbers show that, post 2018Q2, even these large non-SOEs with access to the capital
markets are struggling in performance. In addition to the severe credit-market squeeze
documented in this paper, post 2018, the non-SOE firms, from small to large, are also
known to have difficulties in financing and re-financing via other credit channels, including
bank loans and shadow banking. As shown in our results, such severe credit conditions are
affecting the fundamentals of the non-SOE firms. The rapidly shrinking gap in profitability
and credit quality between non-SOEs and SOEs observed in this paper could serve as an
alarming alert to policy makers in China, pushing them to better balance the credit allocation
among the SOEs and non-SOEs.


5    Empirical Results: Price Discovery
While the previous section focuses exclusively on the tension between SOEs and non-SOEs,
we study in this section the price discovery with respect to credit quality and government
support by focusing on the samples of SOEs and non-SOEs separately. For each sample, we

                                               26
perform the quarterly panel regression:
                                                                     
 CreditSpreadi,t = a + b DMi,t + c GovtHoldingsi,t + d Ratingi,t +        Controlsk
                                                                                  i,t + i,t ,   (4)
                                                                      k


where the credit spread of bond i in quarter t is regressed on the corresponding default
measure (DM) and government support (GovtHoldings) controlling for credit rating and
other bond and firm characteristics. The regressions further include quarter fixed effect and
industry fixed effect to control for potential market-wide fluctuations and industry differences
in credit spreads. The reported t-stat's use standard errors double clustered by quarter and
bond to take into account of cross-sectional as well as time-series correlations in credit
spreads. The main results are summarized in Table 7 and the more detailed results are given
in Table A.3 for the SOE sample and Table A.2 for the non-SOE sample.


5.1    Price Discovery: Credit Quality
To capture the information content of credit spreads on credit quality, we focus on the
coefficient associated with the default measure, DM, in the panel regression summarized by
equation (4). While the information content of credit spreads has been extensively studied
for the US market, our paper is the first comprehensive study of the Chinese market. Given
the known segmentation in this market, we perform this regression for our listed NSOE and
listed SOE samples separately. Moreover, recognizing that this is a market in transition,
we perform the panel regressions over three time periods: Phase I, from 2010 through 2013,
is the pre-default period; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of
defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second and much more severe
wave of defaults.

The Shock of First Default in History: 2014Q1

During Phase I, prior to the first default of 2014Q1, credit spreads are uninformative with
respect to credit quality above and beyond the information contained in credit ratings. As
shown in Table 7, for both the SOE and non-SOE samples, the sensitivity of credit spreads
to default measures is of rather small magnitude, with the wrong sign for the non-SOE
sample. Given that investors had never experienced a default prior to 2014Q1, this lack of
connection between credit spread and default measure makes intuitive sense. During this
period, investors control for credit quality by focusing on credit rating, and credit spreads do
not contain any additional information about the credit quality of the issuer. For all practical
purposes, there is very little incentive for the credit-market investors to move beyond credit

                                              27
rating since their belief is such that default never happens.
   This situation is improved during Phase II, after the first default in the Spring of 2014.
For both the non-SOE and SOE samples, the coefficients for DM are positive and statis-
tically significant: 1.63 (t-stat=2.88) for non-SOEs and 1.04 (tstat=3.84) for SOEs. This
indicates that, as credit-market investors become aware of the potential default risk, credit
spreads start to incorporate default related information above and beyond credit rating. In
particular, information related to the issuer's financial statements and equity market valua-
tion starts to get incorporated into credit spreads. To gauge the economic significance of our
results, we use the sample standard deviation of DM during Phase II reported in Table 3,
which is 0.15 and 0.19, respectively, for the non-SOE and SOE samples. This implies that
one standard deviation increase in DM is associated with 24 bps and 20 bps increases in
credit spreads for non-SOEs and SOEs, respectively, comparable to the average SOE pre-
mium during this period. Inferring from the regression coefficients for credit rating during
Phase II, associated with an improvement of one letter grade in credit rating is an average
reduction of 50 bps in credit spread. From this perspective, the economic significance of the
price discovery with respect to credit quality is sizable.
   While this improvement in price discovery is decisively welcoming for a young market in
transition, the explanatory power of our default measure remains limited. As shown in Ta-
ble 7, during Phase II, the additional adjusted R-squared attributable to the default measure
is 1.0% for the non-SOE sample and 0.8% for the SOE sample. Such small magnitudes in the
explanatory power are in stark contrast with the findings for the US credit market, where,
as documented by Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001), a significant portion of
the variation in credit spreads can be explained by issuer-level variables known to affect the
credit quality of a firm. At the same quarterly frequency, Bao (2009) reports that default
measures constructed using models of Merton (1974) and Black and Cox (1976) can explain
as much as 45% of the cross-sectional variation in credit spreads for the US sample.

The Shock of Worsening Segmentation: 2018Q2

Moving from Phase II to Phase III gives us a unique opportunity to study price discovery
under a worsening segmented market. As shown in the previous section, during Phase III,
the listed non-SOE issuers suffer from explosive credit spreads, unprecedented defaults, and
shrinking new issuance, while the SOE issuers remain largely intact. It is therefore interesting
to examine the extent to which this market segmentation affects the information content of
credit spreads.
   For the non-SOE sample, we find a marked improvement in the information content of


                                              28
credit spreads. As shown in Table 7, the regression coefficient associated with DM increases
from 1.63 (t-stat=2.88) to 7.89 (tstat=3.83) for the non-SOE sample. During this period, the
standard deviation of DM for listed non-SOE issuers is 0.11. This implies that, associated
with one standard deviation increase in DM, credit spreads on average increase by 87 basis
points. During this stressful time period for NSOE issuers, associated with an improvement
of one letter grade in credit rating is an average reduction of 144 bps in credit spread. From
this perspective, the default measure has an economically significant impact on the credit
spread. Moreover, the adjusted R-squared of the panel regression improves by 3% with
the inclusion of the default measure during this period. Compared to the US market, the
explanatory power of the default measure is rather small, but it is by far the best performance
of the default measure among our results.
   For the SOE sample, the coefficient associated with DM increases from 1.04 (t-stat=3.84)
in Phase II to 2.09 (t-stat=2.65) in Phase III. For the SOE sample, the standard deviation of
DM is 0.09 during Phase III, as compared with 0.19 during Phase II. This implies that one
standard deviation increase in DM translates an increase in credit spread of 20 bps in Phase
II and 19 bps in Phase III. In other words, the economic significance of the DM coefficient
remains more or less the same for the SOE sample, while its statistical significance reduces.
Overall, in stark contrast to the non-SOE sample, there is no improvement in the information
content of credit spreads for the SOE sample. Given that most investors seek safety in SOE
bonds while abandoning the non-SOE bonds amidst the credit turmoil, the price discovery
for non-SOE bonds is forced to be more informative, while SOE bonds with their outside
government support are under no such pressure.

The Time-Series Variation of Price Discovery

To better capture how the price discovery evolves over time, the left panels of Figure 6
report the time-series variation of the extent of price discovery with respect to credit quality
using the panel regression specified in equation (4) over a rolling window of 8 quarters. The
top-left panel reports the slope coefficients on the default measure while the bottom-left
panel reports the additional adjusted R-squared explained by the default measure. Prior to
2014Q1, the price discovery is essentially zero as captured by both the regression coefficient
and the explanatory power. After the shock of the first default in the history of China's credit
market, we see a visible improvement in both the regression coefficient and the explanatory
power. The gradual nature of the plot is due to the smoothing done by the rolling window of
8 quarters. It is also interesting to observe that during Phase II, the time-series movements
are similar for both the SOE and non-SOE samples.


                                              29
   Post 2018Q2, however, we see a rapid improvement in the price discovery for the non-SOE
sample while the estimates for the SOE sample stays relatively flat. As a result, the slope
coefficient for non-SOEs diverges significantly from that for SOEs, and the same pattern
can be seen in terms of incremental R-squared. For non-SOEs, the incremental explanatory
power increases rather rapidly from 1% to the peak value of 9% on 2019Q3. Meanwhile,
explanatory power for SOE fluctuates around 1%.

Difference-in-Difference Test in Price Discovery

To formally test our observation that, since 2018Q2, credit spreads of non-SOEs become
significantly more informative than those of SOEs, we perform the difference-in-difference
test by running the following quarterly panel regression with two time shocks,

CreditSpreadi,t = a + b1 DMi,t + b2 NSOEi,t + b3 Posti,t + c1 DM*NSOEi,t + c2 DM*Posti,t
                                                                        
                + c3 NSOE*Posti,t + d DM*NSOE*Posti,t + e Ratingi,t +       Controlsk
                                                                                    i,t + i,t
                                                                              k


where Post is the event shock. For the default shock in 2014Q1, we define Post as 1 for
the time period from 2014Q1 through 2018Q1 and 0 for the time period from 2010Q1 to
2013Q4. For the segmentation shock in 2018Q2, we define Post as 1 for the time period from
2018Q2 through 2020Q2 and 0 for the time period from 2014Q1 to 2018Q1. Effectively,
the coefficient d associated with DM*NSOE*Post, captures the additional informativeness
of default measure on credit spreads for NSOE compared to SOE after each shock.

                      Shock = First Default                Shock = Segmentation
                        Phase I      Phase II - I           Phase II      Phase III - II
                    2010Q1-2013Q4                       2014Q1-2018Q1

     SOE                 0.09          1.30***              1.01***            1.28
                         [0.57]          [3.60]              [3.76]           [1.47]
     NSOE-SOE            -0.41           0.88                 0.38           5.57**
                        [-0.52]          [1.06]              [1.06]           [2.16]

   As summarized above, after the first default shock, the informativeness of credit spreads
with respect to credit quality improves for the SOE sample and the difference in the DM
coefficient is 1.30 (t-stat=3.60). Relative to the SOE sample, there is no further improvement
for the non-SOE sample, and the difference-in-difference coefficient is 0.88 (t-stat=1.06). By
contrast, after the segmentation shock, the SOE sample actually sees no improvement in

                                              30
price discovery and the difference in the DM coefficient is 1.28 (t-stat=1.47). Relative to the
non-SOE sample, however, there is a rather significant improvement in price discovery for
the non-SOE. The difference-in-difference estimate is 5.57 with t-stat 2.16.


5.2    Price Discovery: Government Support
While the connection between credit spreads and credit quality has been extensively studied
in the literature, price discovery with respect to government support has not been broadly
explored for the credit market. The closest paper in the literature of that of Berndt, Duffie,
and Zhu (2019), who examine the information content of credit spreads of US banks with
respect to the likelihood of government bailout. They find large post-Lehman reductions in
market-implied probabilities of government bailout, and, after controlling for credit quality,
they find big increases in debt financing costs for the US banks. Conceptually, our mes-
sage follows that of theirs ­ weaker government support results in higher credit spreads.
Our approach, however, differs from theirs in that we take a reduced-form approach by
constructing proxies for government support using information on government ownership.
Taking advantage of the large cross-issuer variation in our proxy, we gauge the importance
of government support in credit pricing. In Berndt, Duffie, and Zhu (2019), the extent of
government support is built explicitly into a structural model and the key identifying shock
is the time-variation in government support for US banks: stronger before the 2007-08 fi-
nancial crisis and weaker afterwards. Similar to Berndt, Duffie, and Zhu (2019), we also
cover two regimes with the segmentation shock in 2018Q2 as the turning point. Relative to
this shock, we can examine the before and after sensitivities of credit spreads to government
support among the SOE and non-SOE samples.

Before 2018Q2: Only the SOE Label Matters

To capture the information content of credit spreads on government support, we focus on the
coefficient associated with the government holdings, GovtHoldings, in the panel regression
summarized by equation (4). As shown in the Table 7, the coefficient on the government
holdings for the non-SOE sample is 0.45 (t-stat 1.06) in phase I and 0.24 (t-stat 0.52) in
phase II. For the SOE sample, the loading on the government holdings is -0.17 (t-stat -1.26)
in phase I and -0.11 (t-stat -0.52) in phase II. Overall, these results indicate that the richer
information contained in government holdings are not important for credit pricing. In credit-
market pricing, investors take into account of the extent of government support up to the
SOE labels, and the magnitude of that effect is captured by our SOE premium of around
20 bps. Prior to 2018Q2, the extent of government support above and beyond the SOE

                                              31
labels does not get priced into the market. This result is also consistent with our findings
reported in Table 5, where panel regression is performed using the full sample of both SOEs
and non-SOEs.

Post 2018Q2: Government Holdings Matter in an Important Way

Post 2018Q2, amid the rapidly worsening segmentation, the importance of government sup-
port permeates into both the SOE and NSOE sample. For the SOE sample in Table 7,
the coefficient estimate is -2.32 and highly significant at the 1 percent level with t-statistics
-6.05. Moreover, in terms of economic magnitude, one standard deviation increase in gov-
ernment holdings is associated with a reduction of 38 bps in credit spreads. Furthermore, as
shown in the top-right panel of Figure 6, the slope coefficients of the government holdings
from the rolling quarterly regression start to become negative and significant right after the
second quarter of 2018 and the effects are increasingly stronger afterwards. Meantime, from
the bottom-right panel in Figure 6, the incremental R-squared has a sharp increase from
0.3% to 3.0% post 2018Q2. These evidences imply that the extent of government support
measured by government holdings has become increasingly crucial in explaining the credit
spreads within SOE sample.
   Interestingly, government holdings also matter for the non-SOE sample post 2018Q2.
From Table 7, the coefficient estimate is -5.52 at the 1 percent significance level with t-
statistics -4.56. Although the slope coefficient for non-SOEs is larger in magnitude than
that of SOE, it is mostly due to the larger variations in credit spreads within the non-SOE
sample. In terms of economic magnitude, one standard deviation increase in government
holdings is associated with a reduction of 53 bps in credit spreads (t-stat=4.56) for the non-
SOE sample. Moreover, in terms of explanatory power, the importance to GovtHoldings for
the SOE sample is more apparent from the bottom right panel of Figure 6. By contrast, for
the non-SOE sample, price discovery with respect to credit quality remains more important,
as captured by the bottom left panel of Figure 6. Effectively, our results show an interest-
ing pattern of divergence, with the price discovery for SOEs focusing more on government
support and that for non-SOEs on credit quality. In other words, the rapid segmentation
not only divides SOEs from non-SOEs in terms of credit pricing, it also divides the contents
of their price discovery, moving one segment of the market toward price discovery and the
other segment toward government support.
   Overall, studying the information content of credit spreads with respect to default mea-
sures and government holdings, we find a market of improved price efficiency as investors
take into account the developing risk factors ­ default risk as well as the extent of govern-


                                               32
ment support, and price them into the credit market. Paradoxically, as investors react to the
emerging importance of government support, the segmentation between the SOE and NSOE
further deepens. In other words, the efficiency of market prices results in further inefficiency
in resource allocations, which could have real economic consequences on the non-SOE is-
suers as shown in Section 4.3. Our empirical evidences suggest that government support has
became a very important pricing factor for SOE while credit spreads contain significantly
more information about the default risk for non-SOE since 2018.


6    Conclusions
In this paper, we study the price efficiency of the onshore Chinese corporate bond market.
For the bank-dominated financial system in China, the presence of this market-based credit
channel has a profound and lasting impact. On the credit-demand side, for non-financial
firms in China, it has opened a new channel of debt financing ­ cheaper and more efficient
than the traditional bank loans. On the credit-supply side, for asset managers in China, it
has significantly expanded their investment frontier by offering an entirely new asset class
­ between the lower yielding and lower risk government bonds and the higher yielding and
higher risk equity market. Indeed, the growth of the onshore credit market is closely con-
nected with the demand from the fast growing asset-management industry in China. As
China further opens up its financial system, this onshore credit market is well positioned
to become a key component of the global fixed-income market, offering prospective interna-
tional investors exposures to the real China. If the rapid growth of China's economy was the
story of our age for the past three decades, then, moving forward, the maturation of China's
financial markets and their integration into the global markets could very well be the story
of the coming decade.
    Overall, our paper provides a comprehensive study of China's credit market and doc-
uments the importance of two factors in China's credit pricing: the fundamental credit
quality and the extent of outside government support. Focusing on the link between the
market-observed credit spreads and the underlying credit quality of the issuers, we find that,
unlike the US market, where a significant portion of the cross-sectional variation in credit
spreads can be explained by issuer-level information, the link between credit spreads and
credit quality is generally weak in China. Prior to the first default in 2014, credit spreads in
China are uninformative. Growing out of the pre-default era, credit spreads become more
informative, but with rather moderate magnitude. More alarming is the severe segmenta-
tion that has developed between state-owned enterprise (SOE) and non-SOE issuers since
the credit tightening of 2017-18. Our results show that this segmentation is driven not by

                                              33
the fundamentals of the firms, but by the perceived vulnerability of non-SOE issuers due
to their lack of outside government support. This schism, while dormant during normal
condition, has the tendency to break open at a rapid speed during stressful market condi-
tion, undermining the stability of the market. On the bright side, the unprecedented credit
risk forces investors to price non-SOE bonds with more differentiation, making the non-SOE
credit spreads markedly more informative. But this comes at a huge cost, with non-SOEs
suffering from exploding credit spreads, unprecedented defaults, and shrinking new issuance.
At the same time, as investors seek for safety in the SOE bonds, their information content
remains rather limited.
   Studying the link between credit spreads and the extent of government support, we find
the increasingly importance of government support in credit pricing. Prior to the severe SOE-
NSOE segmentation, the extent of government support stays at the coarse differentiation
of whether or not an issuer is SOE. Further information on government holdings had no
pricing impact. Post 2018Q2, amid the rapidly worsening segmentation, the importance of
government support permeated into every aspect of bond pricing, becoming an important
pricing factor across the SOE and non-SOE bonds as well as within the SOE and NSOE
samples. We show that this increased importance of government support is the main driver
behind the explosive SOE premium post 2018Q2. While our results are gathered only from
the credit market, they could help shed light on the credit allocation between SOEs and
non-SOEs in the broader economy. The severity of the SOE premium and its tendency to
break open at a rapid speed can serve as a warning to policy makers in China as they aim to
balance the credit allocation and encourage economic growth among the two most important
segments of China's economy.




                                             34
                                    References
Amstad, M. and He, Z. (2019). Handbook on China's Financial System: Chinese Bond
    Market and Interbank Market.
Bai, J. and Zhou, H. (2018). The Funding Cost of Chinese Local Government Debt. Working
   paper.
Bao, J. (2009). Structural Models of Default and the Cross-Section of Corporate Bond Yield
   Spreads. Working paper.
Bao, J., Pan, J. and Wang, J. (2011). The Illiquidity of Corporate Bonds. The Journal of
    Finance 66(3), 911­946.
Berndt, A., Duffie, D. and Zhu, Y. (2019). The Decline of Too Big to Fail. Working paper.
Black, F. and Cox, J.C. (1976). Valuing Corporate Securities: Some Effects of Bond Inden-
   ture Provisions. The Journal of Finance 31(2), 351­367.
Brandt, L. and Zhu, X. (2000). Redistribution in a Decentralized Economy: Growth and
   Inflation in China under Reform. Journal of Political Economy 108(2), 422­439.
Caballero, R.J., Hoshi, T. and Kashyap, A.K. (2008). Zombie Lending and Drepressed
   Restructuring in Japan. American Economic Review 98(5), 1943­1977.
Campbell, J.Y. and Taksler, G.B. (2003). Equity Volatility and Corporate Bond Yields. The
   Journal of Finance 58(6), 2321­2349.
Chen, H. et al (2018). Pledgeability and Asset Prices: Evidence from the Chinese Corporate
   Bond Markets. Working paper.
Chen, Z., He, Z. and Liu, C. (2020). The Financing of Local Government in China: Stimulus
    Loan Wanes and Shadow Banking Waxes. Journal of Financial Economics.
Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S. and Martin, J.S. (2001). The Determinants of Credit
   Spread Changes. The Journal of Finance 56(6), 2177­2207.
Cong, L.W. et al (2019). Credit Allocation Under Economic Stimulus: Evidence from China.
   The Review of Financial Studies 32(9), 3412­3460.
Ding, Y., Xiong, W. and Zhang, J. (2020). Overpricing in China's Corporate Bond Market.
    Working paper.
Dollar, D. and Wei, S. (2007). Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and Investment
   Efficiency. NBER working paper.
Gao, H., Huang, Y. and Mo, J. (2020). Boosted Credit Ratings in China: The Effects of
   Credit Enhancement on Bond Pricing. Working paper.
Gao, H. et al (2015). Predicting Financial Distress in China: Credit Market versus Stock
    Market. Working paper.
Hsieh, C.T. and Klenow, P.J. (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
    India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1403­1448.

                                           35
Hu, G.X., Pan, J. and Wang, J. (2019). Chinese Capital Market: An Empirical Overview.
    Working paper.
Huang, J.Z., Liu, B. and Shi, Z. (2020). Determinants of Short-Term Corporate Yield
    Spreads. Working paper.
Huang, Y., Pagano, M. and Panizza, U. (2020). Local Crowding-Out in China. The Journal
    of Finance.
Jin, S., Wang, W. and Zhang, Z. (2018). The Value and Real Effects of Implicit Government
    Guarantees. Working paper.
Kealhofer, S. and Kurbat, M. (2001). The Default Prediction Power of the Merton Approach
    Relative to Debt Ratings and Accounting Variables (KMV LLC).
Lardy, N. (2019). The State Strikes Back: The End of Economic Reform in China? Wash-
    ington: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Li, B., Wang, Z. and Zhou, H. (2018). China's Anti-Corruption Campaign and Credit
    Reallocation from SOEs to Non-SOEs. Working paper.
Liu, L.X., Lyu, Y. and Yu, F. (2017). Implicit Government Guarantee and the Pricing of
    Chinese LGFV Debt. Working paper.
Merton, R.C. (1974). On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
    Rates. The Journal of Finance 29(2), 449­470.
Mo, J. and Subrahmanyam, M.G. (2019). Policy Interventions, Liquidity, and Clientele
    Effects in the Chinese Corporate Credit Bond Market. Working paper.
Song, Z., Storesletten, K. and Zilibotti, F. (2011). Growing Like China. American Economic
    Review 101(1), 202­239.
Wang, S., Wei, K.J. and Zhong, N. (2015). The Demand Effect of Yield-Chasing Retail
    Investors: Evidence from the Chinese Corporate Bond Market. Working paper.




                                            36
                                                              Corporate Bonds          Chengtou Bonds          CP          Other

                                                100                                                                                25


           Fraction of Amount Outstanding (%)




                                                                                                                                                         Amount Outstanding (RMB Trillion)
                                                80                                                                                 20



                                                60                                                                                 15



                                                40                                                                                 10



                                                20                                                                                 5



                                                 0                                                                                 0
                                                      2004    2006     2008     2010     2012   2014    2016        2018   2020

                                                                        (a) China's Credit Market


                                                      NSOE Listed        NSOE Unlisted          SOE Unlisted          SOE Listed

                                                100                                                                                8

                                                                                                                                   7
           Fraction of Amount Outstanding (%)




                                                                                                                                        Amount Outstanding (RMB Trillion)
                                                80
                                                                                                                                   6

                                                                                                                                   5
                                                60

                                                                                                                                   4

                                                40
                                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                                   2
                                                20
                                                                                                                                   1

                                                 0                                                                                 0
                                                      2004    2006     2008     2010     2012   2014    2016        2018   2020

                                                                    (b) China's Corporate Bond Market

Figure 1: The top panel plots the total amount outstanding of the Chinese credit market
(right axis) and the fraction by instrument type (left axis). The bottom panel plots the total
amount outstanding of the corporate bond market (right axis) and the fraction by issuer
type (left axis). Data for 2020 is as of end of the second quarter.



                                                                                           37
                                                  NSOE Listed         NSOE Unlisted               SOE Unlisted           SOE Listed

                                            100                                                                                       70




                                                                                                                                            Quarterly Default Amount (RMB Billion)
           Fraction of Default Amount (%)                                                                                             60
                                            80
                                                                                                                                      50

                                            60
                                                                                                                                      40


                                                                                                                                      30
                                            40

                                                                                                                                      20
                                            20
                                                                                                                                      10


                                             0                                                                                        0
                                                   1

                                                          3

                                                                 1

                                                                        3

                                                                               1

                                                                                       3

                                                                                                1

                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                                             1
                                                Q

                                                         Q

                                                                Q

                                                                       Q

                                                                              Q

                                                                                     Q

                                                                                             Q

                                                                                                      Q

                                                                                                             Q

                                                                                                                    Q

                                                                                                                            Q
                                              15

                                                       15

                                                              16

                                                                     16

                                                                            17

                                                                                   17

                                                                                           18

                                                                                                    18

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                          20
                                                       (a) Quarterly Default in China's Credit Market


                                                  NSOE Listed          NSOE Unlisted              SOE Unlisted           SOE Listed

                                            100                                                                                       900

                                             90
                                                                                                                                      800



                                                                                                                                                                 Total New Issuance (RMB Billion)
                                             80
          Fraction of New Issuance (%)




                                                                                                                                      700
                                             70
                                                                                                                                      600
                                             60

                                             50                                                                                       500

                                             40
                                                                                                                                      400
                                             30
                                                                                                                                      300
                                             20
                                                                                                                                      200
                                             10

                                              0                                                                                       100
                                                   1

                                                          3

                                                                 1

                                                                        3

                                                                               1

                                                                                       3

                                                                                                1

                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                                             1
                                                 Q

                                                          Q

                                                                 Q

                                                                        Q

                                                                               Q

                                                                                      Q

                                                                                              Q

                                                                                                       Q

                                                                                                              Q

                                                                                                                     Q

                                                                                                                             Q
                                              15

                                                       15

                                                              16

                                                                     16

                                                                            17

                                                                                   17

                                                                                           18

                                                                                                    18

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                          20




                                                       (b) Quarterly New Issuance of Coporate Bonds

Figure 2: The top panel plots the quarterly default amount (right axis) and the fraction by
issuer type (left axis). Defaults by all instruments in the credit market are included. The
bottom panel plots quarterly new issuace of corporate bonds (right axis) and the fraction by
issuer type (left axis). Corporate bonds issued by Chengtou are excluded.

                                                                                           38
                                           2500
                                                                                                                                      CSOE
                                                                                                                                      LSOE
                                                                                                                                      Other NSOE
                                                                                                                                      POE
                                           2000



                Num of Observations

                                           1500




                                           1000




                                                        500




                                                                 0
                                                                     0   10     20       30          40     50     60     70     80      90        100
                                                                                                Controller Holdings (%)

                                                                         (a) Distribution of Government Holdings

                                                                80
                                                                          CSOE
                                                                          LSOE
                                                                70        Other NOSE
                                                                          POE


                                                                60
                                      Government Holdings (%)




                                                                50



                                                                40



                                                                30



                                                                20



                                                                10



                                                                0
                                                                12Q1     13Q1     14Q1        15Q1        16Q1   17Q1     18Q1    19Q1        20Q1



                                                                     (b) Government Holdings: P25, Median and P75

Figure 3: This figure plots the distribution of the government holdings for four types of firms, namely
central SOEs (CSOE), local SOEs (LSOE), other non-SOE firms (Mainly Public and Foreign Companies)
and privately-owned enterprises (POE). Panel (a) plots the histogram of the government holdings for the
full sample. Panel (b) plots the dynamic dispersion of government holdings. The doted line refers to the
median and the shaded area indicates the 25 percentile and 75 percentile.



                                                                                                          39
                                                       200                                                                                            70
                                                                  Difference in Credit Spread (left axis)
                                                                  Quarterly Default Amount (right axis)

                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                       150




                                                                                                                                                           Quarterly Default Amount (Billion RMB)
               Difference in Credit Spread (bps)                                                                                                      50


                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                      40



                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                       50


                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                      10



                                                       -50                                                                                            0
                                                         10Q1   11Q1    12Q1       13Q1       14Q1          15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1

                                                         (a) The SOE Premium: Difference in Credit Spread

                                                         5                                                                                            70



                                                                                                                                                      60




                                                                                                                                                           Quarterly Default Amount (Billion RMB)
                                                         0
                   Difference in Default Measure (%)




                                                                                                                                                      50



                                                                                                                                                      40

                                                        -5

                                                                                                                                                      30



                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                       -10


                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                  Difference in Default Measure (left axis)
                                                                  Quarterly Default Amount (right axis)
                                                       -15                                                                                            0
                                                         10Q1   11Q1    12Q1       13Q1       14Q1          15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1

                                                                       (b) Difference in Default Measure

Figure 4: This figure plots the difference between listed non-SOEs and listed SOEs in credit
spread (top panel, left axis) and in default measure (bottom panel, left axis), estimated using
quarterly regressions, controlling for credit ratings and other bond and firm characteristics.
The shaded area indicates the 95% confidence intervals. Also reported are the total quarterly
default amounts in the credit market (right axis).




                                                                                                             40
                                                       200                                                                                           70
                                                                  NSOE Listed minus SOE Listed (left axis)
                                                                  NSOE Unlisted minus SOE Unlisted (left axis)
                                                                  Quarterly Default Amount (right axis)
                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                       150




                                                                                                                                                          Quarterly Default Amount (Billion RMB)
               Difference in Credit Spread (bps)
                                                                                                                                                     50


                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                     40



                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                       50


                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                     10



                                                       -50                                                                                           0
                                                         10Q1   11Q1   12Q1      13Q1      14Q1       15Q1        16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1

                                                                (a) SOEs vs Non-SOEs, Listed and Unlisted

                                                       60                                                                                            70



                                                       40                                                                                            60




                                                                                                                                                          Quarterly Default Amount (Billion RMB)
                   Difference in Credit Spread (bps)




                                                       20                                                                                            50



                                                         0                                                                                           40



                                                       -20                                                                                           30



                                                       -40                                                                                           20



                                                       -60                                                                                           10
                                                                  LSOE Listed minus CSOE Listed (left axis)
                                                                  LSOE Unlisted minus CSOE Unlisted (left axis)
                                                                  Quarterly Default Amount (right axis)
                                                       -80                                                                                           0
                                                         10Q1   11Q1   12Q1      13Q1      14Q1       15Q1        16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1

                                                             (b) Central vs Local SOEs, Listed and Unlisted

Figure 5: This figure plots the difference between non-SOEs and SOEs in credit spread for
both listed and unlisted sample (top panel, left axis) and the difference between LSOEs
and CSOEs in credit spread for both listed and unlisted sample (bottom panel, left axis),
estimated using quarterly regressions, controlling for credit ratings and other bond and firm
characteristics. The shaded area indicates the 95% confidence intervals. Also reported are
the total quarterly default amounts in the credit market (right axis).



                                                                                                        41
                                                                                                                          3
                      14      NSOE                                                                                                 NSOE
                              SOE                                                                                         2        SOE


                      12
                                                                                                                          1


                      10                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                          -1
                       8
 Slope Coefficient




                                                                                                      Slope Coefficient
                                                                                                                          -2
                       6
                                                                                                                          -3

                       4
                                                                                                                          -4

                       2                                                                                                  -5


                                                                                                                          -6
                       0

                                                                                                                          -7
                      -2
                                                                                                                          -8
                      12Q1   13Q1    14Q1   15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1                                       12Q1    13Q1    14Q1   15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1


                               (a) Credit Spreads on DM                                                                        (b) Credit Spreads on GovtHoldings

                      10                                                                                             3.5
                              NSOE                                                                                                 NSOE
                       9      SOE                                                                                                  SOE
                                                                                                                          3
                       8

                                                                                                                     2.5
                       7


                       6
 Incremental R2 (%)




                                                                                       Incremental R2 (%)




                                                                                                                          2

                       5
                                                                                                                     1.5
                       4


                       3                                                                                                  1


                       2
                                                                                                                     0.5

                       1
                                                                                                                          0
                       0


                      -1                                                                                       -0.5
                      12Q1   13Q1    14Q1   15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1                              12Q1             13Q1    14Q1   15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1


                               (c) Incremental R2 by DM                                                                    (d) Incremental R2 by GovtHoldings

Figure 6: This figure plots the slope coefficient (top two panels) and the additional adjusted
R-squared (bottom two panels) from the regression of credit spreads on default measure and
government holdings, respectively, controlling for credit ratings and other bond and firm
characteristics. The additional adjusted R-squared is the difference in adjusted R-squared
between the regression with and without default measure (or government holdings). The
shaded area indicates the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                      42
  Table 1: Summary Statistics: Bond-Level Data

                       Non-SOE Listed              SOE Listed
                      mean    med       std     mean    med     std
NumIssuers              367                       403
NumBonds                923                     1,477
CreditSpread (%)       2.47   1.94     2.39      1.39    0.99   1.41
Rating                 2.43   3.00     0.85      1.69    1.00   0.84
Maturity (yr)          2.97   2.79     1.25      3.33    2.95   1.70
IssueSize (billion)    1.03   0.80     0.89      2.00    1.20   2.56
Age (yr)               1.75   1.53     1.26      2.01    1.61   1.67
Coupon (%)             5.91   5.90     1.24      5.13    5.10   1.09
Embed                  0.63   1.00     0.48      0.39    0.00   0.49
Exch                   0.69   1.00     0.46      0.53    1.00   0.50
ZeroDays (%)             77     88       26        86      93     18
Turnover (%)             31     13       62        35      10     80
TradingDays (day)        15      8       18        10       5     12
                      Non-SOE Unlisted            SOE Unlisted
                      mean    med       std     mean    med     std
NumIssuers              403                     1,795
NumBonds              1,518                     7,061
CreditSpread (%)       2.82   2.48     1.85      1.58   1.31    1.18
Rating                 2.33   2.00     0.81      1.98   2.00    0.86
Maturity (yr)          3.11   2.81     1.47      3.59   3.23    1.86
IssueSize (billion)    1.09   1.00     0.92      1.67   1.00    2.18
Age (yr)               1.66   1.38     1.31      2.29   1.86    1.86
Coupon (%)             6.11   6.20     1.31      5.79   5.80    1.25
Embed                  0.56   1.00     0.50      0.26   0.00    0.44
Exch                   0.48   0.00     0.50      0.21   0.00    0.41
ZeroDays (%)             85     93       20        88     94      16
Turnover (%)             48     15      117        63     21     144
TradingDays (day)        10      5       13         8      4      11
The sample extends from January 2010 through June 2020. Credit-
Spread is the difference in yield between corporate bond and CDB
bond of the same maturity. Rating is a numerical number: 1=AAA,
2=AA+, 3=AA, 4=AA-, etc. Embed is 1 for bonds issued with
emdedded option. Exch is 1 for exchange-traded bonds. ZeroDays
is the percent of non-trading days per quarter. Turnover is the ra-
tio of quarterly trading volume to issuance size. TradingDays is the
number of trading days per quarter.




                                43
                             Table 2: Summary Statistics: Bond-Level Data by Period

                                          Non-SOE Listed                                      SOE Listed
                            Phase I           Phase II        Phase III       Phase I          Phase II          Phase III
                           mean   std        mean    std     mean    std     mean   std       mean    std       mean    std
     NumIssuers              178               315             227              256              340              252
     NumBonds                221               643             570              458              824              884
     CreditSpread (%)       2.03   1.25       2.06   1.39     3.57   3.78      1.21   0.79      1.32   1.31      1.70   1.89
     Rating                 2.73   0.75       2.60   0.73     1.91   0.91      1.85   0.86      1.80   0.89      1.34   0.61
     Maturity (yr)          3.89   1.38       2.94   1.16     2.42   0.94      4.16   2.01      3.22   1.55      2.76   1.31
     IssueSize (billion)    0.94   0.80       1.01   0.94     1.14   0.85      2.31   3.16      1.89   2.49      1.91   2.01
     Age (yr)               1.25   1.04       1.81   1.30     1.94   1.21      1.54   1.36      2.26   1.69      1.98   1.77
     Coupon (%)             6.45   0.99       5.96   1.23     5.46   1.25      5.44   0.97      5.24   1.09      4.65   1.05
     Embed                  0.52   0.50       0.65   0.48     0.65   0.48      0.28   0.45      0.43   0.50      0.43   0.49
     Exch                   0.77   0.42       0.70   0.46     0.63   0.48      0.56   0.50      0.56   0.50      0.45   0.50
     ZeroDays (%)             62     30         76     26       88     16        79     21        85     19        92     10
     Turnover (%)             44     91         32     56       20     47        54    118        31     70        26     46
     TradingDays (day)        25     20         16     18        8     11        14     14        10     13         5      6
                                          Non-SOE Unlisted                                   SOE Unlisted




44
                            Phase I           Phase II        Phase III       Phase I          Phase II          Phase III
                           mean   std        mean    std     mean    std     mean   std       mean    std       mean    std
     NumIssuers              152               360             271           1,225             1,626            1,158
     NumBonds                309             1,073             897           3,024             4,758            3,534
     CreditSpread (%)       2.04   0.87       2.54   1.54     3.68   2.29     1.65    0.94      1.45   1.06      1.84   1.68
     Rating                 2.75   0.68       2.45   0.77     1.94   0.76     2.08    0.86      2.09   0.84      1.55   0.77
     Maturity (yr)          4.03   1.83       3.20   1.40     2.51   1.06     4.75    1.95      3.32   1.62      2.61   1.51
     IssueSize (billion)    1.04   0.69       1.08   0.88     1.14   1.06     1.84    2.51      1.56   2.09      1.72   1.88
     Age (yr)               1.09   0.97       1.59   1.30     2.05   1.34     1.59    1.51      2.67   1.82      2.34   2.13
     Coupon (%)             6.31   1.01       6.19   1.31     5.90   1.36     5.88    1.19      6.02   1.21      5.09   1.13
     Embed                  0.38   0.49       0.53   0.50     0.71   0.46     0.27    0.45      0.23   0.42      0.34   0.47
     Exch                   0.18   0.38       0.46   0.50     0.65   0.48     0.20    0.40      0.21   0.41      0.24   0.42
     ZeroDays (%)             80     22         85     21       88     16       80      22        90     14        93      8
     Turnover (%)            125    215         43     96       22     55      121     221        44    100        33     59
     TradingDays (day)        13     15         10     14        8     11       13      15         7      9         5      6
     The sample period is from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default period; Phase II,
     from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second
     and much more severe wave of defaults. See Table 1 for variable definitions.
                                       Table 3: Summary Statistics: Equity-Level Data

                                                                            Non-SOE Listed
                                        All                        Phase I                     Phase II                     Phase III
                              mean      med       std      mean      med       std     mean      med        std     mean      med         std
      NumFirms                   367                         178                         315                          227
      EquitySize (log)         23.30   23.26    1.02       22.57    22.48     0.93     23.31    23.28      0.88     23.77     23.70      1.08
      EquityVolatility (%)     40.38   36.53   17.98       37.56    35.98    10.04     42.27    36.74     21.46     38.45     36.64     13.35
      Leverage (%)             58.55   59.06   15.29       55.76    56.43    12.84     57.39    57.89     15.27     62.67     62.47     15.97
      AssetGrowth (%)          24.96   20.91   19.42       28.69    24.45    21.24     24.69    20.65     19.64     23.08     19.50     17.28
      AssetValue (log)         24.01   23.86    1.24       23.19    23.11     0.98     23.90    23.82      1.05     24.77     24.68      1.31
      AssetVolatility (%)      22.95   19.72   15.50       22.13    21.19    10.34     26.04    21.61     17.44     17.33     14.59     12.21
      DM (%)                   21.18   18.07   12.78       18.70    17.87     6.59     22.48    18.45     14.97     20.21     17.50     10.60
      GovtHoldings (%)          5.07    2.03    8.36        4.97     1.59     8.72      4.51     1.93      7.50      6.23      2.99      9.55
      CtrlHoldings (%)         36.41   32.81   17.43       36.55    33.18    18.83     36.90    33.32     16.78     35.35     32.05     17.69
                                                                              SOE Listed
                                        All                        Phase I                     Phase II                     Phase III




45
                              mean      med       std      mean      med       std     mean      med        std     mean      med         std
      NumFirms                   403                         256                         340                          252
      EquitySize (log)         23.71   23.56    1.34       23.31    23.05     1.40     23.71    23.52      1.28     24.05     23.98      1.28
      EquityVolatility (%)     36.37   32.06   18.35       32.48    31.24    10.82     41.56    35.81     22.32     30.51     28.74     12.17
      Leverage (%)             61.67   64.05   14.90       61.18    62.99    14.61     61.19    63.51     15.70     63.00     65.96     13.56
      AssetGrowth (%)          14.32   12.11   13.04       19.69    17.01    14.23     12.82    11.15     12.99     12.11     10.38     10.37
      AssetValue (log)         24.65   24.42    1.46       24.24    23.96     1.45     24.53    24.28      1.40     25.23     25.33      1.40
      AssetVolatility (%)      17.18   13.31   13.83       15.07    12.89     9.54     21.41    16.69     16.24     11.46      8.51      9.07
      DM (%)                   22.56   18.79   15.12       18.39    17.70     7.83     26.78    21.33     18.91     18.71     17.10      9.26
      GovtHoldings (%)         51.93   53.86   16.76       52.08    53.85    17.34     51.22    53.60     16.71     53.08     54.65     16.26
      CtrlHoldings (%)         45.50   46.00   16.39       47.19    48.81    17.20     45.26    45.54     16.45     44.41     44.92     15.40
     DM is the default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. GovtHoldings is the total government equity holdings
     within firm's top 10 shareholders. CtrlHoldings is the total equity holdings by the end-controller within firm's top 10 shareholders.
     EquitySize and AssetValue are the log of the firm's equity size and asset value, respectively. EquityVolatility and AssetVolatility
     are the annualized equity and asset volatility, respectively. Leverage is the ratio of total current liabilities plus half of the total
     non-current liabilities to the total asset value. AssetGrowth is the average growth rate of the asset value in the past three years.
     The sample period is from January 2010 to June 2020.
                                 Table 4: Difference in Credit Spreads and Default Measures

                                                         Listed Sample                                                   UnListed Sample
                                CreditSpread (%)                                   DM (%)                               CreditSpread (%)
                          Phase I      Phase II     Phase III         Phase I      Phase II      Phase III        Phase I      Phase II     Phase III
      NSOE        0.20***              0.21***        1.06***         -1.50***     -3.08***         -0.55          0.16***      0.79***       1.54***
                    [3.08]                [3.58]        [7.78]         [-2.95]       [-4.23]       [-0.91]           [3.47]     [12.92]        [17.28]
      Rating      0.51***              0.53***        1.24***           0.79*         -0.18       1.60***          0.54***      0.41***       0.46***
                    [6.39]               [10.96]        [4.84]          [1.94]       [-0.51]        [3.13]         [14.11]      [16.89]        [14.58]
      Maturity    0.04***                  0.00      -0.22***           -0.08          0.18          0.06          0.08***       -0.03*      -0.25***
                    [2.61]                [0.16]       [-4.38]         [-0.52]        [0.83]        [0.35]           [9.00]      [-1.85]      [-13.98]
      Age            0.02                 -0.00          0.00           -0.06       0.59***          0.14             0.01     -0.09***         -0.02
                    [1.17]               [-0.16]        [0.04]         [-0.28]        [2.85]        [1.45]           [0.95]      [-9.51]       [-1.39]
      IssueSize     -0.00              -0.05***       -0.08**         -0.53***         0.02         -0.01         -4.60***     -8.39***     -15.64***
                   [-0.25]               [-3.41]       [-2.03]         [-3.23]        [0.10]       [-0.07]          [-9.26]      [-9.98]       [-9.80]
      ZeroDays   -0.91***              -2.07***      -4.57***           -0.34      -4.60***         -1.45         -0.54***     -1.53***      -2.92***




46
                   [-3.98]               [-9.10]       [-5.93]         [-0.40]       [-3.28]       [-1.23]          [-3.95]      [-9.02]       [-8.49]
      Embed         -0.05               1.74***      2.22***            -1.21          1.22         -0.67             0.07      0.90***       2.37***
                   [-0.33]                [8.90]       [10.10]         [-0.79]        [1.20]       [-1.12]           [1.19]       [7.22]       [17.88]
      Exch           0.01              -0.17***       0.90***           -0.37         -0.54         -0.38            -0.06         0.04      0.49***
                    [0.12]               [-2.65]        [3.62]         [-0.66]       [-0.84]       [-0.78]          [-0.99]       [0.96]        [5.08]
      Embed_Exch    -0.07              -2.03***      -3.42***            0.94         -2.00          0.44            -0.10     -0.97***      -2.21***
                   [-0.38]              [-10.78]      [-11.94]          [0.56]       [-1.52]        [0.55]          [-1.64]      [-6.69]      [-14.81]
      EquitySize -0.15***              -0.20***      -0.23***           -0.46      -1.41***      -1.55***
                   [-4.84]               [-5.04]       [-4.16]         [-1.36]       [-2.58]       [-5.39]
      Constant    4.19***              6.48***        9.36***         32.23***     63.03***      50.62***         0.90***       1.81***       3.42***
                    [4.24]                [6.97]        [4.90]          [2.76]        [4.60]        [7.02]         [4.86]        [8.84]        [9.53]
      Obs           4,344                10,072         5,348           4,344        10,072         5,350          21,525        45,315        16,999
      Adj R2        0.543                 0.468         0.385           0.151         0.660         0.331          0.544         0.382         0.457

     Quarterly panel regressions with credit spreads and default measures (DM) as the dependent variables, respectively, with quarter and industry fixed
     effects. NSOE is one for bonds issued by NSOEs and zero for SOEs. DM is the default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. Reported
     in square brackets are tstat's using standard errors clustered by bond and quarter. See Table 1 for bond-level variable definitions. The sample extends
     from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first
     wave of defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second and much more severe wave of defaults.
                                             Table 5: Explaining the SOE Premium

                                        Phase I                                 Phase II                                Phase III
      NSOE                  0.20***     0.20***       0.20**        0.21***      0.25***       0.18*         1.06***     1.09***        -0.09
                             [3.08]       [2.95]      [2.46]         [3.58]       [4.32]       [1.68]         [7.78]      [7.76]       [-0.48]
      DM                                  -0.13                                  1.26***                                 4.78***
                                         [-0.40]                                  [4.52]                                  [5.24]
      GovtHoldings                              0.00                                     -0.08                                 -2.81***
                                               [0.01]                                   [-0.37]                                 [-7.82]
      Rating                0.51*** 0.51*** 0.51***                  0.53*** 0.53*** 0.52***                 1.24*** 1.16*** 1.20***
                              [6.39]  [6.29]   [6.23]                 [10.96]  [11.23]  [11.01]                [4.84]   [4.73]   [4.66]
      Maturity              0.04*** 0.04*** 0.04***                     0.00     0.00     0.00              -0.22*** -0.22*** -0.20***
                              [2.61]  [2.63]   [2.60]                  [0.16]   [0.07]   [0.16]               [-4.38]  [-4.45]  [-4.20]
      Age                      0.02    0.02     0.02                   -0.00    -0.01    -0.00                  0.00    -0.00     0.01
                              [1.17]  [1.17]   [1.17]                 [-0.16]  [-0.52]  [-0.16]                [0.04]  [-0.11]   [0.31]
      IssueSize               -0.00   -0.00    -0.00                -0.05*** -0.05*** -0.05***               -0.08** -0.08**     -0.05
                             [-0.25] [-0.33]  [-0.26]                 [-3.41]  [-3.43]  [-3.32]               [-2.03]  [-2.10]  [-1.28]
      ZeroDays             -0.91*** -0.92*** -0.91***               -2.07*** -2.01*** -2.07***              -4.57*** -4.50*** -4.39***




47
                             [-3.98] [-3.99]  [-3.98]                 [-9.10]  [-9.08]  [-9.08]               [-5.93]  [-5.94]  [-5.72]
      Embed                   -0.05   -0.05    -0.05                 1.74*** 1.73*** 1.74***                 2.22*** 2.25*** 2.24***
                             [-0.33] [-0.34]  [-0.33]                  [8.90]   [8.88]   [8.89]               [10.10]  [10.39]  [10.54]
      Exch                     0.01    0.01     0.01                -0.17*** -0.16** -0.17***                0.90*** 0.92*** 0.91***
                              [0.12]  [0.12]   [0.12]                 [-2.65]  [-2.52]  [-2.64]                [3.62]   [3.70]   [3.80]
      Embed_Exch              -0.07   -0.06    -0.07                -2.03*** -2.00*** -2.03***              -3.42*** -3.44*** -3.46***
                             [-0.38] [-0.37]  [-0.38]                [-10.78] [-10.76] [-10.74]              [-11.94] [-11.64] [-12.43]
      EquitySize           -0.15*** -0.15*** -0.15***               -0.20*** -0.18*** -0.20***              -0.23*** -0.16*** -0.18***
                             [-4.84] [-4.95]  [-4.79]                 [-5.04]  [-4.76]  [-4.84]               [-4.16]  [-2.62]  [-3.08]
      Constant              4.19*** 4.23*** 4.19***                  6.48*** 5.69*** 6.50***                 9.36*** 6.94*** 9.16***
                              [4.24]  [4.51]   [4.24]                  [6.97]   [6.14]   [7.10]                [4.90]   [3.64]   [4.75]
      Obs                     4,344   4,344    4,344                  10,072   10,072   10,072                 5,348    5,348    5,348
      Adj R2                  0.543   0.543    0.543                   0.468    0.476    0.468                 0.385    0.402    0.398

     Quarterly panel regressions of credit spreads on NSOE, default measures (DM) and government holdings (GovtHoldings), respectively, with
     quarter and industry fixed effects. NSOE is one for bonds issued by NSOEs and zero for SOEs. DM is the default measure, the inverse of
     Merton's distance-to-default. GovtHoldings is the total government equity holdings within firm's top 10 shareholders. Reported in square
     brackets are tstat's using standard errors clustered by bond and quarter. See Table 1 for bond-level variable definitions. The sample extends
     from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures
     the first wave of defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second and much more severe wave of defaults.
                        Table 6: The Real Impact of the Credit-Market Segmentation

                                                                  Panel A: NSOE Dummy
                                     ROA (%)                                ROE (%)                                  DM (%)
                         Phase I     Phase II    Phase III       Phase I     Phase II     Phase III       Phase I    Phase II    Phase III
     NSOE                 0.56***     0.52***        0.13       1.07***      1.20***        -0.02        -2.18***    -3.51***       -0.43
                            [7.76]      [8.83]      [1.07]        [6.69]       [7.93]      [-0.05]        [-6.56]     [-4.43]      [-0.68]
     EquitySize          0.18***      0.19***     0.35***       0.77***      0.74***      1.09***        -0.67***    -1.50***     -2.60***
                            [6.00]      [6.33]      [8.69]       [10.81]      [11.11]       [7.60]        [-2.94]     [-4.08]      [-9.10]
     Constant            -3.54***    -4.33***    -7.40***      -15.89***    -15.91***    -22.78***       32.90***    57.61***     82.19***
                           [-4.85]     [-6.04]     [-9.76]       [-9.40]      [-9.52]      [-7.56]         [5.90]      [6.93]      [11.62]
     Obs                   15,724      18,533      10,868        15,724       18,533       10,868         15,724      18,533       10,868
     Adj R2                 0.065       0.063       0.095         0.051        0.045        0.084          0.092       0.590        0.181
                                                              Panel B: Government Holdings
                                     ROA (%)                                ROE (%)                                  DM (%)




48
                         Phase I     Phase II    Phase III       Phase I     Phase II     Phase III       Phase I    Phase II    Phase III
     GovtHoldings -0.89***           -0.90***       -0.26       -1.80***     -2.08***        0.09         2.45***    6.53***         0.00
                   [-6.41]             [-7.79]     [-1.01]       [-5.76]       [-6.65]      [0.12]          [3.53]     [4.30]       [0.00]
     EquitySize   0.17***             0.21***     0.35***       0.76***       0.78***     1.09***         -0.55**    -1.63***     -2.56***
                    [5.68]              [6.83]      [9.13]       [10.96]      [11.70]       [8.24]         [-2.45]    [-4.27]      [-9.18]
     Constant     -2.75***           -4.16***    -7.38***      -14.49***    -15.51***    -22.72***       28.56***    56.99***     81.09***
                   [-3.83]             [-5.72]     [-9.52]       [-9.21]       [-9.43]     [-7.48]          [5.23]     [6.84]      [11.67]
     Obs           15,724              18,533      10,868        15,724        18,533      10,868          15,724     18,533       10,868
     Adj R2         0.056               0.057       0.095         0.047         0.041       0.084           0.081      0.588        0.180

     Quarterly panel regressions with ROA, ROE, Default Measures as the dependent variables on Non-SOE Dummy (NSOE) and government
     holdings (GovtHoldings), respectively, with quarter and industry fixed effect. ROA is the ratio of the net profit to the lag book asset.
     ROE is the net profit to the lag book equity. DM is the default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. GovtHoldings is
     the total government equity holdings within firm's top 10 shareholders. Reported in square brackets are tstat's using standard errors
     clustered by firm and quarter. The sample extends from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default
     Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the
     second and much more severe wave of defaults.
                Table 7: Price Discovery: Credit Spreads on Default Measures and Government Holdings

      NSOE                                Phase I                                       Phase II                                         Phase III
      DM                              -0.03  -0.01                                 1.63***                 1.62***                  7.89***                  8.01***
                                     [-0.03][-0.02]                                 [2.88]                  [2.89]                   [3.83]                    [3.94]
      GovtHoldings                   0.45     0.45                                           0.24            0.12                               -5.52***    -5.69***
                                    [1.06]   [1.05]                                         [0.52]          [0.27]                                [-4.56]     [-5.14]
      Rating       0.74*** 0.74*** 0.75*** 0.75***                      0.41***    0.41*** 0.41***         0.42***       1.64***    1.44***      1.58***    1.37***
                    [2.99]  [2.99]  [3.05]   [3.05]                      [4.65]     [4.82]  [4.77]          [4.88]        [4.34]     [4.06]        [4.24]      [3.85]
      Constant     7.88*** 7.88*** 7.86*** 7.86***                     10.83***    9.99*** 10.85***       10.00***      15.07***    12.97***    11.64***    9.40***
                    [3.97]  [4.11]  [3.99]   [4.13]                      [6.94]     [6.55]  [6.92]          [6.52]        [4.77]     [4.23]        [3.49]      [2.94]
      Obs           1,372   1,372   1,372    1,372                       4,182      4,182   4,182           4,182         2,095      2,095         2,095       2,095
            2
      Adj R         0.484   0.483   0.484    0.484                       0.376      0.386   0.376           0.386         0.367      0.397         0.382       0.413
      SOE                                 Phase I                                       Phase II                                         Phase III




49
      DM                               0.09   0.08                                 1.04***                1.04***                   2.09***                   1.47*
                                      [0.65] [0.58]                                 [3.84]                  [3.83]                   [2.65]                   [1.87]
      GovtHoldings                   -0.17   -0.17                                              -0.11       -0.12                               -2.32***    -2.18***
                                    [-1.26] [-1.25]                                            [-0.52]     [-0.57]                               [-6.05]     [-6.02]
      Rating       0.39*** 0.39*** 0.39*** 0.38***                      0.55***    0.55***    0.54***     0.55***        0.58***    0.56***     0.53***     0.52***
                   [11.23] [11.20] [11.01] [10.97]                       [9.50]     [9.83]      [9.76]    [10.06]         [4.88]     [4.72]       [4.70]      [4.61]
      Constant     3.25*** 3.22*** 3.32*** 3.29***                      5.22***    4.50***    5.24***     4.51***        7.45***    6.12***     7.83***     6.87***
                    [3.63]  [3.65]   [3.82]  [3.85]                      [5.68]     [4.87]      [5.75]      [4.93]        [4.77]     [3.95]       [5.22]      [4.60]
      Obs           2,972   2,972    2,972   2,972                       5,890      5,890       5,890       5,890         3,253      3,253        3,253       3,253
            2
      Adj R         0.542   0.542    0.543   0.543                       0.500      0.508       0.500       0.508         0.386      0.393        0.412       0.415

     Quarterly panel regressions of credit spreads on default measures (DM) and government holdings (GovtHoldings) with quarter and industry fixed effects. DM is the
     default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. GovtHoldings is the total government equity holdings within firm's top 10 shareholders. Reported in
     square brackets are tstat's using standard errors clustered by bond and quarter. The sample extends from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through
     2013, is the pre-default Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second
     and much more severe wave of defaults.
A     Appendix
A.1     Construction of Government-Holdings Measure
In this subsection, we provide a detailed construction of our measure of government holdings.
As described in Section 3.2, we build the measure from ground up by piecing together
three separate datasets detailing, for each listed firm in China, information on the top ten
shareholders and their state affiliations.
    In addition to this initial construction, we further incorporate two separate databases
that provide similar information. The first dataset is from Wind, which provides the total
holdings (in shares) for all the government-related shareholders within top ten shareholders.
Their approach is effectively the same as our construction. Comparing their measures against
ours, we find substantial amount of inconsistencies, with missing observations being the main
driver. For example, China's biggest manufacturer of air-conditioners - Gree Electric is
owned and controlled by Zhuhai SASAC before December 2019, but its government holdings
information is missing in Wind before 2008. Even for firms whose government holdings are
recorded as positive in Wind, we still find many instances when Wind fails to account for
all the government-related shares.
    The second data source used in our compilation is CSMAR, which provides the attri-
bution information for each top ten shareholders, without calculating the total government
holdings. We find three potential drawbacks in their data. First, they do not separate the
holdings by National Social Security Fund (NSSF), a government-run investment fund estab-
lished primarily to provide a reserve of funds for China's social security system. Given the
investment objective of NSSF, it is unlikely that their holdings will be informative for the
purpose of gauging the extent of government support. For this reason, we exclude NSSF's
holdings from the measure of government holdings. Second, prior to 2014, CSMAR has
many missing observations in the first and third quarters of each year. It is possible that
they focus their attention more on the semi-annual and annual reports. Finally, even in
recent years, as CSMAR improves their data coverage, we still find that a significant portion
of inaccurate estimates.
    Overall, all three data sources provide valuable and yet imperfect information on govern-
ment holdings. Our objective is to compile the most robust measure of government holdings
using the information contained in these data sources. Our algorithm in merging the three
datasets is as follows. For quarters when the government holdings values are missing in all
three data sources, we fill in the nearest value from the previous quarters. For quarters
when all three data sources provide values, we adopt the maximum algorithm by choosing


                                             50
the highest government holdings among three. Underlying this choice is the observation
that the most prevalent errors in these data sources are missing observations: the failure to
assign government attribution to a government-related shareholder. For quarters when one
or two estimations are missing, we modify our algorithm as follows. Suppose the government
holdings value for a firm is 45% from Wind, 50% from our raw estimation, and missing from
CSMAR for one particular quarter. We then check the values from all three sources reported
for the previous quarter. If, during the previous quarter, both Wind and Raw have the same
holdings as in the current quarter, while CSMAR has a non-missing value, say 55%, we will
fill in the value of 55% for CSMAR for the current quarter and choose the maximum among
the three estimates. In other words, our robust government holdings will pick up CSMAR's
estimation (55%) in this case. By contrast, if either Wind or Raw indicates a change in value
from the previous quarter to the current quarter, we will then choose the maximum only
between Wind and Raw. In this case, our robust government holdings will pick up Raw's
estimation (50%). Since both CSMAR and Wind have many missing values on Q1 and Q3
from 2010 to 2013, this modification is necessary for our construction.
    The key underlying assumption for our construction is that most of the errors occurred
in the three data sources are due to omissions: the failure to assign state attributions to
government-related entities. By contrast, the errors of wrongly assigning state attributions
to non-state entities are less likely. To verify our strategy, we further randomly choose ten
examples in which the government holdings measure provided by the three data sources are
inconsistent and manually check their shareholder's attribution. We find that it is always the
case that the maximum holdings have a larger and more accurate coverage than the rest. As
long as the three data sources do not systematically mis-specify the attribution information
for a given shareholder, this is the most effective way for us to compile the non-overlapping
information contained in the three data sources. In this respect, we believe that our robust
measure of government holdings is a more precise and robust measure of government support
compared with the ones adopted in the literature.13
    To better assess the data quality across different sources, we use two measures to com-
pared their data quality against our robust measure of government holdings. For firm i in
quarter t, we measure the absolute difference in government-holdings measure between each
of the data sources and our robust measure. From this deviation, we further calculate the
   13
     For example, Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) use the the share of registered capital effectively
owned by the government as the measure of state-ownership from Annual Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIF)
of the China's National Bureau of Statistics. Their measure of state-ownership is in spirit to our government
holdings, but ASIF suffers from many missing observations in the the share of government registered capital,
even for large SOEs. In the example of Gree Electric, the shares of government registered capital in ASIF
are zero for the period from 1998 through 2013.


                                                     51
quarterly error rate and the mean error for each of the data sources: the quarterly error
rate calculates the percent of incidents when the deviation is more than 1%, while the mean
error reports the average of the deviation for each of the data sources. Effectively, the first
measure focuses on the number of incidents when errors take place, while the second measure
cares more about the overall magnitudes of the errors.
   Figure A.1 plots the quarterly error rates and mean errors for Wind, CSMAR, and our
initial construction (labeled as Raw). Panel (a) reports the error rates for the three data
sources. Overall, CSMAR outperforms both Wind and Raw in all period, with improving
data quality over time. The error rate is around 17% in Phase I and 8% in Phase III. For
Wind, the error rates are on average 20% in Phase I, followed by a big jump on 2015Q3,
driven mainly by the stock crash in July 2015 amid governments' effort to rescue the market.
As for Raw, the error rates are on average 27% in phase I and then decrease to 17% and
remain stable afterwards.
   Panel (b) of Figure A.1 reports the mean error for the three data sources. We see
a significant decline in mean error, indicating an overall convergence in the information
contained in the three data sources. By 2020, the mean error rate is less than 1% for Wind
and CSMAR. Indeed, post 2018, we see a pattern of expanded data coverage and improving
data quality by both CSMAR and Wind. Consistent with our findings of the emerging
importance of government support for credit pricing, the professional data providers are
also making more effort to differentiate the affiliations, state and non-state, of the top-
ten shareholders, At the same time, we observe a slight increase in mean error of our raw
estimation, as the addition information from Wind and CSMAR becomes more valuable in
helping us construct the robust measure. Moreover, our initial construction (labeled as Raw)
tends to have high error rates but relatively low mean errors because our inability to identify
those small shareholders with low holdings among top ten shareholders. Indeed, this is where
professional data services such as Wind and CSMAR can add value.
   Overall, by compiling the information from the three data sources with varying degrees
of information and imperfection, the robust version of our government holdings measure is
so far the most comprehensive when it comes to proxies for government support. It could
be useful for other research settings in the future.


A.2     Credit Spreads and End-Controller Holdings
Next we use our end-controller holdings to proxy for government support as a robustness
check. Let's first look at the summary statistics from Table 3, for the SOE sample, the
average end-controller holdings (Ctrlholdings) are 45.5% with a standard deviation of 16.4%


                                              52
and there is a slight decrease from Phase I to III. Decomposing the SOE group into central
SOE (CSOE) and local SOE (LSOE), as shown in Figure A.2, we find that the CSOE group
on average has higher end-controller holdings than LSOE group, consistent with the patterns
shown in panel (b) of Figure 3 for government holdings. Moving to the non-SOE sample, the
average end-controller holdings are 36.4% with a standard deviation of 17.4%, also exhibit
a downward trend from Phase I through Phase III. Decomposing the NSOE group into
POEs and other NSOEs, we find that the end-controller holdings are more concentrated
for the POE sample. As the other NSOE group mainly consists of public firms without a
definitive end-controller, they are expected to have the lowest end-controller holdings with
least concentrated ownership. Different from the small variations in government holdings for
POE group, the end-controller holdings exhibit large variations in all periods, comparable
to that of CSOE group and LSOE group.
   For SOEs, the expectation is such that end-controllers with more at stake are more likely
to extent government support. By contrast, there is no such expectation for the NSOE
group as their end-controllers are unrelated to governments. We test this hypothesis in the
following quarterly panel regression including quarter fixed effect and industry fixed effect,
                                                                     
 CreditSpreadi,t = a + b DMi,t + c CtrlHoldingsi,t + d Ratingi,t +       Controlsk
                                                                                 i,t + i,t ,   (5)
                                                                     k


The coefficient b captures the connection between credit spreads and controller holdings
(CtrlHoldings).
   The main results are summarized in Table A.1. In the SOE panel, we see a similar result
as in the Table 7. Prior to 2018Q2, there is no significant relation between credit spreads
and government support proxy. The coefficients are -0.15 (t-stat=-1.12) in Phase I and 0.15
(t-stat=0.75) in Phase II. Moving to the Phase III, the government support proxy becomes
important in explaining the credit spreads. The estimate is -2.03 and also highly significant
with a t-stat of -4.74, implying that one standard deviation increase in controller holdings is
associated with a reduction of 33 bps in credit spreads, comparable to the 38 bps reduction
for the government holdings.
   In the NSOE panel, we do not find any statistically significant connection between credit
spreads and controller holdings (CtrlHoldings) in phase II and III. The insignificant result in
phase III confirms our hypothesis that the information content of the end-controller holdings
measure for NSOE group is unrelated to government support. Instead, it measures the
ownership concentration for NSOEs. The coefficients are -0.55 (t-stat=-2.22) in Phase I,
0.16 (t-stat=0.71) in Phase II and -0.11 (t-stat=-0.17) in Phase III. Thus CtrlHoldings do
not provide any explanatory power on the credit spreads.

                                              53
A.3    Credit Spreads and Control Variables
We focus our discussion in Section 5 on the price discovery of China's credit market with
respect to credit quality and government support and our Table 7 reports only the key
variables, default measures, government holdings, and credit ratings, of the panel regressions.
In this section, we focus our discussion on the control variables and study their relation with
credit spreads. Expanding the contents of Table 7, we report in Tables A.2 and A.3 the
complete regression results for the non-SOE and SOE samples, respectively.
   Focusing first on credit ratings, as expected, bonds with higher credit ratings (and lower
numerical rating measure) have lower credit spreads. During Phase I, the non-SOE sample
is substantially smaller. During this period, a letter-grade improvement in credit rating is
associated with a reduction in credit spread of around 74 bps for non-SOEs and 39 bps for
SOEs. During Phase II, as the number of non-SOE bonds increases substantially, the non-
SOE and SOE samples are more balanced. During this period, the sensitivity to credit rating
are comparable for these two samples, with one-letter grade improvement in credit rating
associated with a reduction of 41 bps for non-SOEs and 55 bps for SOEs. Interestingly,
the SOE bonds are found to be slightly more sensitive to credit ratings during this period.
Moving to Phase III, however, there is a divergence in the sensitivity, with the non-SOE
sample increasing to around 164 bps and the SOE sample staying put around 58 bps.
   The relation between bond maturity and credit spread is mixed and varies between the
two samples. For the non-SOE sample, there is no statistically significant relation between
credit spreads and bond maturity, while for the SOE sample, the relation varies over the
three time periods. Interestingly, during Phase III, SOE bonds with longer maturity actually
have lower credit spreads: a one year increase in maturity is associated with a reduction of
29 bps in credit spread. In China, bond maturity is in general short, with SOE bond having
longer maturity than non-SOE bonds. The relation with bond age is also mixed. In the US
market, bond age has been used as a proxy for liquidity: older bonds in general have lower
liquidity and higher credit spreads. For the Chinese market, It is interesting to observe that
older SOE bonds during Phase III, as well as older non-SOE bonds during Phase II, have
lower credit spreads, although the economic significance is relatively small. With respect
to bond issuance size, the evidence is similar to that in the US. Bonds with larger issuance
command lower yields, although in Phase III this result becomes much weaker. We also find
that bonds issued by firms with larger equity capitalization command lower credit spreads,
and this finding is rather robust across the three time periods.
   The variable ZeroDays counts the percentage of days in a quarter when the bond has
zero trading, with a higher value indicating a less liquid market. As shown in Table 2,


                                              54
the percent of zero days increases rather significantly over time: Moving from Phases I, II,
and III, the average value is 62%, 76%, and 88% for the non-SOE sample, and 79%, 85%,
and 92% for the SOE sample. The lack of liquidity is more severe for the SOE sample.
Interestingly, the regression coefficients on this variable are consistently negative, indicating
that the bond with less frequent trading enjoys a lower yield. This result, counter to our
usual understanding of liquidity premium, could be explained by the fact that higher yielding
bonds are actually traded more frequently by investors who are reaching for yield.
   Finally, we include Embed, to take into account of the fact that some bonds have embed-
ded optionality; and Exch, to differentiate the exchange-traded bonds, which attract more
retail investors, from the interbank market, which are populated largely by institutional
investors. The most significant result is that among the exchange-traded bonds, the ones
with embedded option enjoys lower yields. We further separate the SOE bonds into local
and central government SOEs. As shown in Table A.3, there is a central government SOE
premium during Phase II of about 22 bps.




                                               55
                                     35
                                                                                                        Wind
                                                                                                        CSMAR
                                                                                                        Raw
                                     30




                                     25
                    Error Rate (%)



                                     20




                                     15




                                     10




                                      5
                                      10Q1   11Q1   12Q1   13Q1   14Q1   15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1

                                                             (a) Error Rate (%)

                                      4
                                                                                                        Wind
                                                                                                        CSMAR
                                                                                                        Raw
                                     3.5



                                      3
                Mean of Error (%)




                                     2.5



                                      2



                                     1.5



                                      1



                                     0.5
                                      10Q1   11Q1   12Q1   13Q1   14Q1   15Q1   16Q1   17Q1   18Q1   19Q1   20Q1

                                                           (b) Mean of Error (%)

Figure A.1: This figure plots the quarterly error rates in construction of government holdings
from three sources, namely Wind, CSMAR and our raw government holdings (Raw). The
quarterly error rates are defined as the ratio of the number of errors to the number of total
firms in any given quarter. Any difference between the robust government holdings and
the estimation from Wind, CSMAR or Raw beyond 1% is considered as errors. The robust
government holdings is the maximum government holdings among Wind, CSMAR and Raw.
Panel (a) reports the result for all the listed firms and Panel (b) reports the mean of difference
between robust government holdings and Wind, CSMAR and Raw.
                                                                         56
                                    60




                                    50
      End-Controller Holdings (%)




                                    40




                                    30




                                    20




                                    10                                                        CSOE
                                                                                              LSOE
                                                                                              Other NOSE
                                                                                              POE
                                    0
                                    12Q1   13Q1   14Q1   15Q1    16Q1   17Q1    18Q1    19Q1        20Q1


                                           (a) End-Controller Holdings: P25, Median and P75

Figure A.2: This figure plots the dynamic dispersion of the end-controller holdings for four types of firms,
namely central SOEs (CSOE), local SOEs (LSOE), privately-owned enterprises (POE) and other non-SOE
firms (Mainly Public and Foreign Companies). The doted line refers to the median and the shaded area
indicates the 25 percentile and 75 percentile.




                                                                  57
           Table A.1: Price Discovery: Using End-Controller Holdings as a Proxy for Government Support

      NSOE                                Phase I                                        Phase II                                         Phase III
      DM                              -0.03   0.03                                  1.63***             1.64***                      7.89***                  8.00***
                                     [-0.03] [0.03]                                  [2.88]              [2.92]                       [3.83]                   [3.78]
      CtrlHoldings                 -0.55** -0.55**                                                0.16    0.20                                     -0.11        0.46
                                    [-2.22] [-2.28]                                             [0.71]   [0.91]                                   [-0.17]      [0.69]
      Rating       0.74*** 0.74*** 0.76*** 0.76***                      0.41*** 0.41***        0.41*** 0.41***          1.64***      1.44***     1.64***     1.43***
                    [2.99]  [2.99]   [3.07]  [3.07]                      [4.65]   [4.82]        [4.61]   [4.76]          [4.34]       [4.06]       [4.36]      [4.03]
      Constant     7.88*** 7.88*** 8.56*** 8.55***                      10.83*** 9.99***       10.80*** 9.94***         15.07***     12.97***    15.20***    12.41***
                    [3.97]  [4.11]   [4.40]  [4.54]                      [6.94]   [6.55]        [6.88]   [6.50]          [4.77]       [4.23]       [4.69]      [3.78]
      Obs           1,372   1,372    1,372   1,372                        4,182   4,182          4,182   4,182            2,095        2,095       2,095       2,095
      Adj R2        0.484   0.483    0.489   0.489                        0.376   0.386          0.376   0.386            0.367        0.397       0.367       0.397
      SOE                                 Phase I                                        Phase II                                         Phase III




58
      DM                              0.09    0.09                                  1.04***                1.03***                   2.09***                   1.57**
                                     [0.65]  [0.61]                                  [3.84]                 [3.82]                    [2.65]                    [2.01]
      CtrlHoldings                   -0.15   -0.15                                               0.15        0.13                                -2.03***    -1.87***
                                    [-1.12] [-1.11]                                             [0.75]      [0.66]                                [-4.74]      [-4.55]
      Rating       0.39*** 0.39*** 0.39*** 0.39***                      0.55***     0.55***    0.55***     0.55***       0.58***     0.56***     0.55***      0.54***
                   [11.23] [11.20] [11.12] [11.08]                       [9.50]      [9.83]     [9.63]      [9.93]        [4.88]      [4.72]       [4.75]       [4.64]
      Constant     3.25*** 3.22*** 3.33*** 3.30***                      5.22***     4.50***    5.23***     4.51***       7.45***     6.12***     7.80***      6.77***
                    [3.63]  [3.65]   [3.87]  [3.90]                      [5.68]      [4.87]     [5.65]      [4.84]        [4.77]      [3.95]       [5.02]       [4.39]
      Obs           2,972   2,972    2,972   2,972                       5,890       5,890      5,890       5,890         3,253       3,253        3,253        3,253
            2
      Adj R         0.542   0.542    0.543   0.543                       0.500       0.508      0.500       0.508         0.386       0.393        0.404        0.407

     Quarterly panel regressions of credit spreads on default measures (DM) and controller holdings (CtrlHoldings) with quarter and industry fixed effects. DM is
     the default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. CtrlHoldings is the total equity holdings by the end-controller within firm's top 10 shareholders.
     Reported in square brackets are tstat's using standard errors clustered by bond and quarter. The sample extends from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from
     2010 through 2013, is the pre-default Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults; and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2,
     captures the second and much more severe wave of defaults.
                                               Table A.2: Price Discovery within the Non-SOE Sample

                                                                                         NSOE Listed
                                          Phase I                                          Phase II                                         Phase III
     DM                               -0.03                    -0.01                 1.63***                  1.62***                   7.89***                 8.01***
                                     [-0.03]                  [-0.02]                 [2.88]                    [2.89]                   [3.83]                   [3.94]
     GovtHoldings                                   0.45        0.45                                 0.24        0.12                              -5.52***    -5.69***
                                                   [1.06]      [1.05]                               [0.52]      [0.27]                               [-4.56]     [-5.14]
     Rating              0.74***    0.74***     0.75***      0.75***      0.41***     0.41***     0.41***     0.42***       1.64***     1.44***     1.58***     1.37***
                           [2.99]     [2.99]       [3.05]      [3.05]       [4.65]      [4.82]      [4.77]      [4.88]        [4.34]      [4.06]      [4.24]      [3.85]
     Maturity               0.08       0.08         0.09        0.09        -0.07       -0.08       -0.07       -0.08          0.02       -0.05        0.11        0.05
                           [1.46]     [1.47]       [1.56]      [1.57]      [-1.35]     [-1.44]     [-1.37]     [-1.44]        [0.10]     [-0.33]      [0.72]      [0.36]
     Age                   -0.05      -0.05        -0.05       -0.05       -0.08*     -0.09**      -0.08*     -0.10**          0.24        0.21      0.36**       0.34*
                          [-0.73]    [-0.75]      [-0.73]     [-0.75]      [-1.81]     [-2.10]     [-1.82]     [-2.08]        [1.37]      [1.22]      [2.06]      [1.92]
     IssueSize              0.03       0.03         0.02        0.02       -0.11*      -0.12*      -0.11*     -0.12**          0.00       -0.06        0.02       -0.05
                           [0.39]     [0.39]       [0.24]      [0.23]      [-1.85]     [-1.94]     [-1.91]     [-1.97]        [0.03]     [-0.40]      [0.12]     [-0.33]
     ZeroDays           -1.31***    -1.31***    -1.33***    -1.33***     -2.19***    -2.12***    -2.20***    -2.13***      -5.74***    -5.52***    -5.43***    -5.20***




59
                          [-4.31]    [-4.26]      [-4.35]     [-4.29]      [-7.51]     [-7.26]     [-7.52]     [-7.26]       [-6.85]     [-7.01]     [-6.37]     [-6.47]
     Embed              -0.54***    -0.53***    -0.52***    -0.52***      1.49***     1.50***    1.49***     1.50***        1.16**     1.20***       0.90**     0.92**
                          [-3.89]    [-2.94]      [-4.02]     [-3.01]       [6.08]      [6.17]      [6.12]      [6.18]        [2.56]      [2.65]      [2.00]      [2.15]
     Exch                  -0.07      -0.07        -0.07       -0.07      -0.30**     -0.27**     -0.30**     -0.27**         -0.24       -0.14       -0.41       -0.32
                          [-0.35]    [-0.34]      [-0.34]     [-0.33]      [-2.40]     [-2.18]     [-2.34]     [-2.14]       [-0.68]     [-0.37]     [-1.14]     [-0.82]
     Embed_Exch            0.35*      0.34*        0.33*       0.33*     -1.62***    -1.61***    -1.62***    -1.61***      -2.22***    -2.21***    -2.04***    -2.03***
                           [1.88]     [1.75]       [1.84]      [1.73]      [-5.75]     [-5.86]     [-5.79]     [-5.88]       [-3.93]     [-3.80]     [-3.82]     [-3.70]
     EquitySize         -0.29***    -0.29***    -0.29***    -0.29***     -0.31***    -0.29***    -0.32***    -0.29***      -0.44***    -0.38***     -0.30**     -0.24**
                          [-5.05]    [-5.05]      [-5.00]     [-5.00]      [-4.94]     [-4.75]     [-4.93]     [-4.72]       [-3.74]     [-3.26]     [-2.52]     [-1.99]
     Constant            7.88***    7.88***      7.86***     7.86***     10.83***     9.99***    10.85***    10.00***      15.07***    12.97***    11.64***     9.40***
                           [3.97]     [4.11]       [3.99]      [4.13]       [6.94]      [6.55]      [6.92]      [6.52]        [4.77]      [4.23]      [3.49]      [2.94]
     Obs                   1,372      1,372        1,372       1,372        4,182       4,182       4,182       4,182         2,095       2,095       2,095       2,095
     Adj R2                0.484      0.483        0.484       0.484        0.376       0.386       0.376       0.386         0.367       0.397       0.382       0.413

     Quarterly panel regressions of credit spreads on default measures (DM) and government holdings (GovtHoldings) for NSOE, with quarter and industry fixed effects.
     DM is the default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. GovtHoldings is the total government equity holdings within firm's top 10 shareholders.
     Reported in square brackets are tstat's using standard errors clustered by bond and quarter. See Table 1 for bond-level variable definitions. The sample extends
     from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults;
     and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second and much more severe wave of defaults.
                                                 Table A.3: Price Discovery within the SOE Sample

                                                                                          SOE Listed
                                           Phase I                                          Phase II                                        Phase III
      DM                               0.09                      0.08                 1.04***                  1.04***                 2.09***                    1.47*
                                      [0.65]                    [0.58]                 [3.84]                    [3.83]                 [2.65]                    [1.87]
      GovtHoldings                                  -0.17       -0.17                                -0.11       -0.12                             -2.32***    -2.18***
                                                   [-1.26]     [-1.25]                              [-0.52]     [-0.57]                              [-6.05]     [-6.02]
      Rating              0.39***    0.39***      0.39***     0.38***      0.55***     0.55***     0.54***     0.55***      0.58***    0.56***     0.53***     0.52***
                          [11.23]     [11.20]     [11.01]     [10.97]        [9.50]      [9.83]      [9.76]    [10.06]        [4.88]      [4.72]      [4.70]      [4.61]
      Maturity             0.03**      0.03**      0.03**      0.03**         0.02        0.02        0.02        0.02     -0.29***    -0.28***    -0.27***    -0.27***
                            [2.37]      [2.37]      [2.33]      [2.33]       [1.14]      [1.11]      [1.12]      [1.08]      [-6.91]     [-6.94]     [-7.07]     [-7.06]
      Age                   0.03*       0.03*       0.03*       0.03*         0.02        0.01        0.02        0.01       -0.07*      -0.07*      -0.07*     -0.07**
                            [1.67]      [1.68]      [1.67]      [1.67]       [0.85]      [0.62]      [0.85]      [0.61]      [-1.88]     [-1.90]     [-1.95]     [-1.96]
      IssueSize           -0.02**     -0.02**     -0.02**     -0.02**     -0.05***    -0.05***    -0.05***    -0.05***        -0.05       -0.05       -0.02       -0.02
                           [-2.24]     [-2.20]     [-2.09]     [-2.06]      [-3.06]     [-3.01]     [-3.00]     [-2.96]      [-1.22]     [-1.18]     [-0.59]     [-0.60]
      ZeroDays           -0.65***    -0.65***    -0.66***    -0.66***     -1.89***    -1.84***    -1.90***    -1.84***       -1.86*      -1.83*      -1.73*      -1.72*
                           [-2.77]     [-2.77]     [-2.79]     [-2.79]      [-6.97]     [-7.06]     [-7.01]     [-7.11]      [-1.71]     [-1.68]     [-1.67]     [-1.65]




60
      Embed                 -0.06       -0.05       -0.05       -0.05      1.83***     1.81***     1.83***     1.81***      2.58***    2.59***     2.62***      2.62***
                           [-0.41]     [-0.39]     [-0.35]     [-0.34]       [8.23]      [8.16]      [8.23]      [8.16]      [13.17]     [13.21]     [13.96]     [13.91]
      Exch                   0.00        0.01        0.01        0.01      -0.16**     -0.16**     -0.16**     -0.16**      1.28***    1.27***     1.29***      1.29***
                            [0.08]      [0.09]      [0.09]      [0.10]      [-2.18]     [-2.17]     [-2.16]     [-2.16]       [5.95]      [5.88]      [6.22]      [6.15]
      Embed_Exch             0.03        0.03        0.03        0.03     -2.09***    -2.07***    -2.09***    -2.07***     -3.75***    -3.76***    -3.79***    -3.79***
                            [0.20]      [0.18]      [0.19]      [0.18]     [-10.00]     [-9.89]     [-9.97]     [-9.85]     [-13.20]    [-13.41]    [-13.88]    [-13.98]
      EquitySize         -0.10***    -0.10***    -0.10***    -0.10***     -0.16***    -0.14***    -0.16***    -0.14***     -0.21***    -0.16***    -0.18***    -0.15***
                           [-3.44]     [-3.45]     [-3.31]     [-3.32]      [-4.21]     [-3.78]     [-4.01]     [-3.58]      [-4.17]     [-3.34]     [-3.92]     [-3.29]
      CSOE                   0.00        0.00        0.01        0.01        -0.05       -0.07       -0.05       -0.07       -0.26*     -0.29**       -0.20      -0.22*
                            [0.06]      [0.05]      [0.14]      [0.14]      [-0.78]     [-1.26]     [-0.77]     [-1.26]      [-1.88]     [-2.22]     [-1.52]     [-1.79]
      Constant            3.25***     3.22***     3.32***     3.29***     5.22***      4.50***     5.24***     4.51***      7.45***    6.12***     7.83***      6.87***
                            [3.63]      [3.65]      [3.82]      [3.85]       [5.68]      [4.87]      [5.75]      [4.93]       [4.77]      [3.95]      [5.22]      [4.60]
      Obs                   2,972       2,972       2,972       2,972        5,890       5,890       5,890       5,890        3,253       3,253       3,253       3,253
      Adj R2                0.542       0.542       0.543       0.543        0.500       0.508       0.500       0.508        0.386       0.393       0.412       0.415

     Quarterly panel regressions of credit spreads on default measures (DM) and government holdings (GovtHoldings) for SOE, with quarter and industry fixed effects.
     DM is the default measure, the inverse of Merton's distance-to-default. GovtHoldings is the total government equity holdings within firm's top 10 shareholders.
     Reported in square brackets are tstat's using standard errors clustered by bond and quarter. See Table 1 for bond-level variable definitions. The sample extends
     from January 2010 to June 2020. Phase I, from 2010 through 2013, is the pre-default Phase; Phase II, from 2014 through 2018Q1, captures the first wave of defaults;
     and Phase III, from 2018Q2 to 2020Q2, captures the second and much more severe wave of defaults.
