                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           RELOCATING OR REDEFINED:
                  A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON URBANIZATION IN CHINA

                                            Li Gan
                                            Qing He
                                           Ruichao Si
                                           Daichun Yi

                                       Working Paper 26585
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26585


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Li Gan, Qing He, Ruichao Si, and Daichun Yi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Relocating or Redefined: A New Perspective on Urbanization in China
Li Gan, Qing He, Ruichao Si, and Daichun Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 26585
December 2019
JEL No. O18,R31,R52

                                         ABSTRACT

China's fast economic growth over the past 40 years has been accompanied by an increasingly
rapid rate of urbanization, from about 20% in the early 1980s to 60% in 2018. In addition to
natural population growth, rural-urban migration is generally believed to be a dominant driving
force. Motivated by a recent finding of a high housing vacancy rate in urban China, however, we
find that a large share of urban population growth comes from community reclassification. These
redefined migrants (from communities which were reclassified from rural to urban) accounted for
33.4% of total urban population growth from 2010 to 2015. Households in reclassified
communities share similar characteristics with those from rural villages, particularly in their
ownership of housing. Furthermore, we provide evidence that at the prefecture level, the size of
redefined migrants is significantly related to residential land supply, and to the proportion of
households holding vacant housing units, but not to the change of night-time light. These results
suggest that an inaccurate account of urbanization is an important factor for the oversupply of
residential housing units in China.

Li Gan                                          Ruichao Si
Department of Economics                         School of Economics
Texas A&M University                            Nankai University
College Station, TX 77843-4228                  94 Weijin Road
and NBER                                        Tianjin 300071
ganli@tamu.edu                                  China
                                                siruichao@nankai.edu.cn
Qing He
Guanghuacun Street 55                           Daichun Yi
China Household Finance Survey                  Guanghuacun Street 55
Southwestern University of Finance              China Household Finance Survey
and Economics                                   Southwestern University of Finance
Chengdu 610074                                  and Economics
China                                           Chengdu 610074
heqing@chfs.cn                                  China
                                                daichunyi@chfs.cn




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26585
1        Introduction

Urbanization has played a key role in economic development since most manufacturing and
service production is more efficient in urban areas that benefit from agglomeration (Hen-
derson et al. [2009]). According to the World Urbanization Prospects, the world urban
population has grown rapidly from 751 million or 29.3% of the world population to 4.2
billion or 55% in 2018 (United Nations [2018]). The majority of this increase came from de-
veloped countries. However, more recently, developing countries generated the most urban
population growth (Glaeser and Henderson [2017]). China, with one-fifth of the world pop-
ulation, contrubited 28% of the world urban population growth since 2000. In fact, between
2000 and 2015, China's urban population increased from 459 million to 771 million, and the
urbanization rate increased from 36.2% to 56.1%.
    Accompanied by this most rapid and expansive urban growth in history 1 is the booming
in the urban housing market. Before 1990s, households in urban areas who worked for the
state-owned enterprises were assigned housing units by their work units with low rents. In
1993, approximately 40 percent of urban households in China were residing in state-owned
housing (Wang [2011]). After a housing reform that took place in 1994, state-owned housing
units were no longer provided and private housing market quickly developed. For example, in
2005, the quantity of newly completed residential construction reached 28.4 million square
meters in Beijing, which accounted for 13.1% of the city's existing housing stock (Zheng
and Kahn [2008]). Nationwide, Figure 1 illustrates a rising trend of completed residential
housing units in urban areas. The total number was almost doubled from 549 million square
meters in 2000 to one billion square meters in 2012, in which year it accounted for 4.3% of
the existing housing stock in urban areas. In the United States, on the contrary, the housing
units built in urbanized area between 2010 and 2013 were 1.64 million, only accounting for
1.8% of total housing units by 2013 in urbanzied area.
    Recently, however, a widely publicized study by China Household Finance Survey (CHFS)
    1
        Christensen and McCord [2016]


                                             1
in 2014 and then in 2018 estimated approximately 65 million vacant housing units in urban
China.2 These vacant units consist of houses and apartments which are not occupied by
their owners for a variety of reasons, such as temporary migration or that the homeowners
own multiple properties that are not occupied by themselves or anyone else. This number
is high not only in absolute values but also in percentages; these units account for 21.4% of
all urban housing units in 2017. Table 1 shows the housing vacancy rates in China and in
other economies. Urban China's housing vacancy rate ranks one of the highest among all
listed countries or regions.
    Partly because of the first-ever estimate on vacancy rate based on the large-sampled
nationally representative household survey data in China, and partly because the estimate
was surprisingly large, a wide-ranged debate among both academic researchers and real
estate developers followed the study in 2014. Many researchers and developers believed at
the time that the vacancy rate estimate was too big. Their logic is based upon comparing
increments with increments. Although no official data ever exist, it is commonly believed
that there would hardly be any vacanct housing before 2000 in urban China. Therefore,
one may compare the increments in the number of households and in the number of newly-
built housing units net of demolished ones. Figure 1 graphically illustrates yearly completed
residential housing units and yearly increase in urban households. Between 2000 and 2012,3
the total estimated number of newly added urban households was around 92.46 million while
that of newly added housing units in urban areas was about 80.96 million. If we compare
these two groups and assume that each newly added urban household occupies one unit, it
is impossible to find such a large number of vacant units in urban China. In this sense, it is
    2
      See, for example, New York Times https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/30/business/china-economy-
property.html; Nikkei Asian Review https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Cover-Story/China-s-housing-glut-
casts-pall-over-the-economy; Bloomberg https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-11-08/a-fifth-of-
china-s-homes-are-empty-that-s-50-million-apartments; and numerous others in both English and Chinese
media.
    3
      The numbers on added housing units in urban areas are from the 2014 China Statistical Yearbook. The
last year in which this variable is available is 2012. There is only information on the total size of newly built
residential houses on a yearly basis from 1985 to 2012. We assume the average size per housing unit is 90
square meters. The numbers on the annual demolished urban housing units are estimated based on the 2013
wave of China Household Finance Survey.


                                                       2
puzzling to find almost 50 million vacant units in 2014, or 65 million vacant units in 2018.
   Motivated by these two seemingly contradictory studies, this paper provides a new per-
spective on urbanization in China; that is, we solve this puzzle by decomposing the growth
of urban population while providing a new statistical framework for China's urbanization.
   Besides natural population growth from birth and death, urban population growth con-
sists of two main sources: migration from rural to urban areas, referred as relocating migrants
in this paper, and urbanization by expansion of urban areas (Wang [2004]; Chen and Song
[2014]). Residents living in these expanded urban areas are reclassified as urban residents,
referred as redefined migrants because they in fact do not relocate. In the literature, the
relocating migrants have been generally believed to be a dominant driving force of the overall
urbanization process. For example, Zhang and Song [2003] compute the amount of annual
increase of urban populatoin by the natural growth and relocating migrants. They find
that the latter made dominant contributions to urban population growth from 1978 to 1999.
However, we find that quite a large share of newly added urban residents in the first half of
the 2010s resulted from the National Bureau of Statistics' (NBS) reclassifying communities
from rural to urban. By tracking nearly 700,000 communities from 2009 to 2017 and using
their respective rural-urban division codes to identify rural communities that were reclas-
sified as urban, we estimate that redefined migrants accounted for nearly 34% of all urban
population growth during this period.
   This paper contributes to the large literature on urbanization in China, both spatially
and in urban population size. Spatially, Deng et al. [2008] employ a unique three-period
panel data set of high-resolution satellite imagery data to study the extent of and the factors
driving urban expansion in China from the late 1980s to 2000. They find that the growth of
income and population in a city play powerful roles in China's urban exansion. Lichtenberg
and Ding [2009] theoretically demonstrate how fiscal and governance reforms may result
in land conversion decisions and long run urban spatial sizes. These papers mainly talk
about how urban area expands due to economic activities, for example, land converted from


                                              3
agricultural use into industrial or residential uses. Our paper documents and measures the
spatial expansion of urban areas from a statistical perspective on which urbanization rate
is based. In terms of the size of the urban population, we complement the work of Wang
[2004] and Chen and Song [2014] by providing the composition estimation in the 2010s.
Wang [2004] uses census data from 1990 and 2000 and estimates different sources of urban
population growth in 1990s while Chen and Song [2014] use their methods to account for
China's urbanization in 2000s.4 However, both of these two papers are only able to measure
at the national level. Different from theirs, we could measure different sources at more
disaggregated levels on a yearly basis.
   Furthermore, employing survey data collected by CHFS at both the household and com-
munity levels, we provide evidence that these communities, though statistically reclassified as
urban, retain their basic rural characteristics, and residents in these communities continue
to share similar living conditions with rural villagers, even after years of reclassification.
Moreover they have limited resources to participate in commercial housing markets.
   We thus show that urbanized population should not be treated equally since a large share
of urban population growth comes from the urban land expansion. As a result, previous
studies on determinants or consequences of urbanization in China might be misleading. For
example, Li and Huang [2015] study how increase in housing prices in Chinese cities might
have impacts on household saving behavior. Given that housing prices could be affected
by some macro-level factors, they use the province-level changes of urbanization rate as an
excluded instrument, which implies that increases in urban population lead to more demand
in the urban housing markets, thus increase the price. However, based on our analysis, this
does not hold for urban population from reclassification.
   In addition, we apply this new urbanization framework to land and housing markets
at the prefecture level. Using prefecture-level data, we show that the size of redefined
migrants is significantly related to the local land supply, suggesting that a mismeasurement
   4
       Their method and results will be discussed in Section 2.



                                                       4
of urbanization might explain the surplus of urban housing units and result in a high vacancy
rate, as reported by CHFS.
    Thus, our paper also contributes to the literature on the primary land market in China.
For example, Zhang et al. [2017] show that government intervention enlarges the impact of
positive productivity shocks on housing price appreciation, through mainly the government
control over residential land supply. Li [2018] shows that at the prefecture level, land supply
could also be determined by the local leaders' career concern.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the current rural-urban
division rule and proposes a new approach to measure the size of redefined migrants. Sec-
tion 3 demonstrates the difference of demographic and housing characteristics of redefined
migrants, at both the community and household levels. In Section 4, we show how the size
of redefined migrants relates to land supply at the prefecture level. Section 5 concludes.



2       Decomposing Urban Population Growth

2.1     Background

The urbanization rate is the share of the population that resides in urban areas. However,
there are actually no universal standards regarding the rural-urban dichotomy. A country's
specific standard may also vary over time. One traditional distinction between urban and
rural areas is based on the assumption that urban areas, no matter how they are defined,
offer a different way of life and usually provide a higher standard of living than rural areas.5
According to UNICEF [2012], the urban-rural dichotomy could be based on one or a com-
bination of factors such as administrative or political boundaries, a threshold on population
size,6 population density, and local economic industries/sectors or the presence of urban
characteristics (e.g., paved streets, electronic systems).
    5
    https://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/sconcerns/densurb/densurbmethods.htm
    6
    In the United States, for example, the Census Bureau identifies two types of urban areas: Urbanized
Areas have 5,000 or more people while Urban Clusters have at least 2,500 and less than 5,000 people.


                                                  5
    In China, the official standard of rural-urban dichotomy changes with waves of population
censuses. In the 1990 census, the rural-urban definitions were entirely based on administra-
tive boundaries (Wang [2004]).7 Rural-urban areas were defined at the third and fourth
levels, i.e., the district/county/county-level city and the street/town/township levels. For
example, all "districts"8 were classified as urban (Chan and Hu [2003]). The 2000 census
modified the previous standard by several criteria that included whether the area has a popu-
lation density of 1,500 people per squared kilometer; whether the local government is located
in the area; and whether the area is contiguous to another area where the local government
is located (National Bureau of Statistics [1999]). Compared with the previous standard, dis-
tricts with less than 1,500 people per square kilometer were no longer all classified as urban
areas. Yet, Yu [2001] finds that these two standards yield a very small change, only 0.16%
between 1990 and 2000 population censuses.
    The current standard for rural-urban dichotomy was issued in 2008 (National Bureau
of Statistics [2008]).9 The new standard defines urban areas at the community level rather
than at the county and town levels. Communities are autonomous organizations by their
residents. Community leaders are often elected by all residents in the community on a regular
basis rather than assigned by higher-level governments. However, communities do receive
government funding. In that sense, communities may be considered as the lowest level of
administrative unit in China. A community is often referred as "village" in rural areas, and
as "community" in urban areas. The total number of communities have been declining since
2009, from 699,089 in 2009 to 673,804 in 2017, at an annual grwoth rate of -0.5%. Given there
are 3,290 county-level administrative units (districts, counties and county-level cities) and
43,805 town-level administrative units (streets, towns and townships) in 2017, each county-
level unit would have 205 communities on average, and each township-level unit would have
   7
      There are four official administrative levels and one unofficial level. The four official ones are the
province/provincial-level city level, the prefecture level, the district/county/county-level city level, and the
street/town/township level. The unofficial one is the community level.
    8
      Compared with other county-level units, "districts" are usually the core of a prefecture.
    9
      The standard (in Chinese) can be found on the official website of the National Bureau of Statistics at
http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/tjbz/200610/t20061018 8666.html.


                                                       6
15 communities in 2017. As a result, a community is a much smaller administrative unit
than a county or a town. In this sense, this new standard for rural-urban dichotomy would
potentially be more accurate than previous ones.
   This new standard is solely based on land contiguity by actual construction, which refers
to public facilities, residential facilities etc., either completed or under construction. For
example, in districts, if a community is contiguous to the district-level government by actual
construction, it is classified as urban; otherwise it should be regarded as rural. Industrial
parks, economic development zones, colleges or farms that are not contiguous to the area
where the local government is located but with population more than 3,000 are also catego-
rized as urban. As a result, this rural and urban division does not directly take population
densities, economic activities, or residential infrastructures into major consideration. Hence,
there is a possibility that a community is officially reclassified from rural to urban only
because its attribute of land contiguity has been changed. It is worth pointing out that
the standard does not alter the administrative division, affiliation status or land planning;
instead, it is mainly for statistical accounting use.


2.2    Community ID and Rural-Urban Division Codes

NBS assigns all communities ID codes and publish them annually since 2009. Figure 2 in-
cludes two screenshots from the NBS website: the upper panel shows the links to information
for all available years while the lower panel shows the content of each observation unit. Each
row represents a community. The first two columns contain community ID and rural-urban
division codes respectively while the last column shows the community's name (in Chinese).
   The community ID has 12 digits, representing the aforementioned five administrative lev-
els: the first two digits represent province-level administrative units (provinces, autonomous
regions and province-level municipalities), the next two digits are for the prefecture and the
fifth and sixth digits represent the county (districts, counties and county-level cities). The
seventh, eighth and ninth digits represent the town level (streets, towns and townships) while


                                               7
the final three digits represent the community.10 They are codified according to the NBS'
Coding Rules for Administrative Units at the Town Level and Lower.
   The rural-urban division code has five digits. The first two digits represent the village
attributes and the last three represent the rural-urban dichotomy. Only the last three digits
for each community are available (Note that there are only three digits in the second column
of Figure 2's lower panel.); they are translated from the twelve-digit administrative code
and the first two digits of the rural-urban division code. In this three-digit code, the first
digit represents the basic rural-urban division: "1" represents urban communities and "2"
represents rural villages. The remaining two digits provide a detailed sub-classification.11
   Most of the declines of the number of communities come from rural areas. The total
number of rural villages has decreased from 519,616 in 2009 to 459,651 in 2017, at an annual
grwoth rate of -1.5%. Among those, villages located in township centers declined most
from 23,197 to 16,129, on average 4.4% annually, while villages in the suburban areas of
townships decreased from 496,419 to 443,522. On the other hand, the total number of urban
communities have increased from 179,473 in 2009 to 214,153 in 2017, with an growth rate
2.2% per year. Specifically, one of the subclassifications that increased most is communities
located in the fringe of town and township, from 48,364 in 2009 to 63,991 in 2017, with
an annual growth rate of 3.6%. This implies that many of the communities reclassified
from rural to urban occured between township centers and town-township fringes, which
also serves as evidence that a rural village would be reclassified as an urban community
simply due to the change of its attribute of land contiguity by actual construction rather
than economic development.
  10
      Towns and communities that have been confirmed by local governments would be codified from 001 to
399. Those which have not been confirmed would be assigned codes from 400 to 599, indicating that they
are virtual administrative units (for example, industrial zones, farms and forestry stations).
   11
      For example, 111 reprensents communities in the center of the city while 121 stands for communities
in the town centers.




                                                   8
2.3     Results from Tracking Community ID over Time

One problem in tracking a community's rural-urban status change is that the community ID
might vary across years. According to the coding rule, any change to the type of upper-level
administrative units12 could result in changes to the community ID. Moreover, it can also
change when its (upper-level) administrative unit is reorganized.13
   We track community ID codes for all nearly 700,000 communities from 2009 to 2017.
Each year, between 2.81% and 9.43% of communities have changed codes from the pre-
vious year. For these communities, we first look up all available official documentations
for adjusted administrative units at the county level and above and manually track those
communities whose prefecture- or county-level administrative units have been adjusted. On
average 1.1% communities can be tracked. For administrative adjustments at the town level
and community level, we allow town-level administrative units to be readjusted both within
the county and across counties. Another 1.1% on average can be tracked. The rest steps use
different combinations of key words to deal with community-level renames or administrative
unit readjustments. However, due to lack of geographic data and public information at the
community level, we fail to track communities with merges and splits.
   The results from tracking communities from 2009 to 2017 are summarized in Tale 2.
Three facts are worth discussing. First, our tracking algorithm allows us to track more than
99% of communities for most two consecutive years. One exception is 2015-2016. In those
two years, there was a massive increase in the number of communities in several provinces.14
Second, combined all years, around 90% of communities could be tracked. A large proportion
  12
      For example, a county can be changed into a county-level city or district; a township can be changed
into a town.
   13
      For example, a county in one prefecture can be assigned to another prefecture. In 2011, Chaohu
prefecture in Anhui province had all its districts and counties reassigned. All of Chaohu 's districts and
counties were assigned to three other prefectures within the province.
   14
      For example, the untracked communities in Heilongjiang province in 2015 is only 66. However, it
amounted to 2,153 in 2016. In Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, these numbers were 17 and 3,314
respectively. On the other hand, Hunan province experienced a tremendous drop in the number of com-
munities, the untracked of which were 20,866 in 2015 and 4,862 in 2016, possibly due to a large wave of
community merge.




                                                    9
of the untracked communities are from a sudden decrease of total number of communities
from 2013 to 2014.15 Third, for all 617,770 communities that can be tracked all across years,
there are a considerable number of communities with rural-urban status change every year,
though this trend has been declining in recent years. In total, from 2009 to 2017, almost
40,000 communities were reclassified from rural villages to urban communities, accounting
for 8.5% of all rural communities in the year 2009.


2.4     Measuring the Size of Redefined Migrants

Table 3 summarizes the tracking results for our study period of 2010-2015. We tracked
around 650,000 communities between 2010 and 2015. By analyzing each year's rural-urban
division code for those tracked communities, we are able to obtain detailed information on
whether each community has had a rural-urban dichotomy change and, if so, the year it
was reclassified. Of the 649,182 communities that were tracked during this period, 27,795
were reclassified from rural to urban while 9,983 were reclassified from urban to rural. The
percentage of reclassified communities from rural to urban net of those reclassified from
urban to rural account for more than 3.7% of total rural communities in 2010.16


2.4.1    Data on Urban Population at the Prefecture Level

In order to measure the size of redefined migrants between 2011 and 2015, it is necessary
to have information on the urban and rural population during this period. The lower the
level of administrative units from which we have population data, the more accurate our
measurements would be. The urban and rural population at the prefecture level is available
at the 2010 census. For the rest years (2011-2015), populatoin information for each prefecture
  15
      Note that there were 694,664 communities in 2013 and only 671,348 communities in 2014, almost a 5%
drop in total numbers.
   16
      Here we assume that there are no systematic differences between communities reclassified from rural to
urban and those from urban to rural as the rural-urban dichotomy mainly relies on land contiguity, which can
also be supported by descriptive evidence later shown in Section 3. In fact, many of communities reclassified
from urban to rural were either original rural villages that had been reclassified to urban before another
reclassification or urban communities that subsequently reclassified to urban again.


                                                     10
is either from its provincial-level statistical yearbooks or from the prefecture's statistical
yearbooks or bulletins.17


2.4.2    Data on Average Population at the Community Level

In order to measure the number of redefined migrants from the number of reclassified com-
munities, we need to obtain average population for those reclassified communities. The
community survey in the China Household Finance Survey at Southwestern University of
Finance and Economics provides such information.
    So far, there have been four CHFS waves: 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2017. The first wave, from
summer 2011, covered 80 counties in 25 provinces and collected data from 8,438 households
across 320 community-level administrative units. The second wave in 2013 increased the
sample size to 28,143 households distributed in 1,021 communities across 29 provincial-level
regions.18 The 2015 and 2017 waves consisted of 37,341 households from 1,362 communities
and 40,011 households from 1,417 communities, respectively.
    In the CHFS data, communities are sampled using a stratified method with probability
proportionate to size sampling. All counties are divided into groups based on their respec-
tive GDP per capita rankings; sampled counties are drawn from these groups. Sampled
communities are then randomly drawn from those counties. The CHFS dataset is nationally
representative. It contains rich micro-level information on household demographics, balance
sheets, income and expenditures. Starting from the second wave in 2013, CHFS added a
community-level survey to include the community total population and other demographic
and geographic information, public infrastructures and local governance. The community
survey questions are answered by community officials. Table 4 summarizes all three waves
of community survey. On average, the number of residents is 7,308 for an urban community,
1,956 for a rural village, 2,130 for the rural-to-urban reclassified community, and 2,020 for
   17
      We fail to find this information in most prefectures in provinces like Jilin, Heilongjiang, Tibet, Qinghai
and Xinjiang.
   18
      There are 31 provincial-level regions in mainland China. Tibet and Xinjiang are the only two that are
not included in this survey. Both of them are Minority Autonomous Regions in Western China.


                                                      11
an urban-to-rural reclassified community.
   To show the representativeness of the CHFS community survey, we pool all three waves,
aggregate at both prefecture and province levels, and compare those with the census data.
Figure 3 shows that average community population from the CHFS community survey is
quite comparable with that from the 2010 census data. The left panel shows this comparison
at the province level. The horizontal axis shows the average population of a rural community
within a province calculated as the ratio between the total rural population from 2010 census
and the total number of rural communities in 2010. The vertical axis illustrates the average
population from the pooled community survey aggregated at each province. The correlation
coefficient between these two variables is 0.84 while the estimated coefficient from a regression
framework is 1.14, insignificantly different from the 45-degree line. The right panel show
this relationship at the prefecture level. We calculate the average population for all 339
prefectures from 2010 census and 155 prefectures from pooled CHFS community survey.
The coefficient of correlation is 0.62. In addition, the estimated coefficient is 1.04, which is
significantly different from 0 but insignificantly different from 1. As a result, we are confident
that the survey data is representative, at least for the rural population information at the
prefecture level.


2.4.3    Measuring the Average Population at the Community Level

We measure the average population for communities reclassified from rural to urban for each
prefecture between 2010 and 2015. For the 36 prefectures of which CHFS has reclassified
communities, we use average population from reclassified communities in the pooled CHFS
community survey data. For the additional 121 perfectures in the CHFS sample, we use
the average population in the rural areas in the CHFS at prefecture level.19 . For the rest,
   19
      We have provided some descriptive evidence from Table 4 that the average number of population from
reclassified communities (both from rural to urban and from urban to rural) would be higher than the
average population in a rural community by around 10%. Therefore, we are likely to underestimate the
average population from these communities which leads to a lower bound of the measurement of the overall
redefined migrants at the national level.



                                                  12
we set the average population for reclassified communities equal to the province average.20
Finally, for the two province-level autonomous regions (Tibet and Xinjiang ) from which we
have no observations, the average population for reclassified communities in a prefecture is
assumed to be the average number of rural population in 2010 census in that prefecture also
considering the natural growth from 2010 throughout 2015.21


2.4.4    Measuring the Overall Size of Redefined Migrants

The size of redefined migrants for each prefecture during 2010-2015 is just the number of
communities reclassified from rural to urban net of those reclassified from urban to rural
multiplied by the corresponding average population for these reclassified prefectures. Because
a small portion of the communities cannot be tracked, the calculated size needs to be scaled
up by the ratio of total number of communities to the number of tracked communities during
the period. Overall, approximately 33.83 million people were redefined as urban residents.
Table 5 shows the size of redefined migrants by provinces across years. It shows that there
are large variations in the number of reclassified migrants both between provinces and within
provinces across years. In some province-year cells, the number of redefined migrants even
exceeds the total number of urban population growth, resulting a negative urban population
growth net of redefined migrants. Figure 4 illustrates the distributions of prefectures for
both total urban population growth and this net urban population growth between 2010
and 2015. Every prefecture experienced positive total urban population growth. However,
the number of net urban population growth is negative for many prefectures, due to a large
wave of urban population outflow from these prefectures.
   20
      We use similar step-wise assumptions as we did at the prefecture level. For those unmatched prefectures,
we first assume the average population for reclassified communities is equal to the province average for
reclassified communities (We match 124 prefectures.) or rural communities (We match 36 prefectures.).
   21
      Data about the natural growth rate are from the National Bureau of Statistics. We are not able to
find such information of rural population at the prefecture level. As a result, we need to make assumptions
that the variations of natural growth rate during 2010-2015 are not significantly different between rural and
urban areas within prefecture.




                                                     13
2.4.5   Decomposing Urban Population Growth by Year

Next, we estimate the prefecture-level urban population growth resulting from natural birth
and death. For each prefecture, this number is equal to the size of urban population as of
2010 multiplied by its overall rate of natural growth between 2010 and 2015. We conclude
that the natural growth of the urban population was approximately 16.62 million.
   Finally, the urban population increased by 101.38 million between 2010 and 2015. This
total growth consists of natural growth, relocating migrants and the redefined migrants. By
subtracting the amount of natural growth and redefined migrants from the total, we estimate
that relocating migrants accounted for approximately 50.93 million, around 50.2% of total
urban population growth. Table 6 shows this decomposition across years. Although the
size of redefined migrants has been declining, it still accounts for 33.4% of the overall urban
population growth during this period.


2.5     Comparing Results with Previous Studies

The current literature offers a couple of papers that focus on how each source contributes
to China's urban population growth. Wang [2004], using 1990 and 2000 census, estimates
that natural growth accounted for 17% of the total urban population increase and relocating
migrants accounted for 31%. The remaining 52% came from the establishment of new cities
or towns or the expansion of current city or town boundaries; this is contextually similar to
the "redefined migrants".
   Another related paper is Chen and Song [2014], who employ census data and find that
between 2000 and 2010, 20% of new urban residents are from natural grouwth, 40% are
relocating migrants, and another 40% are redefined migrants. Their estimates are based on
the census tables published by the NBS. Since the census tables only provide the number of
residents along both rural/urban residency and agricultural/non-agricultural Hukou dimen-
sions, one can construct a 2 × 2 table for each census year after netting out the estimated



                                              14
population growth due to birth or death.22 These 2 × 2 tables for years 2000 and 2010 imply
potentially twelve different population flows from 2000 to 2010. For example, people with
agricultural Hukou living in rural areas in 2000 could find themselves in urban areas by 2010
while keeping their agricultural Hukou, or changing to non-agricultural Hukou ; or they stay
in rural areas while changing their Hukou to be non-agricultural.
    In order to back out these population flows, Chen and Song [2014] make following as-
sumptions on the inflows into and outflows from each block between the two waves of census.
First, they assume no one who live in rural areas would have non-agricultural Hukou, re-
ducing the number of blocks from four to three in both 2000 and 2010. This assumption
reduces the possible population flows from twelve to six. Second, they argue that people who
had non-agricultural Hukou in 2000 are generally not allowed to be converted to agricultural
Hukou in 2010, eliminating two more population flows. Third, they assume that those who
live in urban areas and have agricultural Hukou in 2000 continue to live in urban areas in
2010. As a result of the three assumptions, only three possible population flows remain, i.e.,
those with agricultural Hukou in rural areas in 2000 move to urban areas in 2010, either
keeping their agricultural Hukou, or switching to non-agricultural Hukou, and those with
agricultural Hukou in 2000 in urban areas continue to live in urban areas but change to
non-agricultural Hukou. The first two movements add up to the total urbanized population.
Relying on the relationship between population flows and stocks, the authors managed to
back out the total urbanized population during the period.
    In the next step, they further break down the urban population with local Hukou and
those with non-local Hukou. They assume those with local agricultural Hukou in rural areas
in 2000 and non-local agricultural Hukou in urban areas in 2010 are exactly those who
migrate from rural to urban areas. Moreover, for simplicity, they assume that the size of
population who live in urban areas with agricultural Hukou and move out of their Hukou
  22
     For example, Table 7-1 from the Long Table of 2010 census reports the size of population with different
Hukou registration places (Township, Residents' Committee of Town, Villagers' Committee of Town and
Street) and different current places of residence (City, Town and Township).



                                                    15
registration place is roughly equal to the size of population who move back to their Hukou
registration place. By doing this, they are able to decompose the rural-urban migrations
into two components: (1) change of urban residents with non-local agricultural Hukou net
of natural growth and (2) those converting agricultural to non-agricultural Hukou in a place
other than where her Hukou was registered. The first component is measured similarly with
the first step, using the stock value in census data to back out the flow value. They rely
on the China General Social Survey as a supplement to estimate the second component.
After estimating the number of relocating migrants, they back out the size of urbanized
population due to land reclassification by subtracting relocating migrants from the overall
urbanized population.
   These papers shed light on the sources of urban population growth. However, they
received relatively few attentions, perhaps for the following reasons. First, they treat "re-
defined migrants" as a residual term, not a direct measure. Put differently, they calculate
the size of redefined migrants after measuring the size of relocating migrants and natural
growth population; as a result, measurement errors may arise if one wants to study the size
of redefined migrants. Second, their methods can only be performed using two consecutive
census waves to measure the number for a nationwide 10-year period. In addition, their
approach often relies on strong assumptions. For example, in Chen and Song [2014], they
assume those who live in urban areas and have agricultural Hukou in 2000 continue to live
in urban areas in 2010, which fails to consider the relatively large size of return migrants.
   Comparing our result with the two papers, it follows quite a similar trend since 1990.23
Though declining, this relatively large share indicates that urban area expansions are still
one of the main factors driving China's increasing urbanization rate.
   Unlike Wang [2004] and Chen and Song [2014] who back out the size of rural-urban
migration first and then take the residual as urbanization by urban land expansion or re-
classification, our approach of decomposing urban population growth takes the opposite
  23
   Recall that the share of reclassified migrants to the overall urban population growth is 52% in 1990s
Wang [2004]) and 40% in 2000s (Chen and Song [2014].


                                                  16
direction. We first measure the size of redefined migrants and then back out the relocating
migrants as the residual term. In order to compare our approach with theirs, especially Chen
and Song [2014] that employ the most recent census waves, we adopt their method to back
out the size of rural-urban relocating migrants as a robustness check using 2010 population
census and 2015 1% population mini-census.
    Employing their methodology, the measured size of redefined migrants was around 47.69
million, 41% larger than our result. As has been mentioned, our approach tends to be
conservative and is likely to underestimate the size of reclassified migrants. Also, in this
alternative method, since some information from the 2015 1% population mini-census is not
available, we have to rely on some linear estimation from its own trend, which is also likely
to cause inaccurate measurements. Nevertheless, since both approaches show that there are
a large share of urban population growth from urban area expansion (from 33% to 45%),
we believe that exploring the characteristics of redefined migrants living on those expanded
urban areas are of importance to understand the overall urbanization process for the recent
decades in China.



3     Characteristics of Reclassified Communities and Re-

      defined Migrants

In Section 2, we measure that redefined migrants accounted for more than 30% of total urban
population growth from 2010 to 2015. In this section, we use community- and household-
level survey data from CHFS to explore some characteristics of reclassified communities and
redefined migrants, especially their housing behaviors.


3.1    Characteristics of Reclassified Communities

We first show descriptive evidence that those reclassified communitites, both from rural to
urban and from urban to rural, are more in line with rural villages both demographically

                                             17
and in the level of economic development.
    Communities from three waves of survey are categroized into four groups: rural, urban,
reclassified from rural to urban from 2010 to the survey year,24 reclassified from urban to
rural.25 For all 3,800 communities pooled in three waves, we are able to track the rural-urban
status change for 3,479 communitites and categorize them into the four groups, accounting
for more than 91% of all surveyed communities, in line with the overall tracking rate (Table
2). Table 7 compare the characteristics from these four categories of communities. Variables
related to values are measured in 2015 RMB.
    In the community questionnaire, community leaders were asked what type of community
they consider their community to be. Results show that 75% of leaders from reclassified
communities regarded themselves as rural, indicating that they were unaware of their own
community's rural-urban dichotomy change. What's more, in most of the variables listed
in the table, reclassified communities have more characteristics in common with rural vil-
lages than their urban counterparts. For example, reclassified communities have an average
of 2,130 residents; this is close to the rural population average, and far below the urban
community average. Similarly, the average number of registered households in reclassified
communities is close to that of rural villages. The questionnaire also asked about basic
local facilities, such as number of banks. Data shows that both reclassified and rural com-
munities have less than one bank in their neighborhoods. Conversely, urban communities
have nearly two banks on average; this reflects that, in terms of the economic development
and infrastructure, these reclassified communities are far less developed than urban com-
munities. Interestingly, all the characteristics for communities reclassified from urban to
rural are also very close to traditionally rural villages and reclassified communities. This is
straightforward in the sense that the current rural-urban dichotomy adopted by the National
Bureau of Statistics is simply based on land contiguity, making both directions of switches
  24
      For example, if a community was reclassified from rural to urban in 2014, it was categorized as rural in
the 2013 wave but as reclassified in the 2015 wave.
   25
      Very few communities experienced the rural-urban dichotomy switch more than once during the study
period. We do not include these observations in the comparison as well as later in the empirical analysis.


                                                     18
less dependent on social and economic development of the community.
   Beginning in 2015, more questions were added to the survey questionnaire regarding in-
frastructures and economic activities in a community. These new questions help us make
comparisons in more aspects. Demographically, these reclassified communities still share
similar characteristics with rural villages, such as the number of registered residents and
households. Furthermore, 94% of the population in reclassified communities has agricultural
Hukou. The ratio of communities that keep agricultural land is approximately 17% in urban
communities but over 87% in reclassified communities; this indicates that the majority of
households in these reclassified communities still rely on agricultural activities. Addition-
ally, these reclassified villages have significantly sparser financial services, job trainings, and
childcare and eldercare options than urban areas. Moreover, the disposable per capital in-
come for reclassified communities was around 8,000 RMB, less than half of that of urban
communities.
   Columns 5 and 6 in Table 7 compare the difference between reclassified communities
from both their rural and urban counterparts. In Column 5 we show the difference between
urban and reclassified communities. In all characteristics, the differences are not only large
in magnitude but also highly significantly different from zero, almost all at 1% level. In con-
trast, Column 6 shows that between rural villages and reclassified communities. While the
differences are smaller, most of them are indistinguishable from zero. From such simple com-
parison, it is clear to see that although reclassified as urban, those commmunities are more
aligned with their rural counterparts in terms of demographic and economic development.


3.2    Characteristics of Redefined Migrant Households

In addition to community-level comparisons, we also use household survey data to explore
whether significant demographic differences exist at the household level. Table 8 shows the
demographic and economic information of households in different categories of communities
from pooling samples of all four waves (2011, 2013, 2015, 2017). Similar to what we find in


                                                19
the community-level data, households living in reclassified communities share more common
characteristics with rural households. For example, compared with urban households, they
have larger household sizes, more children, and less years of schooling. They are also more
likely to hold agricultural Hukou while working in the agricultural sector. With respect to
economic activity, their income and consumption levels are much lower.
   Moreover, the last two columns of Table 8 also compare the difference for household char-
acteristics. Similar to what we find from the community-level observations, in the household
data, we still find asignificant difference between urban households and those from reclassi-
fied communities while this difference is much larger than that between rural and reclassified
communities.
   Using descriptive evidence from both community and household-level comparisons, we
conclude that though statistically treated as urban, reclassified communities and redefined
migrant households are much more similar to rural villages and rural households than to
their urban counterparts.


3.3    Community Reclassification and Housing Behaviors

Aimed to solve the urban high-vacancy-rate puzzle, we empirically test whether reclassifica-
tion from rural to urban had an effect on households' housing behaviors. In order to do this,
we pool all four waves of household-level survey data and adopt a fixed-effects model, with
the following regression equation:


                     yijt = j + t + Reclassif icationjt + Xijt  +     ijt                 (1)


where i denotes household, j denotes community and t denotes the survey year. The outcome
variable is a dummy variable indicating whether the household is a homeowner. We also
explore the effects of reclassification on multiple homeownership, measured by the number
of housing units each household owns. j and t are community and year (survey wave) fixed


                                             20
effects. Reclassif icationjt is the key variable of interest, which is a dummy variable equal
to one if Community j has been reclassified from rural to urban by year t. Xijt is a vector
a household-level control variables including household size, age of household head, whether
the household head is married, number of children and elderly within the household and
whether household has agricultural land. Summary statistics is presented in Table 9. Since
we are comparing households in traditional rural villages and reclassified communities, we
drop observations from urban communities as well as communities reclassified from urban
to rural. Standard errors are clustered at the community level.
   Since we exploit the within-community variation in reclassification to distinguish its ef-
fect from confounding factors, we are in a difference-in-differences framework. Thus, our
identifying assumption would be that in the absence of the reclassification, reclassified com-
munities would have experienced changes in homeownership and other behaviors regarding
living conditions and housing demand similar to non-reclassified villages.
   One may wonder whether those reclassified communities shared different attributes from
traditional rural villages even before they were reclassified, which could cause concerns in
our identification strategy. Our data allow us to test and relax this identifying assumption
in several ways. First, we offer a formal statistical test by including an indicator for the
two years prior to the reclassification in Equation 1. That is, we ask whether reclassified
villages diverged in terms of household homeownership even before reclassification. If they
do, it suggests that the identifying assumption of our research design is violated. Second,
as has been discussed in previous sections, the current standard of rural-urban dichotomy
is simply based on land contiguity, independent of the social and economic development of
the community. We can empirically test this by taking advantage of our community-level
survey panel data. To be more specific, we use community-level demographic and economic
variables to predict whether this village would be reclassified within the next survey period
(i.e., two years). The dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if a village that had




                                              21
never been reclassified was reclassified within the next survey period.26 Results are shown
in Table 10. Column 1 only includes geographic, demographic variables and those proxy for
economic development, which could have explanatory power for household homeownership
and housing behaviors. The overall R-squared is low (only 0.008) and we fail to reject the
hypothesis of the overall insignificance using the joint F-test, though some variables are
statistically significant. This significance disappears in specifications which we gradually
include county-level fixed effects, year fixed effects and their interaction terms. Across all
specifications, the F-statistics are insignificant. As a result, we are assured that observable
community-level characteristics that ought to reflect the social and economic development
of a community are not correlated with its reclassification status.
   Results from Equation 1 using homeownership dummy and number of housing units are
shown in Table 11 and 12. Column 1 only includes community fixed effects and year fixed
effects while Column 2 includes additionally household-level covariates to increase precision.
Results remain unchanged with the coefficients of reclassification dummy, both economically
and statistically insignificant, indicating that the community reclassification from rural to
urban does not have any impact on household-level homeownership and multiple homeown-
ership. The third column shows that the estimated coefficients remain small in magnitude
and insignificance when replacing community fixed effects with household fixed effects. To
further mitigate the concern for our identification strategy due to the possibility of differen-
tial time trends that would be correlated with the timing of reclassification, in Columns 4
and 5, we show that the results are robust to controlling for specific time trends more flexibly.
In Column 4, we allow communities in different provinces to have different time trends by
including province-year fixed effects while Column 5 adopts interacts of all household-level
characteristics with each year fixed effect. Our main results for both outcome measures
remain economically small and statistically insignificant after introducing several additional
  26
     Since the first community-level survey was conducted in 2013, we drop communities that had been
reclassified before the year 2013 since we do not have any pre-period information on them. We also drop
observations from the 2017 survey since we do not know their rural-urban dichotomy after 2017.



                                                  22
controls for differential time trends.
   Table 13 illustrates results including the dummy variable for the two years prior to the re-
classification. Adding this indicator makes the omitted category to three or more years prior
to treatment, which alters the interpretation of the reclassification dummy. However, the
fact that both indicators are small and insignificant reflects that these reclassified community
follow similar trend with rural villages in terms of homeownership before reclassification.
   One may worry that the control group in our empirical model might not approximate the
treatment group well if they fall into different regions of the country. We address this concern
in two ways. At the macro level, though provinces along the coastal areas show a somehow
larger reclassification rate, provinces with the highest rates are in the central and western
areas. Furthermore, neighbouring provinces with similar levels of economic development
may show different reclassification behaviors. For example, Shaanxi Province is among the
highest reclassification rate, while Shanxi Province, which is to the east of Shaanxi shows the
lowest rate of reclassification, although both provinces share similar tradition and culture
with similar economic development. Second, at the micro level, in Table 14, we show the
baseline results are robust if we drop the observations from provinces that do not have any
reclassified community.
   Another potential issue of concern is attrition from the CHFS samples. In Table 15,
we run the basic regression used to identify the role of reclassification on homeownership,
Equation 1, on attrition. The effect of reclassification on attrition is both small and statisti-
cally insignificant. There is therefore no evidence that reclassification would cause different
behaviors in terms of attrition from the sample or household moving out of the community.
   The rich information on housing from CHFS also allows us to empirically test the reclassi-
fication impacts on other housing measures, to see whether there is any housing consmuption
increase in quality instead of quantity. Table 16 shows corresponding results. Samples are
restricted to households owning at least one housing unit. In Column 1, we regress number
of rooms for the current housing unit they live in on the reclassification dummy variable,


                                               23
controlling for household-level characteristics, community fixed effects and year fixed effects.
The coefficient of reclassification indicator is around 0.4 and insignificant. Next, we use
logarithm of housing size as dependent variable in Column 2, the coefficient estimate is neg-
ative and also insignificant, indicating that community reclassification does not improve the
quality of housing consumption. One character of housing behavior in rural China is that
households often build their houses on assigned land (ZhaiJiDi ) rather than purchase from
the housing markets. In Column 3, we find that the coefficient is around 0 in magnitude.
   Starting from the third wave in 2015, the questionnaire also included information regard-
ing housing demand. From both waves in 2015 and 2017, we distinguished their demand as
either self-built or purchasing from housing markets. In 2015, the ratio of households that
are willing to improve their living conditions by having more houses was similar among all
three categories (rural, urban and reclassified), around 20%. While most urban residents
would prefer to purchase apartments, more than half of reclassified villages would like to
build housing units themselves. This trend was still obvious in the 2017 wave; this indicates
that although noticeable housing demands exist, the majority of households from reclassified
communities still prefer to build houses rather than participate in the commercial housing
market. In Column 4 of Table 16, we show that households in reclassified communities are no
more willing to participate in more formal housing markets; i.e., they are no more involved
in purchasing a unit compared with households in rural villages.
   So far, we fail to find any effect of community reclassification from rural to urban on
improvement on household housing behavior. Nevertheless, households living in those com-
munities are never regarded as rural citizens in any statistical way. We are interested in the
question that in what aspects the reclassification affects households. Did it affect household-
level income and consumption that might not be revealed from housing behavior? If this
urbanization leads to more local job opportunities, this could translate to more welfare gain.
To investigate this, we use the household-level survey in all four waves of CHFS. Each sur-
vey has a detailed income and consumption module that allows for calculation of different


                                              24
sources of income and consumption. Regression results using them as dependent variables
are shown in Table 17.
   In Column 1, we regress the logarithm of household income per capita on the reclassifi-
cation indicator, household-level covariates as well as the community fixed effects and year
fixed effects. Though the coefficient estimates of the reclassification dummy is positive with
0.109 in magnitude, it is not statistically different from zero. In addition, we do not observe
a statistically significant effect on overall consumption as well as consumption of non-food
items. All results combined, we fail to detect any effect of the community reclassification on
improving welfare for the redefined migrant households.


3.4    Long-Run Reclassification Effects

One may think that after being reclassified as urban, those communities would follow a
differential development trajectory than their rural counterparts. For example, reclassified
communities might experience more investments in infrastructures from upper-level govern-
ments, which might take years. Thus, it is also important to discover whether there exist
any long-run reclassification effects for those reclassified villages.
   In Table 18, we show household characteristics in both rural villages and communities
reclassified from rural to urban in various years. As the first year we can identify reclassified
communities is 2010 and our last wave of survey measures household behaviors in 2017, it
has been at least six years for the first cohort of communities since reclassification. However,
we fail to discover any noticable difference in all household-level characteristics.
   In terms of housing behavior, Figure 5 shows the dynamic reclassification effects on
household homeownership and multiple homeownership from a regression framework. The
outcome variable is either the homeownership dummy or number of housing units. The key
explanatory variables are a series of indicators for 1 or 2 years before reclassification, the year
of reclassification, 1 or 2 years after reclassification and 3 or more years after reclassification.
The omitted category is 3 or more years before reclassification. We also include community


                                                25
and year fixed effects. The red dots indicate the coefficients of estimate while the 95 percent
confidence intervals are indicated by lines. In line with the descriptive evidence, we fail to
find any long-run effect of reclassification on household housing behaviors.
    To summarize, we first descriptively demonstrate that reclassified communities are dif-
ferent from urban communities not only in community characteristics but also in household
housing behaviors and demand. In all of these aspects, reclassified areas are identical to
rural villages. In addition to this cross-sectional comparison, we empirically show that be-
ing reclassified does not have impacts on the development trajectory for the corresponding
communities; they still followed the trend that resembles rural villages. Both horizontally
and vertically, we fail to detect any difference between reclassified communities and rural
villages.



4     Redefined Migrants, Local Land and Housing Mar-

      kets

4.1     Urban Population as a Determinant of Land Supply

According to the Constitution, China is under the "Two-Tier Land Tenure System": urban
land is owned by the state, and rural land is owned by local collective communes (Li [2018]).
Local governments have de facto control over city planning and land use.(Fan et al. [2015]).
The amount of supplied land is based on city planning, land quota, economic activity, pop-
ulation, income and expenditures, etc. Though there are policies that restrict the ratio of
each type (e.g., industrial, commercial, residential) of land supplied, the local government
has discretion to some extent on allocating shares of land on different types of use. Ac-
cording to Lichtenberg and Ding [2009] and Fan et al. [2015], after government acquired all
land from rural farms and established a land reserve center for management, approximately
20%-30% of land reserves were transferred for residential use and offered to the markets,



                                              26
mostly through public auctions. Additionally, around 50% was transferred to investors for
industrial use, mostly through negotiation. The price for industrial use was much lower than
for residential use. Figure 6 summarizes the land supply for different types of use between
2010 and 2015. During this period, the size of all three types (industrial, commerical and
residential) stay quite stable over time. The size of land supply for industrial use is almost a
half more than that for residential use, which is then doubled than that for commerical use.
   This section focuses on the relationship between urban population and residential land
supply. Figure 7 graphically shows a strong positive relationship between land supply and
urban population growth at the prefecture level between 2010 and 2015.
   Equation 2 tries to find out factors that may be used to determine the local residential
land supplies. We adopt a fixed-effects panel data model using prefecture-year observations
for all prefectures which we can obtain urban population data from 2010-2015. Specifically,
the regression equation is:


           Residential Landj,t = j + t + U rban P opulationj,t-1 + Xj,t-1  +                j,t       (2)


where Residential Landj,t is the total land for residential use in prefecture j as of year
t while U rban P opulationj,t-1 is the one-year lagged measure for the urban population in
prefecture j . Both variables are logged so the coefficient  can be interpreted as the elasticity
of residential land with respect to urban population. We control for the prefecture fixed
effects and year fixed effects as well as a list of one-year lagged prefecture-level time-varying
covariates including the prefecture area, per capita GDP, per capita fiscal income, per capita
size of paved roads and green spaces.27 Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level.
   Regression results are shown in Table 19. Column 1 presents the results only controlling
for the prefecture and year fixed effects. The elasticity of residential land with respect to
urban population is large in magnitude and statistically significant. A one percent increase
  27
     Data on GDP and fiscal income at the prefecture level come from the China City Statistical Yearbooks.
Since the yearbooks do not include information on prefecture-level autonomous regions, we exclude those
observations in the regression.


                                                   27
in urban population is associated with 0.50 percent increase in residential land in the next
year, indicating that total urban population growth is a strong predictor of residential land
supply. In Column 2, we add the lagged prefecture-level covariates as in our baseline spec-
ification in Equation 2, the coefficient increases to 0.60 and still highly significant. In the
next column, we further include the region-by-year fixed effects28 to account for potential
differential changes in different regions due to the central government policies in favor of
less developed central and western provinces, the coefficient is almost unchanged. Lastly,
in Column 4, we allow each prefecture to have its own linear trend; again, the elasticity is
high both economically and statistically. As expected and in line with the urban planning
literature in China, the growth in urban population is a key determinant on the amount of
residential land supplied within the prefecture.
    We can also test the elasticity of local land supply with respect to the total number of
residents instead of the urban population only. Columns 1 and 2 in Table 20 show that the
coefficients are similar but imprecisely estimated. Administratively, an alternative way to
measure population at the prefecture level is through the Hukou registration system. The
local department of public safety would annually document the total number of people whose
Hukou registration is within the prefecture. However, in the last two columns of Table 20,
results show that they are quite sensitive to different specifications while the coefficients are
statistically insignificant and even negative.
    In addition, it is interesting to explore whether this elasticity is heterogeneous across
prefectures with different attributes. While it is plausible to categorize different prefectures
by different dimensions, we would divide prefectures into three tiers, which has been widely
used officially and unofficially. To be more specific, we are dealing with this potential het-
erogeneity between the second-tier and third-tier cities.29 Second-tier cities consist of most
  28
     We divide the country into three regions: East, Central and West.
  29
     The first-tier cities include Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen, two provincial-level munici-
palities and two prefecture-level cities in the coastal Guangdong province. These four cities have a large
urban population and enjoy a large wave of immigrants, with very different policies in the land and housing
markets.



                                                    28
provincial capitals and municipalities that are local economic and political centers while the
remaining prefectures are considered the third-tier. Table 21 shows the results for prefec-
tures from these two tiers. Unlike Tier 3 cities which are relatively less developed, for tier
2 prefectures, residential land supply is inelastic to urban population growth. The different
sensitivities of land supply to population growth might reflect the different weights of ur-
ban population in the urban planning process. Since the second-tier prefectures are usually
provincial capitals or local economic centers, they tend to attract population from nearby
less developed third-tier prefectures on a fixed bases. As a result, urban population is less
predictive of land supply in these prefectures.


4.2    Redefined Migrants and Local Residential Land Supply

The fact that urban population growth is a strong determinant of local land supply for
residential use is expected. However, different prefectures might have different compositions
of urban population growth. For example, in metropolises, migration both from rural areas
within the prefecture and from outside the prefecture might account for the majority of
urban population growth while in some small and remote prefectures redefined migrants
might dominate. Since redefined migrants are similar to rural residents, the total urban
population increase net of the size of redefined migrants should be of more importance. This
section studies the relative importance of this "net urban population growth" and redefined
migrants. A regression equation is adopted as follows:


        yc,p,t = 0 + 1 N et U P Gc,p,t + 2 Redef inedc,p,t + Xc,p,t0  + p +       c,p,t     (3)


where yc,p,t measures the land supply of prefecture c in province p during time period
t; N et U P Gc,p,t and Redef inedc,p,t measure the net urban population growth and the
size of redefined migrants respectively. Xc,p,t0 is a list of control variables similar to those
in Equation 2 but they are measured as of the base year (2010). We also add the level of


                                              29
residential land as a control variable. p controls for province fixed effects.30 Standard errors
are clustered at the province level.
   Table 22 shows the results of the relationship between different sources of urban popula-
tion growth and residential land supply. Column 1 only includes the total urban population
growth. Similar to our results using the prefecture-level panel data set, the coefficient which
can be interpreted as elasticity is 0.61, large and highly significantly different from zero,
implying a strong relationship between urban population growth and residential land sup-
ply. In the next two columns, we add our measure of net urban population growth and
redefined migrants respectively. Both measures are of similar size and significant. In the
last column, we include both measures in one regression. Both coefficients are qualitatively
and quantitatively unchanged. While this result is suggestive, it shows that the elasticity of
residential land supply with respect urban population from redefined migrants is almost at
large as predictive as that with respect to net urban population growth, the group of which
is thought to have real demand for urban housing markets.
   In addition, we divide the cities into different tiers and estimate Equation 3 separately.
While residential land supply is inelastic to urban population growth in Tier-2 cities, it is
very sensitive to both net urban population growth and redefined migrants in smaller Tier-3
cities (Table 23), consistent with what we find from the panel data regressions.


4.3     Redefined Migrants and City Nighttime Light

An alternative way to illustrate that redefined migrants exhibit differing impacts from relo-
cating migrants on urbanization process is to look at their effects on development in both
economic activities and land use. One appealing way to measure the economic development
in the recent literature is to look at the change of nighttime light (Donaldson and Storeygard
[2016]). Measures using light data at the prefecture level are particularly fit into our set-
ting not only because they are good proxies for economic growth (Henderson et al. [2012]),
  30
     For the four province-level municipalities, Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai and Chongqing, the results are
virtually unchanged if these four observations are dropped.

                                                   30
but also in that they partly address the downside of using GDP growth within the entire
boundary of prefecture cities since in China they normally incorporate substantial rural areas
(Dingel et al. [2019]).
    Data on the nighttime light are from the U.S. National Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program (DMSP). As with the empirical literature that studies using the nighttime light
data, average digital number at the prefeture-year level between 2010 and 2013 is obtained.
We adopt a regression equation similar to Equation 3, with the difference of the logarithm of
city nighttime light between 2010 and 2013 as the dependent variable. Consequently, different
sources of urban population growth between 2010 and 2013 are used as key explanatory
variables.31
    Results are shown in Table 24. In the first column, we regress the difference of the log-
arithm of city nighttime light between 2010 and 2013 on the size of total urban population
growth at the prefecture level and find an economically and significantly large effect. In-
creasing the net urban population growth by ten percent would lead to an around 0.35%
increase in the prefecture average night light. However, in the next two columns, such effects
of net urban population growth as well as redefined migrants are of different sizes and levels
of significance, indicating that only the net urban population growth contributes to the city
nighttime economic activities.


4.4     Surplus Index and Housing Vacancy

Urban population growth is one of the primary predictors for local governments' urban
land supply. More importantly, as shown previously, this relationship is as strong for the
size of redefined migrants as for the net urban population growth, with the former having
little housing demand in the local housing markets. To quantify this extra supply casued
by redefined migrants, we construct an index for every prefecture measuring the degree of
surplus supply. Specifically, we regress land supply for residential use on the net urban
  31
     Here we do not use lags of the explanatory variables since nighttime light reflects the contemporaneity
of economic development as well as population mobility.

                                                    31
population growth to predict the fitted amount of residential land supply.32 The index is the
ratio between actual residential land supply and this predicted value. The higher the ratio,
the more excess supply the city has provided. Put differently, the surplus index is higher
when a prefecture supplies excess residential land for the net urban population growth. In
Figure 8, we show a negative relationship between this index and the average housing price
change for almost 100 major prefecture-level cities in China from 2010 to 2015.33
   In order to link the prefecture-level surplus index with the household-level vacant hous-
ing units, we combine this surplus index and findings from CHFS data. Empirically, the
regression equation is as follows:


                 vacant househ,p,l = 0 + 1  Surplus Indexp,l + Xh,p,l  + l                            (4)


where vacant househ,p,l is our measure of housing vacant information for household h that
has at least one housing unit in urban areas in prefecture p with tier l; it is either a dummy
variable taking the value of 1 if the household has at least one unit of vacant house or
the number of vacant houses. Surplus Indexp,l is the prefecture level surplus index we
constructed. Xh,p,l is a vector of variables including household size, Hukou status, age and
education level for household head, household income and expenditures, whether a household
has vehicles. City-tier dummy variables are also included. Since the key variable of interest,
Surplus Indexp,l is a generated variable, we also present results using bootstrapped standard
errors with 100 repetitions.
   Results are shown in Table 25. For the dummy variable, we use Probit model and report
marginal effects. For the number of housing units variable, a Poisson regression is adopted.
The results, for all specifications, are similar and quite robust. The prefecture-level surplus
index we constructed is positively related to both our measures of household-level vacant
housing units, and is significant at the 5% level. In cities with a larger surplus index (where
  32
     The regression equation is similar to Equation 3, but does not control for province fixed effects.
  33
     Data for housing price at the prefecture level are from China Residential House Price Index (HPI-100)
published monthly by the China Index Academy.


                                                   32
there is a higher excess supply of residential land), households are more likely to have vacant
housing units.


4.5    Revisiting the Vacant Housing Puzzle

Summarizing what we have discussed in previous sections, a large wave of newly added
households in urban areas exist simply because the areas they live in have been reclassified
from rural to urban. These redefined migrants comprised 34% of total urban population
growth from 2010 to 2015; they had little demand in urban housing markets since they
"bring" their own housing units into urban areas. To quantify its size, we simply combine
our estimated size of redefined migrants with information regarding their living conditions
from descriptive evidence found in CHFS datasets. Results show that between 2010 to 2015,
redefined migrants account for 33.83 million, which is approximately 8.93 million households
from reclassified communities (The family size of households in reclassified community is
3.79, shown in Table 8). Around 94% of these households have their own housing units. As
a result, they brought around 8.39 million housing units into urban areas, given all these
houses are located within these reclassified communities. Combining results from Chen and
Song [2014] by employing similar assumptions, from 2000 to 2010, these reclassified migrants
brought around 30.4 million housing units into urban areas. In total, during the first 15 years
of this new millennium, the size of newly added urban households from redefined migrants
brought around 38.79 million housing units into urban areas, accounting for nearly 80%
of total number of vacant housing units estimated by CHFS in 2014. This result provides
evidence in favor of the high vacancy rate found by CHFS. In fact, when comparing the
added urban housing units and urban households, the size of redefined migrants has been
taken into account in calculating the increment of newly added urban households but the
housing units brought by these redefined migrants are not taken into account in considering
the increments of newly added urban housing units. This mismatch due to neglecting the
group of redefined migrants causes excess supply which in turn leads to large numbers of


                                              33
vacant housing units in urban China.



5     Conclusions

Accompanied by rapid economic development, in 2018 China's urbanization rate reached
60%. A large wave of the population migrated and settled in urban areas, causing a consistent
demand for housing. As a result, urbanization is considered to be an important factor for
the enlarged urban housing demand. In this paper, however, we find that a large share
of new urban residents during the first half of the 2010s actually came from communities
that were reclassified from rural to urban. Relying on the rural-urban division codes which
are issued by the National Bureau of Statistics every year, we estimate that around 34% of
the total urban population growth from 2010 to 2015 resulted from rural-urban dichotomy
reclassification.
    Further exploration of the demographic and economic characteristics of reclassified com-
munities and redefined migrants finds empirical evidence that these communities are far less
urbanized than those in urban areas; most households still live in traditional rural houses
and have little demand to participate in local housing markets. We then use prefecture-level
land supply data and our measures of urban population growth to empirically estimate the
relationship between local land supply and different types of urban population growth. Our
results show that the elasticity of the size of redefined migrants is as large as that of net urban
population growth. If this is the case, we can anticipate large amounts of surplus housing
units, especially in cities with large sizes of redefined migrants. All of this evidence supports
a recent finding from the China Household Finance Survey that the housing vacancy rate in
urban areas is over 20%.




                                                34
References

Kam Wing Chan and Ying Hu. Urbanization in China in the 1990s: New definition, different
  series, and revised trends. China Review, pages 49­71, 2003.

Qin Chen and Zheng Song. Accounting for China's urbanization. China Economic Review,
  30:485­494, 2014.

Peter Christensen and Gordon C. McCord. Geographic determinants of China's urbanization.
  Regional Science and Urban Economics, 59:90­102, 2016.

Xiangzheng Deng, Jikun Huang, Scott Rozelle, and Emi Uchida. Growth, population and
  industrialization, and urban land expansion of China. Journal of Urban Economics, 63
  (1):96­115, 2008.

Jonathan I. Dingel, Antonio Miscio, and Donald R. Davis. Cities, lights, and skills in
  developing economies. Journal of Urban Economics, 2019.

Dave Donaldson and Adam Storeygard. The view from above: Applications of satellite data
  in economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4):171­98, 2016.

Jianyong Fan, Jiawei Mo, and Jipeng Zhang. Housing models and urbanization in China:
  Empirical research from the perspective of land supply. Social Sciences in China, 4:44­63,
  2015.

Edward Glaeser and J. Vernon Henderson. Urban economics for the developing world: An
  introduction. Journal of Urban Economics, 98:1­5, 2017.

J. Vernon Henderson, John Quigley, and Edwin Lim. Urbanization in China: Policy issues
  and options. Unpublished manuscript, Brown University, 2009.

J. Vernon Henderson, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. Measuring economic growth
  from outer space. American Economic Review, 102(2):994­1028, 2012.


                                            35
Xuan Li. The political cycle in China's primary land market. Working Paper, 2018.

Xuesong Li and Yanyan Huang. Rising housing price, multi-suite decision and household
  savings rate in urban China. Economic Research Journal, 9:100­113, 2015.

Erik Lichtenberg and Chengri Ding. Local officials as land developers: Urban spatial expan-
  sion in China. Journal of Urban Economics, 66(1):57­64, 2009.

United Nations. World urbanization prospects. Technical Report, 2018.

National Bureau of Statistics. Guidelines for statistically classifying rural and urban areas
  (for trial implementation). 1999.

National Bureau of Statistics. Standards for statistically classifying rural and urban areas.
  2008.

UNICEF. The state of the world's children 2012: Children in an urban world. Technical
  Report, 2012.

Fang Wang. Composition of population growth between the fourth and fifth census in urban
  China. Population Research, 28(3):60­67, 2004.

Shing-Yi Wang. State misallocation and housing prices: theory and evidence from China.
  American Economic Review, 101(5):2081­2107, 2011.

Hongwen Yu. Traits of population situation seen through 2000 census. Population Research,
  25(4):12­18, 2001.

Jipeng Zhang, Jianyong Fan, and Jiawei Mo. Government intervention, land market, and
  urban development: Evidence from Chinese cities. Economic Inquiry, 55(1):115­136, 2017.

Kevin Honglin Zhang and Shunfeng Song. Rural­urban migration and urbanization in China:
  Evidence from time-series and cross-section analyses. China Economic Review, 14(4):386­
  400, 2003.

                                             36
Siqi Zheng and Matthew E. Kahn. Land and residential property markets in a booming
  economy: New evidence from Beijing. Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2):743­757, 2008.




                                         37
Figures

                     Figure 1: Urban Household Growth and Housing Supply




    Note: Data on urban population and average urban household size are from the National Bureau of
Statistics. For added urban households in year t, it is calculated as (total urban population in year t - total
urban population in year t-1) / average urban household size in year t. Data on size of added housing units
are from the 2014 China Statistical Yearbook. For added housing units in year t, it is calculated as (the
newly built housing size in urban areas in year t / average size per housing unit) - estimated demolished
housing units in year t. We assume the average size per housing unit is 90 square meters. Annual demolished
housing units are estimated from the 2013 wave of China Household Finance Survey.




                                                      38
Figure 2: Screenshots of Community ID and Rural-Urban Division Codes




                                39
         Figure 3: Population between CHFS Community Samples and 2010 Census




    Note: Data for average rural community population measured in the horizontal axis come from the 2010
Census and the total number of rural communities in 2010 from the National Bureau of Statistics. Data
for average rural community population measured in ther vertical axis come from the 2013, 2015 and 2017
waves of community survey from China Household Finance Survey.




                                                  40
          Figure 4: Distributions for Urban Population Growth across Prefectures




    Note: Both total and net urban population growth are measured in 10,000. Total urban population
growth is the total urban population growth between 2010 and 2015 while net urban population growth is
total urban population growth net of the size of redefined migrants.




                                                 41
                             Figure 5: Dynamic Reclassification Effects




    Note: The graph shows the dynamic reclassification effects on household homeownership and multiple
homeownership in a regression framework. The outcome variable is either the homeownership dummy or
number of housing units. The key explanatory variables are a series of indicators for 1 or 2 years before
reclassification, the year of reclassification, 1 or 2 years after reclassification and 3 or more years after
reclassification. The omitted category is 3 or more years before reclassification. We also include community
and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the community level. The 95 percent confidence
intervals are indicated by lines.




                                                     42
                      Figure 6: Land Supply for Different Uses (2010-2015)




   Note: Data for land supplied at the prefecture level are from the the China Urban Construction Statistical
Yearbooks. In order to for the aggregated number to be comparable across years, we keep prefectures with
non-missing values at all years.




                                                     43
                  Figure 7: Urban Population Growth and Total Land Supply




     Note: Data for total land supplied at the prefecture level are from the the China Urban Construction Sta-
tistical Yearbooks. Urban population growth is measured in 10,000 and the data come from 2010 population
census and provincial- and prefecture-level statistical yearbooks.




                                                     44
                       Figure 8: Surplus Index and Housing Price Change




    Note: Data of housing price at the prefecture level are from China Residential House Price Index (HPI-
100) published monthly by the China Index Academy. We calculate the percentage change of housing price
as (average housing price in December 2015 - average housing price in December 2010) / average housing
price in December 2010. See Section 4 for detailed information on how to calculate the surplus index.




                                                   45
Tables
             Table 1: International Comparisons for the Housing Vacancy Rate

                     Year     Vacancy Rate Source
    Australia        2017     2.5%a        SQM Research
    Brazil           2012     11.3%        Minist´erio das Cidades
    China (Urban)    2017     21.4%        China Household Finance Survey
                                   b
    Germany          2011     4.5%         Statistisches Bundesamt
    Hong Kong        2013     4.1%c        Hong Kong Property Review
    Japan            2013     13.5%        Statistic Bureau of Japan
                                     d
    Mexico           2010     14.2%        INEGI 2010 Population and Housing Census
    Singapore        2014     7.8%e        Yearbook of Statistics Singapore
                                     f
    United States    2014     13.4%        United States Census Bureau
a
  This number refers to the rental vacancy rate, conducted monthly by a private Australian research
company.
b
  According to the micro census, a vacant property is defined as a housing unit in which no interview
partner was found even after multiple visits.
c
  This number refers to Vacant housing units at the end of the year as a percentage of total housing stock.
d
  A vacant home is defined as dwelling that is offered for sale or rent, rented or sold awaiting occupancy,
or held off market for other reasons. This excludes housing for temporal use.
e
  This number refers to the percentage of the existing stock that is vacant. Vacant Houses are defined as
vacant units/space that are/is not physically occupied.
f
  This number refers to the share of vacant housing units as of all housing units. Vacant housing units
include both year-round vacant units and seasonal vacant units.




                                                    46
                                           Table 2: Results from Tracking Community ID over Time

                                         2009                2010    2011            2012    2013    2014               2015    2016           2017
      Number of Communities              699,089             695,924 694,479         694,663 694,664 671,348            668,389 667,909        673,804
      ID Change with Previous Year (%)   N/A                 4.19%   6.58%           2.81%   4.74%   4.80%              4.53%   9.43%          5.43%
      Tracked with Previous Year         N/A                 692,925 688,739         691,522 690,941 666,600            664,252 642,728        663,001
      Tracked with Previous Year (%) N/A                     99.57% 99.17%           99.55% 99.46% 99.29%               99.38% 96.23%          98.40%
      Tracked with Previous Year:
                                         N/A                 1.55%       2.59%       0.79%      1.98%       2.71%       2.52%      2.56%       2.51%
      ID Change at the Upper-Level Units
      Tracked with Previous Year:
                                         N/A                 2.21%       3.16%       1.57%      2.22%       1.37%       1.39%      3.10%       1.31%
      ID Change at the Community Level
      Tracked with Post Year             692,925             688,739 691,522 690,941 666,600 664,252 642,728 663,001 N/A




47
      Tracked with Post Year (%)         99.12%              98.97% 99.57% 99.46% 95.96% 98.94% 96.16% 99.27% N/A
      Tracked over All Years             617,770             617,770 617,770 617,770 617,770 617,770 617,770 617,770 617,770
      Tracked over All Years (%)         88.37%              88.77% 88.95% 88.93% 88.93% 92.02% 92.43% 92.49% 91.68%
      Tracked over All Years: Urban      156,751             162,753 169,415 173,653 176,229 177,750 179,062 180,724 182,151
      Tracked over All Years: Rural      461,019             455,017 448,355 444,117 441,541 440,020 438,708 437,046 435,619
      Tracked over All Years:
                                         N/A                 2,013       3,138       2,272      1,968       1,007       1,315      1,610       730
      Urban to Rural
      Tracked over All Years:
                                         N/A                 8,015       9,800       6,510      4,544       2,528       2,627      3,272       2,157
      Rural to Urban
     Note: Data on number of communities are from the website of the National Bureau of Statistics. See Appendix for detailed description for our tracking
     method. Communities tracked with previous (post) years are communities in year t that can be tracked with year t-1 (t+1), independent of other years.
     Communities tracked over all years refer to those that can be tracked for all years from 2009 through 2017.
            Table 3: Results from Tracking Communities: 2010-2015

                                               2010      2015
 Number of Communities                         695,924 668,389
 Tracked Communities                           649,182 649,182
 Tracked Communities: Urban                    168,576 186,388
 Tracked Communities: Rural                    480,606 462,794
 Tracked Communities: Rural to Urban                27,795
 Tracked Communities: Urban to Rural                 9,983
 Tracked Communities: Percentage of 2010 Rural      3.71%
 Note: Data on number of communities are from the website of the National Bureau of Statis-
tics. See Appendix A for detailed description for our tracking strategy. Tracked communities
as a percentage of 2010 rural villages are calculated as (the number of tracked communities
from rural to urban - the number of tracked communities from urban to rural) / the number
of tracked rural communities in year 2010.




                                            48
             Table 4: Summary of CHFS Community Survey

                                             2013 2015 2017            Pooled
                No. Provinces                   29    29    29
                No. Prefectures                163   170   170
                No. Communities              1,021 1,362 1,417
                No. Communitites               505   676   694          1,875
 Urban
                Average Population           7,596 7,215 7,187          7,308
                No. Communitites               388   524   550          1,462
 Rural
                Average Population           2,061 1,926 1,912          1,956
                No. Communitites                22    37    42            101
 Rural to Urban
                Average Population           2,277 2,110 2,070          2,130
                No. Communitites                12    14    15             41
 Urban to Rural
                Average Population           2,268 2,003 1,837          2,020
 Note: Data are from the Community Survey (2013, 2015, 2017) of the China House-
hold Finance Survey.




                                      49
Table 5: Redefined Migrants by Province by Year
                                 2012   2013   2014   2015
                    Redefined    1005    432    157    150
   Anhui
                      Total      1100   1020   1040   1130
                    Redefined      27    -23     -4     -2
   Beijing
                      Total       440    410    330    190
                    Redefined     170    -27    -62     51
   Chongqing
                      Total       720    550    500    550
                    Redefined     472    424    287    125
   Fujian
                      Total       730    590    590    510
                    Redefined     122    322    138    252
   Gansu
                      Total       460    370    440    430
                    Redefined    -644   -167     86    109
   Guangdong
                      Total      1540    720    800   1620
                    Redefined     206    165     89    128
   Guangxi
                      Total       960    770    720    700
                    Redefined    1312    289    809    238
   Guizhou
                      Total       560    560    790    790
                    Redefined       0      1    -15     -2
   Hainan
                      Total       140    150    140    160
                    Redefined    -850   -140    238    262
   Hebei
                      Total      1090   1170   1140   1690
                    Redefined      17     40     33     28
   Heilongjiang
                      Total       160    190    230    170
                    Redefined     731    603     98   -518
   Henan
                      Total      1820   1320   1420   1760
                    Redefined     103    326    173     86
   Hubei
                      Total      1080    690    770    890
                    Redefined    1211    352    313    727
   Hunan
                      Total      1220   1120   1110   1320
                    Redefined      41      8     13     12
   Inner Mongolia
                      Total       330    280    250    230
                    Redefined    1230    303    428    273
   Jiangsu
                      Total      1010   1000   1010   1150
                    Redefined     267    329    218     88
   Jiangxi
                      Total       890    700    710    760
                    Redefined     -36    -42     29     -1
   Jilin
                      Total        90    140    180    140
                    Redefined      75     93   -441   -136
   Liaoning
                      Total       740    360    270     80
                    Redefined       3      2    -30    -24
   Ningxia
                      Total        90    120    150    140
                    Redefined      17     24      9      0
   Qinghai
                      Total        90     80    100     60
                    Redefined     333     64     82    176
   Shaanxi
                      Total      1070    540    540    600
                    Redefined    2077    822    298    428
   Shandong
                      Total      1680   1540   1530   2290
                    Redefined      -3      3      0     -3
   Shanghai
                      Total       300    380     90   -570
                    Redefined     229     76     24    -30
   Shanxi
                      Total       660    570    540    540
                    Redefined     417     85    151      2
   Sichuan
                      Total      1490   1240   1290   1430
                    Redefined       0     51      0     15
   Tianjin
                      Total       620    550    410    300
                    Redefined       4     16      0      0
   Tibet
                      Total        10     40     80     80
                    Redefined      46     48     -2     73
   Xinjiang
                      Total       200    250    520    560
                    Redefined     243    121    237      9
   Yunan
                      Total      1270    660    700    880
                    Redefined      81    388    120    119
   Zhejiang
                      Total       580    580    540    720

  Note: Numbers are in thousands.

                            50
                                    Table 6: Decomposing Urban Population Growth over Time

             Total Urban Population     Urban Population Growth        Natural Growth     Redefined Migrants    Relocating Migrants
     2010                   669,780
     2011                   690,790                          21,010    3,058     14.6%    13,836        65.9%    4,115       19.6%




51
     2012                   711,820                          21,030    3,263     15.5%     8,901        42.3%    8,865       42.2%
     2013                   731,110                          19,290    3,123     16.2%     4,988        25.9%   11,179       58.0%
     2014                   749,160                          18,050    4,052     22.4%     3,476        19.3%   10,522       58.3%
     2015                   771,160                          22,000    3,124     14.2%     2,632        12.0%   16,244       73.8%
     Note: Data are from the National Bureau of Statistics. The population number is measured in thousands.
                    Table 7: Community Comparisons for Pooled Sample

                              (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)       (6)
                             Urban       Rural     Rural to Urban   Urban to Rural    (1)-(3)   (2)-(3)
Self-reported Rural           0.17        0.97          0.75             0.93        -0.59      0.22
                             (0.37)      (0.17)        (0.43)           (0.26)        (0.04)    (0.02)

Number of Residents           7,308      1,956           2,130          2,020        5,178       -174
                             (6,824)    (1,818)         (1,436)        (1,595)        (680)     (185)

Registered Residents          5,281      2,082           2,107          1,887        3,174       -25
                             (4,675)    (1,687)         (1,406)        (1,439)        (531)     (196)

Ag-Hukou Ratio                0.26        0.95           0.94            0.86        -0.68       0.02
                             (0.40)      (0.16)         (0.19)          (0.33)        (0.05)    (0.02)

Registered Households         2,219       545                623         631         1,596       -78
                             (2,687)     (399)              (494)       (436)         (269)      (42)

Agricultural Land             0.17        0.94           0.87            0.82        -0.70      0.08
                             (0.38)      (0.23)         (0.34)          (0.39)        (0.05)    (0.03)

Kindergarten                  0.70        0.37           0.49            0.41         0.21      -0.12
                             (0.46)      (0.48)         (0.50)          (0.50)        (0.05)    (0.06)

Number of Banks               1.99        0.37           0.49            0.59         1.51       -0.11
                             (2.28)      (1.07)         (0.87)          (1.20)        (0.23)    (0.11)

Old-Care Service              0.47        0.18           0.28            0.34         0.19      -0.10
                             (0.50)      (0.39)         (0.45)          (0.48)        (0.06)    (0.05)

Job Training Service          0.23        0.08           0.13            0.17         0.10       -0.05
                             (0.42)      (0.27)         (0.33)          (0.38)        (0.05)    (0.03)

Disposable Income pc         19,234      6,646           8,104          12,888       11,130     -1,459
                            (32,388)    (6,068)         (6,270)        (18,886)       (3,244)    (629)

Poor Residents                0.04        0.07           0.08            0.05        -0.04       -0.01
                             (0.09)      (0.10)         (0.13)          (0.09)        (0.01)    (0.01)
Observations                  1875        1462           101              41
Means and standard errors (in parentheses) are presented.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                      52
                      Table 8: Household Comparisons for Pooled Sample

                             (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)       (6)
                           Urban        Rural       Rural to Urban   Urban to Rural    (1)-(3)   (2)-(3)
Family Size                 3.10         3.78            3.79             3.46        -0.69       -0.01
                           (1.41)       (1.83)          (1.81)           (1.58)        (0.03)    (0.04)

Number of Children          0.46         0.68                0.68         0.51        -0.22        -0.00
                           (0.69)       (0.95)              (0.90)       (0.69)        (0.01)     (0.02)

Head Schooling             10.46         6.89                7.15         7.48         3.32      -0.26
                           (4.02)       (3.47)              (3.60)       (3.19)        (0.08)     (0.07)

Head Urban Hukou            0.64         0.03                0.06         0.10         0.58      -0.03
                           (0.48)       (0.17)              (0.23)       (0.30)        (0.01)     (0.00)

Ag Activity                 0.11         0.75                0.61         0.63        -0.50      0.14
                           (0.32)       (0.44)              (0.49)       (0.48)        (0.01)    (0.01)

Agricultural Land           0.21         0.84                0.74         0.70        -0.53      0.10
                           (0.41)       (0.37)              (0.44)       (0.46)        (0.01)    (0.01)

Total Income               90,374       40,786           48,339          47,618       42,034     -7,553
                         (441,480)     (170,892)        (99,504)        (94,565)       (9,102)   (3,563)

Total Consumption          62,821       35,157           43,161          41,426       19,660     -8,004
                          (72,487)     (43,216)         (61,805)        (50,695)       (1,512)     (954)
Observations               68287        32520             2357            1076
Means and standard errors (in parentheses) are presented.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                       53
                   Table 9: Housing Comparisons for Pooled Sample

                                Urban         Rural         Rural to Urban   Urban to Rural
Willing to Buy                   0.16          0.08              0.09             0.09
                                (0.36)        (0.27)            (0.28)           (0.28)

Willing to Build                 0.04          0.11              0.10             0.08
                                (0.18)        (0.31)            (0.30)           (0.27)

Live in Own House                0.78          0.95              0.91             0.90
                                (0.41)        (0.23)            (0.28)           (0.31)

Have Own House                   0.87          0.96              0.94             0.93
                                (0.33)        (0.19)            (0.23)           (0.25)

Housing Usable Size             96.94         126.86            138.72          121.19
                               (81.13)        (94.91)          (101.17)         (93.09)

Self-Built House                 0.30          0.87              0.86             0.71
                                (0.46)        (0.34)            (0.35)           (0.45)

Collective-Owned Land            0.15          0.48              0.58             0.49
                                (0.36)        (0.50)            (0.49)           (0.50)

Housing Cost                   189,741       63,377             82,744           65,612
                              (380,474)     (120,496)         (153,465)        (113,515)

Housing Fair Value             778,791       146,128           290,012          175,447
                             (1,342,187)    (833,538)        (2,139,778)       (331,485)
Observations                    68282         32520             2357             1076
Means and standard errors (in parentheses) are presented.




                                              54
                     Table 10: Balanced Test

                                 (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
Ln(Area)                       -0.001     -0.002     -0.002    -0.002
                              (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.004)

Number of Roads                -0.004     -0.003     -0.004    -0.006
                              (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.014)

Agricultural Land             0.012       -0.001     0.001     0.000
                              (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.007)   (0.005)

Ln(Residents)                 0.016       0.011      0.014     0.020
                              (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.012)   (0.017)

Ln(Households)               -0.019       -0.004     -0.008    -0.010
                             (0.010)     (0.014)    (0.016)   (0.020)

Ln(Migrants)                   -0.002     -0.001     -0.001    0.001
                              (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.004)

Poor Residents                 0.008      -0.006     0.010     0.040
                              (0.039)    (0.057)    (0.057)   (0.076)

Ln(Household Income)           0.005      -0.004     -0.005    -0.009
                              (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.009)

County FE                       No         Yes        Yes      Yes

Year FE                         No         No         Yes      Yes

County*Year FE                  No         No         No       Yes
R2                             0.008      0.519      0.520    0.612
Observations                    813        813        813      813
Robust standard errors are clustered at the county level.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                  55
                Table 11: Effects of Village Reclassification: Homeownership

                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)
Reclassified                                      -0.015      -0.015      -0.034      -0.017    -0.015
                                                 (0.060)     (0.060)     (0.063)     (0.057)   (0.059)

Family Size                                                 0.018                   0.018      0.017
                                                            (0.001)                 (0.001)    (0.003)

Female Head                                                   0.004                   0.003     0.006
                                                             (0.005)                 (0.005)   (0.014)

Head Age                                                    -0.000                  -0.000      -0.000
                                                             (0.000)                 (0.000)   (0.000)

Head Schooling                                                0.001                   0.001     0.002
                                                             (0.000)                 (0.000)   (0.001)

Number of Children                                          -0.016                  -0.015     -0.018
                                                             (0.002)                 (0.002)    (0.004)

Number of Elderly                                           -0.016                  -0.016     -0.019
                                                             (0.002)                 (0.002)    (0.006)

Married                                                     0.036                   0.035      0.038
                                                            (0.006)                 (0.006)    (0.010)

Agricutural Land                                            0.039                   0.039      0.045
                                                            (0.004)                 (0.004)    (0.008)

Community FE                                       Yes         Yes         No          Yes       Yes

Year FE                                            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes

Household FE                                       No          No          Yes         No        No

Province*Year FE                                   No          No          No          Yes       No

Household Characteristics*Year Effects             No          No          No          No        Yes
R2                                                0.058       0.093       0.003       0.097     0.094
Observations                                      34876       34789       34876       34789     34789
Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.
R-squred reported in the specification with household fixed effects is the within R-suqred.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   56
           Table 12: Effects of Village Reclassification: Multiple Homeownership

                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)
Reclassified                                      -0.042      -0.043      -0.040      -0.038    -0.043
                                                 (0.086)     (0.086)     (0.097)     (0.086)   (0.085)

Family Size                                                 0.061                   0.061      0.050
                                                            (0.003)                 (0.003)    (0.005)

Female Head                                                  0.017                   0.017      0.023
                                                             (0.010)                 (0.010)   (0.019)

Head Age                                                     0.001                   0.001     0.002
                                                             (0.000)                 (0.000)   (0.001)

Head Schooling                                              0.008                   0.008      0.010
                                                            (0.001)                 (0.001)    (0.002)

Number of Children                                          -0.039                  -0.039     -0.025
                                                             (0.005)                 (0.005)   (0.010)

Number of Elderly                                           -0.039                  -0.039     -0.037
                                                             (0.005)                 (0.005)    (0.012)

Married                                                     0.034                   0.034      0.038
                                                            (0.010)                 (0.010)    (0.019)

Agricutural Land                                            0.050                   0.049      0.057
                                                            (0.008)                 (0.008)    (0.014)

Community FE                                       Yes         Yes         No          Yes       Yes

Year FE                                            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes

Household FE                                       No          No          Yes         No        No

Province*Year FE                                   No          No          No          Yes       No

Household Characteristics*Year Effects             No          No          No          No        Yes
R2                                                0.064       0.109       0.001       0.113     0.111
Observations                                      32706       32622       32706       32622     32622
Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.
R-squred reported in the specification with household fixed effects is the within R-suqred.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   57
Table 13: Effects of Village Reclassification: Add Pre-Treatment Indicator

                                 Homeownership Multiple Homeownership
                                    (1)    (2)     (3)       (4)
 Reclassified                     -0.010 -0.006   0.029     0.039
                                 (0.037) (0.036) (0.053)   (0.053)

 1-2 Years Before                 0.007         0.012     0.097     0.112
                                 (0.044)       (0.043)   (0.080)   (0.079)

 Community FE                      Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes

 Year FE                           Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes

 Household Characteristics         No           Yes       No        Yes
 R2                               0.058        0.093     0.064     0.109
 Observations                     34876        34789     32706     32622
 Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.
 
  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                          58
Table 14: Effects of Village Reclassification: Drop Provinces w/o Reclassified Villages

                                    Homeownership         Multiple Homeownership
                                     (1)     (2)             (3)         (4)
         Reclassified              -0.016  -0.016          -0.048      -0.049
                                  (0.060) (0.060)         (0.086)     (0.087)

         Family Size                          0.019                     0.066
                                              (0.001)                   (0.003)

         Female Head                           0.008                    0.023
                                              (0.005)                   (0.011)

         Head Age                            -0.000                     0.001
                                              (0.000)                   (0.000)

         Head Schooling                        0.001                    0.008
                                              (0.000)                   (0.001)

         Number of Children                  -0.017                     -0.043
                                              (0.002)                    (0.005)

         Number of Elderly                   -0.018                     -0.044
                                              (0.002)                    (0.005)

         Married                              0.034                     0.025
                                              (0.007)                   (0.011)

         Agricutural Land                     0.037                     0.039
                                              (0.005)                   (0.009)

         Community FE               Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes

         Year FE                    Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
         R2                        0.061       0.096      0.061          0.111
         Observations              27294       27223      25424          25355
         Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.
         
          p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                              59
Table 15: Effects of Village Reclassification: Attrition from Survey

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)
       Reclassified              -0.049      -0.051       0.008
                                (0.232)     (0.234)      (0.007)

       Family Size                         -0.005
                                            (0.002)

       Female Head                           0.010
                                            (0.007)

       Head Age                            -0.001
                                            (0.000)

       Head Schooling                       -0.001
                                            (0.001)

       Number of Children                    0.000
                                            (0.003)

       Number of Elderly                     0.002
                                            (0.003)

       Married                             -0.049
                                            (0.007)

       Agricutural Land                    -0.016
                                            (0.006)

       Community FE               Yes         Yes          No

       Year FE                    Yes         Yes          Yes

       Household FE               No          No           Yes
       R2                        0.359       0.362        0.080
       Observations              21393       21364        21393
       Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.
       
        p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                   60
Table 16: Effects of Village Reclassification: Alternative Housing Measures

                             (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)
                          No.Room       Ln(Size)    Self-Built   Willing to Buy
 Reclassified               0.400        -0.030       -0.000          -0.054
                           (0.556)      (0.030)      (0.037)         (0.033)

 Family Size                0.466       0.055        0.009          0.016
                            (0.242)     (0.004)      (0.002)        (0.002)

 Female Head                 -0.303       0.022        -0.004        0.006
                            (0.377)      (0.015)      (0.008)       (0.007)

 Head Age                    0.093      -0.001       0.002         -0.002
                            (0.093)     (0.001)      (0.000)        (0.000)

 Head Schooling              -0.122     0.009          0.001        0.004
                            (0.167)     (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)

 Number of Children          0.188      -0.032       -0.012        -0.012
                            (0.310)      (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.004)

 Number of Elderly           -0.198     -0.038         0.000       -0.012
                            (0.128)      (0.008)      (0.003)       (0.003)

 Married                     2.748      0.138         0.017          -0.002
                            (2.513)     (0.017)       (0.008)       (0.006)

 Agricutural Land            0.057      0.037        0.026           0.005
                            (0.090)     (0.011)      (0.006)        (0.007)

 Community FE                 Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes

 Year FE                     Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 R2                         0.027         0.225        0.154         0.089
 Observations               31823         30632        31875         17244
 Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.
 
  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                         61
                     Table 17: Effects of Village Reclassification: Welfare

                              (1)                   (2)                        (3)
                         Ln(Income pc)       Ln(Consumption pc)   Ln(Non-Food Consumption pc)
Reclassified                 0.109                 0.009                     -0.046
                            (0.103)               (0.075)                   (0.102)

Female Head                    -0.003                  0.041                   0.032
                              (0.026)                  (0.016)                (0.020)

Head Age                     -0.006                    -0.007                 -0.009
                              (0.001)                   (0.001)                (0.001)

Head Schooling               0.047                     0.024                  0.027
                             (0.002)                   (0.002)                (0.002)

Number of Children           -0.134                    -0.140                 -0.137
                              (0.009)                   (0.006)                (0.006)

Number of Elderly            -0.164                    -0.097                 -0.106
                              (0.011)                   (0.007)                (0.008)

Married                       0.065                     -0.007                0.099
                              (0.026)                  (0.017)                (0.020)

Agricutural Land             0.143                      -0.004                0.057
                             (0.024)                   (0.013)                (0.017)

Community FE                    Yes                      Yes                    Yes

Year FE                         Yes                      Yes                    Yes
R2                             0.184                    0.219                  0.185
Observations                   33627                    34786                  34682
Robust standard errors are clustered at the community level.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                  62
                         Table 18: Household Comparisons for CHFS 2017

                           Rural        2010        2011           2012       2013       2014       2015       2016       2017
Family Size                 3.55        3.92        3.53           3.84       3.80       4.11       3.29       3.23       2.90
                           (1.77)      (1.92)      (1.86)         (1.77)     (1.76)     (1.88)     (1.51)     (1.70)     (1.37)

Number of Children          0.62        0.85        0.64           0.76       0.78       0.89       0.41       0.48       0.30
                           (0.92)      (0.97)      (0.94)         (0.97)     (0.98)     (1.16)     (0.64)     (0.76)     (0.69)

Head Schooling              6.96        7.50        7.09           7.36       7.62       4.88       7.78       7.40       6.75
                           (3.46)      (3.46)      (3.66)         (3.25)     (3.40)     (4.33)     (3.68)     (3.55)     (4.11)

Head Urban Hukou            0.03        0.08        0.04           0.04       0.03       0.05       0.00       0.03       0.31
                           (0.18)      (0.27)      (0.19)         (0.21)     (0.17)     (0.21)     (0.00)     (0.18)     (0.46)

Ag Activity                 0.75        0.58        0.70           0.55       0.65       0.13       0.44       0.39       0.54
                           (0.43)      (0.49)      (0.46)         (0.50)     (0.48)     (0.33)     (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.50)

Agricultural Land           0.80        0.59        0.79           0.64       0.69       0.41       0.65       0.58       0.56
                           (0.40)      (0.49)      (0.41)         (0.48)     (0.47)     (0.50)     (0.48)     (0.50)     (0.50)

Total Income              45,227      49,470      41,369          63,154     45,784     35,411     78,265     45,561     60,680
                         (73,563)    (59,060)    (56,717)        (93,987)   (90,012)   (33,782)   (93,936)   (61,929)   (64,604)

Total Consumption         37,091      44,165      32,322          58,397     61,333     58,984     54,761     37,124     38,896
                         (38,199)    (42,957)    (31,325)        (50,308)   (71,967)   (37,473)   (51,326)   (41,200)   (30,679)
Observations              11425        142         325             135         65         64         85         62         91
Means and standard errors (in parentheses) are presented.




                                                            63
            Table 19: Urban Population and Residential Land

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)
Ln(Urban Population)          0.498       0.603       0.629            0.650
                              (0.158)     (0.178)     (0.165)          (0.279)

Ln(City Size)                             0.129       0.128             0.009
                                          (0.045)     (0.042)          (0.038)

Ln(Road Size pc)                            0.280       0.284           0.438
                                           (0.234)     (0.221)         (0.285)

Ln(Greenland Size pc)                       -0.045      -0.051          -0.028
                                           (0.065)     (0.070)         (0.040)

Ln(GDP pc)                                  -0.128      -0.136          -0.158
                                           (0.100)     (0.102)         (0.165)

Ln(Fiscal Income pc)                        -0.012      -0.007          -0.005
                                           (0.012)     (0.011)         (0.006)

Prefecture FE                    Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes

Year FE                          Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes

Region by Year FE                No           No         Yes             No

Prefecture Linear Trend          No           No         No              Yes
R2                              0.095        0.129      0.145           0.631
Observations                    1581         1465       1465            1465
Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level.
Reported R-squres are the within R-squares from prefecture fixed effects regressions

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                        64
          Table 20: Prefecture Population and Residential Land

                                 (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)
Ln(Total Population)          0.676        0.528
                              (0.241)     (0.379)

Ln(Hukou Population)                                   -0.474          -0.118
                                                      (1.213)         (0.737)

Ln(City Size)                 0.127        0.010      0.137            0.015
                              (0.046)     (0.039)     (0.053)         (0.037)

Ln(Road Size pc)                0.292      0.428       0.254           0.388
                               (0.239)    (0.289)     (0.213)         (0.262)

Ln(Greenland Size pc)           -0.030     -0.030      -0.044          -0.042
                               (0.063)    (0.040)     (0.069)         (0.043)

Ln(GDP pc)                      -0.074     -0.152      -0.103          -0.173
                               (0.101)    (0.167)     (0.100)         (0.165)

Ln(Fiscal Income pc)            -0.005     -0.005      -0.009          -0.008
                               (0.011)    (0.006)     (0.012)         (0.006)

Prefecture FE                    Yes          Yes      Yes              Yes

Year FE                          Yes          Yes      Yes              Yes

Prefecture Linear Trend          No            Yes     No               Yes
R2                              0.125         0.627   0.121            0.625
Observations                    1465          1465    1465             1465
Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level.
Reported R-squres are the within R-squares from prefecture fixed effects regressions

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                         65
Table 21: Urban Population and Residential Land: by Prefecture Tiers

                             Tier 2-3 Tier 2                    Tier 3
Ln(Urban Population)         0.538 0.119                       0.583
                             (0.167) (0.420)                   (0.175)

Ln(City Size)                0.121        0.038                 0.125
                             (0.045)     (0.071)                (0.049)

Ln(Road Size pc)              0.267       0.065                  0.296
                             (0.235)     (0.083)                (0.264)

Ln(Greenland Size pc)         -0.048      -0.048                 -0.050
                             (0.065)     (0.076)                (0.072)

Ln(GDP pc)                    -0.060      -0.036                 -0.066
                             (0.060)     (0.070)                (0.081)

Ln(Fiscal Income pc)          -0.016      0.219                  -0.017
                             (0.012)     (0.139)                (0.013)

Prefecture FE                  Yes           Yes                  Yes

Year FE                        Yes         Yes                    Yes
R2                            0.137       0.453                  0.127
Observations                  1447         227                   1220
Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level.
Reported R-squres are the within R-squares from prefecture fixed effects regressions

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                        66
Table 22: Urban Population Growth and Annual Residential Land Supply

                                     (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)
    Ln(Total UPG)                 0.610
                                  (0.100)

    Ln(Net UPG)                               0.310                  0.307
                                              (0.049)                (0.043)

    Ln(Redefined)                                          0.247     0.292
                                                           (0.049)   (0.059)

    Ln(Residential Size pc)         0.149       0.005       -0.003    0.041
                                   (0.093)     (0.156)     (0.118)   (0.117)

    Ln(GDP pc)                    0.512        0.457       0.533     0.550
                                  (0.148)      (0.195)     (0.229)   (0.240)

    Ln(Fiscal Income pc)            -0.194      -0.155      -0.093    -0.221
                                   (0.147)     (0.155)     (0.168)   (0.207)

    Ln(Road Size pc)                0.142      0.236        0.228     0.292
                                   (0.137)     (0.134)     (0.169)   (0.183)

    Ln(Green Size pc)             -0.176       -0.224      -0.234    -0.215
                                  (0.080)      (0.123)     (0.121)   (0.119)

    Province FE                      Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes
    R2                              0.700       0.607       0.583     0.689
    Observations                     246         224         235       191
    Standard errors are clustered at the province level.
    
      p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                        67
Table 23: Urban Population Growth and Annual Residential Land Supply

                                       Tier 2-3     Tier 2       Tier 3
         Ln(Net UPG)                   0.315         0.770      0.215
                                       (0.049)      (1.830)     (0.063)

         Ln(Redefined)                 0.290         -0.073     0.269
                                       (0.059)      (1.112)     (0.046)

         Ln(Residential Size pc)         0.031      3.889        -0.058
                                        (0.117)     (0.904)     (0.122)

         Ln(GDP pc)                     0.534        -0.147     0.344
                                        (0.238)     (3.550)     (0.182)

         Ln(Fiscal Income pc)            -0.192      0.181       -0.146
                                        (0.210)     (3.126)     (0.188)

         Ln(Road Size pc)                0.294       -0.899      0.316
                                        (0.183)     (1.063)     (0.191)

         Ln(Green Size pc)               -0.210     -1.719       -0.216
                                        (0.129)     (0.911)     (0.143)

         Province FE                      Yes         Yes         Yes
         R2                              0.692       0.957       0.653
         Observations                     189         27          162
         Standard errors are clustered at the province level.
         
           p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                       68
Table 24: Urban Population Growth and City Nighttime Light

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)
Ln(Total UPG)                  0.035
                               (0.012)

Ln(Net UPG)                                0.021                 0.027
                                           (0.009)               (0.013)

Ln(Redefined)                                           0.007     0.012
                                                       (0.007)   (0.009)

Ln(Residential Size pc)         0.020       0.021       0.009     0.048
                               (0.028)     (0.035)     (0.026)   (0.041)

Ln(GDP pc)                      -0.037      -0.081      -0.043    -0.114
                               (0.109)     (0.150)     (0.096)   (0.169)

Ln(Fiscal Income pc)            0.058       0.088       0.064     0.111
                               (0.095)     (0.126)     (0.078)   (0.139)

Ln(Road Size pc)              -0.035      -0.039       -0.028    -0.036
                              (0.014)     (0.018)      (0.014)   (0.017)

Ln(Green Size pc)               -0.012      -0.020      -0.013    -0.036
                               (0.019)     (0.025)     (0.020)   (0.030)

Province FE                      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
R2                              0.241       0.243      0.214      0.259
Observations                     219         183        241        153
Standard errors are clustered at the province level.

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                    69
      Table 25: Surplus Index and Households with Urban Vacant Unit

                         Have Vacant       Have Vacant      No. Vacant     No. Vacant
Surplus Index              0.016             0.016           0.085          0.085
                           (0.007)           (0.007)         (0.034)        (0.033)

Family Size                   -0.002             -0.002           -0.010     -0.010
                             (0.004)            (0.004)          (0.020)    (0.019)

Number of Children            -0.010            -0.010            -0.045     -0.045
                             (0.006)            (0.006)          (0.030)    (0.032)

Number of Laborers          0.020            0.020               0.100      0.100
                            (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.021)    (0.018)

Head Age                    -0.001            -0.001             -0.003     -0.003
                            (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.001)    (0.001)

Head Schooling              0.005            0.005               0.026      0.026
                            (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.005)    (0.005)

Ln(Income)                  0.020            0.020               0.109      0.109
                            (0.003)          (0.003)             (0.015)    (0.016)

Ln(Consumption)             0.054            0.054               0.289      0.289
                            (0.005)          (0.005)             (0.023)    (0.024)

Have Vehicle                0.063            0.063               0.281      0.281
                            (0.007)          (0.007)             (0.035)    (0.035)

City Tier Dummies              Yes               Yes              Yes         Yes

Bootstrap                     No                 Yes              No          Yes
Observations                 17217              17217            17217       17217
For Probit estimation, marginal effects are displayed.
Number of replications with bootstrap standard errors are 100.

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                           70
