                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ASSET PRICES AND UNEMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS

                                      Patrick J. Kehoe
                                       Pierlauro Lopez
                                      Virgiliu Midrigan
                                       Elena Pastorino

                                     Working Paper 26580
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26580


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




We are indebted to Fernando Alvarez and Gabriel Chodorow-Reich for providing insightful
discussions of our paper. We are also grateful to Bernardino Adao, Mark Aguiar, Andy Atkeson,
John Campbell, John Cochrane, Harold Cole, Isabel Correia, Alessandro Dovis, Bob Hall, Gary
Hansen, Erik Hurst, Dirk Krueger, Per Krusell, Lars Ljungqvist, Massimiliano Pisani, Morten
Ravn, Richard Rogerson, Edouard Schaal, Robert Shimer, Pedro Teles, Gianluca Violante, and
Jessica Wachter for invaluable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Patrick J. Kehoe, Pierlauro Lopez, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Prices and Unemployment Fluctuations
Patrick J. Kehoe, Pierlauro Lopez, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino
NBER Working Paper No. 26580
December 2019
JEL No. E0,E2,E24,E32,J6,J63,J64

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent critiques have demonstrated that existing attempts to account for the unemployment
volatility puzzle of search models are inconsistent with the procylicality of the opportunity cost of
employment, the cyclicality of wages, and the volatility of risk-free rates. We propose a model
that is immune to these critiques and solves this puzzle by allowing for preferences that generate
time-varying risk over the cycle, and so account for observed asset pricing fluctuations, and for
human capital accumulation on the job, consistent with existing estimates of returns to labor
market experience. Our model reproduces the observed fluctuations in unemployment because
hiring a worker is a risky investment with long-duration surplus flows. Intuitively, since the price
of risk in our model sharply increases in recessions as observed in the data, the benefit from
creating new matches greatly drops, leading to a large decline in job vacancies and an increase in
unemployment of the same magnitude as in the data.

Patrick J. Kehoe                                  Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Stanford University                               New York University
579 Jane Stanford Way                             19 W. 4th St.
Stanford, CA 94305                                New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                          and NBER
patrickjameskehoe@gmail.com                       virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu

Pierlauro Lopez                                   Elena Pastorino
Bank of France                                    Hoover Institution
Macro-Finance Division                            and Stanford University
31 rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs                    579 Jane Stanford Way
75049 Paris, France                               Stanford, CA 94305
pierlaurolopez@gmail.com                          and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
                                                  epastori@stanford.edu
    The most important theoretical contribution of search models of the labor market to the study of
business cycles is that they interpret involuntary unemployment as an equilibrium phenomenon. The key
insight of these models is that involuntary unemployment can arise even without any assumed ine¢ ciencies
in contracting, such as rigid wages. Despite its great promise, though, Shimer (2005) showed that the
textbook search model cannot generate anywhere near the observed magnitude of the uctuations in the
job-...nding rate and unemployment in response to shocks of plausible magnitude. A large body of work
has attempted to address the unemployment volatility puzzle of Shimer (2005) but, as we later discuss,
recent critiques of it have demonstrated that existing attempts are inconsistent with the procylicality of
the opportunity cost of employment, the cyclicality of wages, and the volatility of risk-free rates. Hence,
in this precise sense, the puzzle has not been solved.
    In this paper, we propose a model that reproduces these features of the data, respects the original
promise of search models by generating involuntary equilibrium unemployment without relying on ine¢ cient
contracting or wage rigidities, and solves this puzzle. We do so by allowing for preferences that give rise
to time-varying risk over the cycle, as consistent with observed uctuations in asset prices, and for human
capital accumulation on the job, in line with the documented growth of wages with labor market experience.
Throughout most of our analysis, we abstract from physical capital simply to help illustrate our mechanism
in the most transparent way. Unlike much of the literature, however, we also incorporate physical capital
and show that such an augmented model matches key observed patterns of job-...nding rates, unemployment,
output, investment, and asset prices. In contrast to the classic separation result by Tallarini (2000) that
introducing asset pricing preferences into an otherwise standard real business cycle model has no e¤ect on
the uctuations of real variables, here introducing such preferences, either in the presence or absence of
physical capital, creates an important interaction between the ...nancial and real sides of an economy and
greatly ampli...es uctuations.
    The main idea of our model is that hiring a worker is akin to investing in an asset with risky dividend
ows that have long durations. In our model, as in the data, the price of risk rises sharply in downturns.
Owing to human capital accumulation on the job, the surplus ows to matches between workers and ...rms
have long durations and so are sensitive to variation in the price of risk. These two features then imply that
the bene...ts of creating matches sharply drop in downturns, which induces ...rms to substantially reduce
the number of job vacancies they create and, correspondingly, leads unemployment to increase as much as
it does in the data.
    Our model adds to the textbook search model two simple ingredients that make it consistent with
two salient aspects of the data: asset prices uctuate over the cycle and wages increase with experience
in the labor market. To accommodate the ...rst feature, we augment the textbook model with preferences
that generate time-varying risk, whereas to accommodate the second feature, we introduce human capital
accumulation on the job and depreciation o¤ the job. We choose parameters for preferences and technology
that are consistent with key observed properties of asset prices and wage-experience pro...les, and show that
the resulting allocations display uctuations in unemployment that are as large as those in the data.
    We generate involuntary unemployment without exploiting ine¢ ciencies in wage contracting by fo-
cusing on labor market outcomes generated by a competitive search equilibrium. We ...nd this concept
appealing relative to common bargaining concepts such as Nash bargaining or alternating o¤er bargaining,
since these bargaining schemes give rise to ine¢ cient wage setting unless the parameters that characterize
the bargaining process are chosen appropriately. For instance, a well-known result is that equilibrium
wage setting under Nash bargaining is e¢ cient and, hence, leads to the same outcomes that arise under
competitive search when the Hosios'
                                  s (1990) condition holds. Similarly, we show that under alternating
o¤er bargaining, wage setting is e¢ cient when two conditions hold: the exogenous rate of breakdown of
bargaining between workers and ...rms converges to one and the probability that a worker makes the ...rst
o¤er equals the elasticity of the matching function with respect to the measure of unemployed workers. In
light of these results, we can interpret our work as focused on economies with e¢ cient wage setting, which
can be achieved under any of the three most popular wage determination schemes: competitive search
and, as long as suitably parametrized, Nash bargaining and alternating o¤er bargaining. In this sense, our
results do not depend on the speci...c wage determination scheme chosen.
    We argue that our two simple ingredients are necessary to account for the observed volatility of
unemployment. In particular, we show that if we retain human capital accumulation but replace our asset
pricing preferences with standard constant relative risk aversion preferences, then the model generates
no uctuations in unemployment regardless of the degree of human capital accumulation. Conversely, if
we retain our asset pricing preferences but abstract from human capital accumulation, then the model
generates almost no uctuations in unemployment.
    We turn to providing further details about our two additional ingredients. Consider ...rst preferences.
The asset pricing literature has developed several classes of preferences and stochastic processes for ex-
ogenous shocks that give rise to large increases in the price of risk in downturns and, hence, reproduce
key features of the uctuations of asset prices. As Cochrane (2011) emphasizes, all of these preferences
and shocks generate variation in asset prices from variation in risk premia, as observed in the data. To
emphasize that our results are robust to the speci...c details of the preferences and shocks that achieve this
variation, we show that our results hold for a wide range of the most popular speci...cations.
    Speci...cally, we begin with a variant of the original preferences in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) in
which we eliminate the resulting consumption externality by making the habit in consumption a function
of exogenous shocks. We ...nd these preferences appealing because they incorporate the idea that the price
of risk rises in recessions in a transparent and intuitive way. Moreover, as we show, their implications
for asset prices and unemployment uctuations are nearly identical to those of the original preferences in
Campbell and Cochrane (1999). We use this model as a baseline for later comparisons.
    We then examine two versions of the preferences in Epstein and Zin (1989). We ...rst consider a
version of the long-run risk setup of Bansal and Yaron (2004) with preferences as in Epstein and Zin

                                                      2
(1989), modi...ed along the lines suggested by Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, Luo, and Rebelo (2016) and
Schorfheide, Song, and Yaron (2018). Albuquerque et al. (2016) show that a model that combines long-
run risk with preference shocks replicates well observed features of asset prices. Following the setup of
Wachter (2013), we next consider the preferences in Epstein and Zin (1989) augmented with a time-varying
risk of disasters, de...ned as episodes of unusually large decreases in aggregate consumption triggered by
marked declines in productivity. Finally, given the large class of reduced-form asset pricing models that
simply specify a discount factor as a function of shocks, we explore a version of the a¢ ne discount factor
model of Ang and Piazzesi (2003) as a representative model in this class. We show that all these preference
and shock structures imply analogous results for the volatility of the job-...nding rate and unemployment.
    Consider now human capital accumulation. For simplicity, we ...rst assume that a worker'
                                                                                           s human
capital grows at a constant rate during employment and depreciates at a constant rate during unemploy-
ment, and that market production, home production, and the cost of posting job vacancies are proportional
to human capital. This formulation is particularly convenient because it implies that only the aggregate
levels of human capital of employed and unemployed workers, rather than their distributions, need to be
recorded as state variables. We also consider a more general formulation of the human capital process in
which the rates of human capital accumulation and depreciation are stochastic and vary with the level of
acquired human capital. This richer version of the model better reproduces the shape of empirical wage-
experience pro...les and yields very similar results to our baseline for the volatility of the job-...nding rate
and unemployment.
    After exploring the quantitative results implied by alternative preferences and parametrizations of
the human capital process, we characterize the mechanism generating them. Namely, we show that the
job-...nding rate is proportional to the present value of the surplus ows from matches between workers
and ...rms. This present value, in turn, can be expressed as a weighted average of the prices of the stream
of dividends from each match that are proportional to aggregate productivity, in short claims to aggregate
productivity, at each time horizon. In this weighted average, the weights are determined by the degree of
human capital accumulation whereas the prices of these claims are determined by the chosen preference and
shock structure. We refer to these claims as strips. Intuitively, since human capital accumulation increases
the duration of surplus ows, the greater is the amount of human capital accumulation, the slower is the
decay of the surplus ows from matches between workers and ...rms, and, hence, the slower is the decay of
the weights attached to strips at di¤erent horizons. The slow rate of decay of these weights is key to the
ampli...cation of aggregate shocks, since it a¤ects the sensitivity of the job-...nding rate to changes in the
exogenous stochastic state of an economy.
    Formally, we prove that the volatility of the job-...nding rate can be well approximated by a single
                                        P
su¢ cient statistic: a weighted average, n ! n bn (st ), over di¤erent horizons fng of the elasticity bn of
the price of a strip with respect to the relevant exogenous stochastic state st of an economy, multiplied



                                                       3
by the volatility     (st ) of this state.1 The weights f! n g decay more slowly the greater is human capital
accumulation and the elasticity bn increases with n so that strips become more sensitive to the exogenous
state as the horizon of a strip increases. We show that although the ...ve asset pricing models we consider
may have very di¤erent implications for various asset pricing moments, their implications for the volatility of
unemployment only depend on our single su¢ cient statistic, which captures the volatility of the exogenous
state, the implied variation in the price of risk, and the persistence of the returns to hiring workers. This
result thus explains why all of these structures generate similar results for unemployment volatility.
       The su¢ cient statistic that we identify further allows us to characterize the roles of time-varying risk
and human capital accumulation in our results. First, we show that when there is little time-varying risk,
the elasticity bn of the price of strips with respect to the state st is small regardless of the horizon n. Hence,
the model cannot generate much volatility in the job-...nding rate regardless of the weights f! n g on strips.
Second, we show that when there is little or no human capital accumulation on the job, the weights f! n g
are nearly all concentrated on short-horizon claims, which display little volatility under all of our asset
pricing speci...cations. Therefore, the model cannot generate much volatility in the job-...nding rate in this
case either. Only when both features are present-- time variation in the price of risk and human capital
accumulation-- can our model produce sizable volatility in the job-...nding rate and unemployment.
       We conclude by considering two extensions. First, we examine a more general model of human capital
along the lines of Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998, 2008) and Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019), which
captures the feature that observed wages grow faster at low levels than at high levels of labor market
experience. We show that our results are robust to accounting for this aspect of the data. Second, we
augment our model with physical capital, subject to adjustment costs along the lines of Jermann (1998),
and construct a business cycle model in the spirit of the seminal work by Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996).
As Shimer (2005) points out, though, both of these papers miss a key feature of the data, namely, the
strong negative correlation between vacancies and unemployment. Our model, instead, not only reproduces
this feature but also matches salient patterns of job-...nding rates, unemployment, output, investment, and
asset prices in the data.
       Based on these results, we view our exercise as a promising ...rst step toward developing an integrated
theory of real and ...nancial business cycles.

1. Relation to the Literature
       Our model relies on a fundamentally di¤erent mechanism than that isolated by Ljungqvist and Sar-
gent (2017) in their survey of early attempts to solve the unemployment volatility puzzle, which include
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008), Hall and Milgrom (2008), and Pissarides (2009). In particular, Ljungqvist

   1
    Note that st is the surplus consumption ratio for Campbell-Cochrane preferences with exogenous habit, the long-run risk
factor for Epstein-Zin preferences with long-run risk, the probability of a disaster for Epstein-Zin preferences with time-varying
disaster risk, and an abstract one for the Ang-Piazzesi discount factor. For Campbell- Cochrane preferences with external
habit, the same statistic applies but the relevant stochastic state, namely, the surplus consumption ratio, is not exogenous.


                                                                4
and Sargent (2017) show that all of these attempts feature an acyclical opportunity cost of employment. In
a recent paper, though, Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) critique this literature and argue that
none of these attempts are consistent with the data. Namely, these authors document that the opportunity
cost of employment in the data is procyclical with an elasticity close to one rather than, as assumed in
these models, zero. These authors further demonstrate that once these models are made consistent with
this aspect of the data, they are incapable of producing volatile unemployment.
    A second critique of the literature that has addressed this puzzle by introducing some form of wage
rigidity is by Kudlyak (2014). This work builds on the insight of Becker'
                                                                        s (1962) classic paper that only
the present value of the wages paid by ...rms to workers over the course of an employment relationship is
allocative for employment. Speci...cally, Kudlyak (2014) establishes that for a large class of search models,
the appropriate measure of rigidity of the allocative wage is the cyclicality of the user cost of labor, de...ned
as the di¤erence in the present values of wages between two ...rm-worker matches that are formed in two
consecutive periods. As Kudlyak (2014) estimates and Basu and House (2016) con...rm, the user cost of
labor is highly cyclical in that it sharply falls when unemployment rises. Both of these papers also argue
that reproducing the observed cyclicality of the user cost of labor is the key litmus test for the cyclicality
of wages implied by any business cycle model. Early attempts to solve the unemployment volatility puzzle
fail this test, as these authors discuss. Here we show that our model, instead, passes it.
    Finally, a third critique has been formulated by Borovicka and Borovickova (2019), who argue that
the literature is grossly at odds with robust patterns of asset prices. In contrast to existing attempts, our
model incorporates standard asset pricing preferences, which avoid counterfactual movements in risk-free
rates and risk premia. In this sense, our model overcomes this ...nal critique as well.
    The important related contribution of Hall (2017) accounts for the observed volatility of unemployment
within a model that features alternating wage o¤er bargaining, a reduced-form discount factor, and no
human capital accumulation. This paper is immune to the critique by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis
(2016) but not to those by Kudlyak (2014) and Borovicka and Borovickova (2019). In particular, as we show,
Hall (2017) relies on a parametrization of wage setting that yields highly ine¢ cient allocations associated
with a counterfactually low degree of cyclicality of the user cost of labor. Hence, in this precise sense, the
wages in Hall (2017) are much more rigid than those in the data. Moreover, Borovicka and Borovickova
(2019) show that Hall'
                     s model generates uctuations in unemployment not from time-variation in the price
of risk, as our model does, but rather from strongly countercyclical movements in the risk-free rate, which
are counterfactual. Thus, although Hall (2017) provides critical insights, it fails the litmus test of Kudlyak
(2014) and Basu and House (2016) and is subject to the critique by Borovicka and Borovickova (2019).
    Also related to ours is the work of Kilic and Wachter (2018). These authors embed a reduced-form
version of the mechanism in Hall (2017) within a model with preferences as in Epstein and Zin (1989) with
variable disaster risk. Although this model'
                                           s pricing kernel does not generate a risk-free rate puzzle, it
generates volatile unemployment by heavily relying on a form of ine¢ cient real wage stickiness. In contrast,

                                                       5
we show that variable disaster risk can generate realistic uctuations in the job-...nding rate under e¢ cient
wage setting without rigid wages, provided human capital is incorporated.
    To show that our mechanism is fundamentally di¤erent from those in the large literature discussed by
Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017) that addresses the unemployment volatility puzzle, we revisit this literature
but modify the relevant models to be consistent with the critique by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis
(2016) as well as with the insight in Shimer (2010). By this insight, if recruiting workers or bargaining
takes time away from production, then the cost of doing so is proportional to the opportunity cost of a
worker'
      s time in production. Under these assumptions on the opportunity costs of employment, recruiting,
and bargaining, we prove that the job-...nding rate and unemployment are exactly constant in response
to changes in productivity. In contrast, for the same speci...cation of these opportunity costs, our model
generates uctuations in the job-...nding rate and unemployment of the same magnitudes as in the data. In
short, our model seems to o¤er a counterexample to the claim that in matching models, "the fundamental
surplus is the single intermediate channel through which economic forces generating a high elasticity of
market tightness with respect to productivity must operate" (Ljungqvist and Sargent 2017, p. 2663). As
such, our model provides a qualitatively di¤erent mechanism for the ampli...cation and transmission of
productivity shocks.

2. Economy
    We embed a Diamond-Mortenson-Pissarides (DMP) model of the labor market with competitive search
within a general equilibrium model of an economy in which households are composed of employed and un-
employed workers and own ...rms. The economy is subject to both aggregate shocks, including productivity
shocks, and idiosyncratic shocks. We extend the DMP model to include two key features: asset-pricing
preferences that generate time-varying risk and human capital accumulation during employment. We con-
sider some of the most popular classes of asset pricing preferences. For concreteness only, we begin with a
simple one leading to exogenous time-varying risk.
    The economy consists of a continuum of ...rms and consumers. Each consumer survives from one period
to the next with probability . In each period, a measure 1          of new consumers is born so that there
is a constant measure one of consumers in the economy. Individual consumers accumulate human capital.
Firms post vacancies to hire consumers with any level of human capital they desire. Each consumer belongs
to one of a large number of families that own ...rms and insure their members against idiosyncratic risks.
    We consider ...ve speci...cations of preferences and processes for shocks that include most of the pop-
ular ones in the macro-...nance literature. We do so to emphasize that our results apply to a wide ar-
ray of speci...cations that generate quantitatively relevant asset-pricing implications primarily from time-
varying risk. These include a simple speci...cation of Campbell-Cochrane preferences with exogenous habit,
Campbell-Cochrane preferences with external habit, Epstein-Zin preferences with long-run risk, Epstein-
Zin preferences with variable disaster risk, and an a¢ ne discount factor. The ...rst four of these preference


                                                      6
speci...cations are special cases of recursive preferences of the Epstein-Zin form,
                                                                    1
                                                            1   1
(1)    Vt = (1       )u(Ct ; Ct ; S1t ) +       Et Vt1
                                                     +1
                                                            1
                                                                        ;

where      is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion and                  is the inverse elasticity of intertemporal substi-
tution. In (1), individual consumption Ct , aggregate consumption Ct , and a shock S1t , which follows an
autoregressive process that captures either an exogenous habit in consumption, an external habit in con-
sumption, or a demand shock depending on the speci...c model considered, enter the period utility function
u( ). The growth rate of the log of aggregate productivity At follows

(2)      at+1 = ga + log(S2t ) +     a "at+1            jt+1 with jt+1        P oisson(S3t );

where S2t and S3t are governed by autoregressive processes determining long-run risk and disaster risk,
respectively. The ...fth speci...cation is a reduced-form a¢ ne discount factor of the Ang-Piazzesi form. We
discuss these speci...cations in detail later on. Omitted proofs and details are collected in the Appendix.

A. Technologies and Resource Constraints
      Consumers are indexed by a state variable that summarizes their ability to produce output. The
variable zt , referred to as human capital, captures returns to experience in the labor market. A consumer
with state variable zt produces At zt units of output when employed and bAt zt units of output when
unemployed in period t. Hence, the opportunity cost of employment is bAt zt with an elasticity to aggregate
productivity of one, consistent with the ...ndings in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016). Here we
follow Hall (2017), who incorporates these ...ndings by assuming that the opportunity cost of employment is
proportional to aggregate productivity; see the discussion in Hall (2017, p. 324). We assume that aggregate
productivity follows a random walk process with drift ga given by

(3)    log(At+1 ) = ga + log(At ) +         a "at+1 ;


where here and throughout "at+1               N (0; 1). Relative to (2), here we drop S2t and S3t and thus abstract
from long-run risk and disaster risk. Newly born consumers draw their initial human capital from a
distribution n(z ) with mean 1 and enter the labor market as unemployed. After that, when a consumer is
employed, human capital evolves according to

(4)    zt+1 = (1 + ge )zt ;

and when a consumer is not employed, it evolves according to

(5)    zt+1 = (1 + gu )zt ;

where ge      0 and gu        0 are constant rates of human capital accumulation on the job and depreciation
o¤ the job. Posting a vacancy directed at a consumer with human capital z costs a ...rm                           At z in lost



                                                                    7
production in period t. This speci...cation of the cost of posting vacancies is consistent with the argument
in Shimer (2010) that to recruit workers, existing workers must reduce their time devoted to production,
which costs a ...rm lost output. Under this view, the cost of recruiting workers moves one-for-one with the
productivity of a worker engaged in market production.2 Note that scaling home production and vacancy
posting costs by z is convenient because, as we show later, it implies that all value functions are linear in
z . This scaling assumption, though, is not necessary for our results and is purely motivated by analytical
tractability and computational convenience.
      The realization of the productivity innovation "t is the aggregate event. Let "t = ("0 ; : : : ; "t ) be
the history of aggregate events at time t. An allocation is a set of stochastic processes for consumption
fC ("t )g and measures of employed consumers, unemployed consumers, and vacancies posted for each level
of human capital z ,         e(z; "t ); u(z; "t ); v (z; "t ) . For notational simplicity, from now on we suppress any
explicit dependence on "t and express these allocations in shorthand notation as fCt ; et (z ); ut (z ); vt (z )g.
The measures of employed and unemployed consumers satisfy
     Z
(6)    [et (z ) + ut (z )] dz = 1:
        z

      The timing of events is as follows. At the beginning of period t, current productivity At is realized,
...rms make o¤ers and post vacancies, and unemployed workers from the end of period t                      1 search for jobs.
Then, new matches are formed and employed consumers immediately begin to work. At the end of the
period, a fraction          of employed consumers separate and enter the unemployment pool of period t, and
consumption takes place.
      To understand the law of motion for the measure of employed and unemployed consumers, consider
unemployed consumers searching for a job at the beginning of period t with human capital z , denoted by
ubt (z ). These consumers were unemployed at the end of period t                       1, had human capital z=(1 + gu ) that
grew at rate 1 + gu to z between t                     1 and t, and survived. Therefore,
                                           z
(7)    ubt (z )             ut   1                 :
                   1 + gu                1 + gu
The term 1=(1 + gu ) that multiplies ut                    1   in (7) arises from the change of variable in the density over
z=(1 + gu ) to derive the density over z . At the beginning of period t, ...rms post a measure of vacancies
vt (z ) that targets consumers with human capital z thus creating a measure mt (ubt (z ); vt (z )) of matches,
where mt ( ) is a constant returns-to-scale matching function increasing in both arguments. The transition
laws for employed and unemployed workers'human capital are then given, respectively, by
                   (1     )                 z
(8)    et (z ) =            et       1                 +   wt ( t (z )) ubt (z )
                   1 + ge                 1 + ge

  2
    Since we maintain that productivity follows a random walk with positive drift, it would not make sense to assume that
home production b and the vacancy cost are constant, because then the ratios b=At and =At would (in a precise stochastic
sense) converge to zero and all agents would always work.



                                                                          8
and
                                              z
(9)      ut (z ) =               et   1                  + [1        wt ( t (z ))]ubt (z )       + (1          ) n(z );
                     1 + ge                 1 + ge
where       wt ( t (z ))     = mt (ubt (z ); vt (z ))=ubt (z ) is the job-...nding rate of an unemployed consumer with human
capital z and market tightness for consumers with human capital z is                                                  t (z )   = vt (z )=ubt (z ).
        To understand these expressions, consider (9). Observe ...rst that new entrants into the unemployment
pool include the measure                      et   1 (z=(1     + ge )) =(1 + ge ) of consumers with z=(1 + ge ) units of human capital
in t      1 and z units of human capital in t who worked in period t                                              1, separated from their ...rms at the
end of the period (an event with probability ), and survived (an event with probability ). New entrants
into unemployment also include all newborn consumers with human capital z , (1                                                               )n(z ). Note that a
proportion 1                 wt ( t (z ))   of unemployed consumers at the beginning of period t remain unemployed.
        For later use, it is convenient to de...ne the job-...lling rate for a ...rm that posts a vacancy for
consumers with human capital z as                               f t ( t (z ))    = mt (ubt (z ); vt (z ))=vt (z ). It follows that                         wt ( t (z ))    =
 t (z ) f t ( t (z )).       We also de...ne the elasticity of the job-...lling rate with respect to                                         t (z )   as     t ( t (z ))   =
          0                                                                                    0                          3
   t (z ) f t ( t (z ))= f t ( t (z ))       so that 1             t ( t (z ))   =      t (z ) wt ( t (z ))= wt ( t (z )).            Note that when we later
assume a Cobb-Douglas matching function, the elasticity                                          t ( t (z ))   is a constant. The aggregate resource
constraint in period t is
              Z            Z                                                     Z
(10) Ct At zet (z )dz + bAt zut (z )dz                                     At          zvt (z )dz;
                         z                           z                             z

where the terms on the right side of this constraint are the total output of the employed, the total output
of the unemployed, and the total cost of posting vacancies.

B. A Family's Problem
        We represent the insurance arrangements in the economy by assuming that each consumer belongs to
one of a large number of identical families, each with a continuum of household members, who have access
to complete one-period contingent claims against aggregate risk. Risk sharing within a family implies that
at date t, each household member consumes the same amount Ct of goods regardless of the idiosyncratic
shocks that such a member experiences. (This type of risk-sharing arrangement is familiar from the work
of Merz 1995 and Andolfatto 1996.)
        Given this setup, we can separate a family's problem into two parts. The ...rst part is at the level of
the family and determines the family'
                                    s choice of assets and the common consumption level of each member.
The second part is at the level of individual consumers and ...rms in the family. The individual consumer
problem determines the employment and unemployment status of each consumer in the family whereas the
individual ...rm problem determines the vacancies created and the matches formed by the ...rms that the
family owns.

   3                                                                                         0             0
       This is easy to see by substituting           f t( t)   =   wt ( t )= t    and      t f t( t)   =   wt ( t )     wt ( t )= t   into the expression for 1            t.




                                                                                       9
        We begin with the simplest and most transparent of our preference speci...cations, in which we replace
the external habit in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) with an exogenous habit. We do so in order to elim-
inate the consumption externality generated by their external habit but retain the desirable asset pricing
properties of their speci...cation. (See Ljungqvist and Uhlig 2015 for the implications of this externality.)
We show below that our speci...cation implies nearly identical results to those implied by their speci...cation.
Speci...cally, with exogenous habit a family's utility is given by
              1
              X
                      t (Ct          Xt )1
(11) E0                                         :
                                1
              t=0

In a symmetric equilibrium, each consumer'
                                         s consumption Ct equals aggregate consumption Ct and we can
de...ne the aggregate surplus consumption ratio as St = Ct                              Xt =Ct so that aggregate marginal utility is
 t                               t
     ( Ct    Xt )          =         Ct St . As in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), we specify the law of motion for the
exogenous habit Xt indirectly by specifying a law of motion for the aggregate surplus consumption ratio
St . Here we assume St is an autoregressive process with st = log(St ) given by

(12) st+1 = (1                  s) s   +      s st   +   a (st )(   at+1   Et at+1 );

where at = log(At ) and s denotes the mean of st .4 The sensitivity function                            a (st )   is de...ned as
                          1
(13)        a (st )   =     [1        2 (st          s)]1=2   1;
                          S
if the right side of (13) is nonnegative and zero otherwise. Here, as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999),
the function              a (st )    is chosen so that in any downturn induced by a technology shock, risk aversion rises
sharply but the risk-free rate does not. The pricing kernel for the economy is

                                St+1 Ct+1
(14) Qt;t+1 =                                            :
                                 S t Ct
This kernel determines the intertemporal price of consumption goods and is the discount factor used by
                                                                                                                            r t    Sr Cr
individual consumers and ...rms in the same family. Using similar notation, we let Qt;r =                                          St Ct
denote the discount factor for period r                              t + 1 in units of the period-t consumption good.
        Since each family is identical, has access to complete one-period contingent claims against aggregate
risk, and the prices of contingent claims are related in the usual fashion to the marginal rate of substitution
in (14), for notational simplicity we do not explicitly include them in the budget constraint of a family,
which can then be written as

(15) Ct + It = Wt +                     t   + Ht ;

where It are the total resources invested in new vacancies, Wt are the total wages of employed consumers

   4
     We have specialized (1) by setting = so that preferences are additively separable over time and by assuming that the
                                                                                        1
utility function does not depend on aggregate consumption Ct in that u(Ct ; St ) = St Ct     with St = S1t . An equivalent
                                                         1         t
speci...cation is obtained when the period utility is t Ct and t = St is the time-varying discount factor.



                                                                               10
of the family,  is the ow of pro...ts from the ...rms the family owns, and Ht is the total home production
                        t
                                                                  R                         R
of unemployed consumers of the family. In equilibrium, It = At zvt (z )dz , Wt + t = At zet (z )dz , and
        R
Ht = bAt zut (z )dz .
        Note for later that the risk-free rate Rf t = 1 + rf t in this economy, namely, the return on a claim
purchased at t to one unit of consumption in all states at t + 1, is Rf t = 1=Et Qt;t+1 . More generally, the
return Rt+1 on any asset in t + 1 must satisfy the ...rst-order condition 1 = Et Qt;t+1 Rt+1 . By a standard
argument in Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), this fact implies that the (log) Sharpe ratio of any asset,
de...ned here as the ratio of the log of the conditional mean excess return on the asset, log(Et (Rt+1 =Rf t )),
to the conditional standard deviation of the log excess return,                                      t (log(Rt+1 =Rf t )),      must satisfy
           log(Et (Rt+1 =Rf t ))
(16)                                            t (log(Qt;t+1 ))     = [1 +           a (st )] t (    ct+1 );
             t (log(Rt+1 =Rf t ))

if returns are lognormally distributed.5 The right side of this Hansen-Jagannathan bound, namely, [1 +
 a (st )] t (    ct+1 ), is the highest possible Sharpe ratio in this economy, the maximum Sharpe ratio, which
is a common measure of the price of risk. As Campbell and Cochrane (1999) showed, a critical feature of
these type of preferences is that the price of risk varies with the exogenous state st so that when the state
is low, the price of risk is high, and risky investments are not too attractive. This feature of the price of
risk will prove critical to generating volatility in the job-...nding rate and so in unemployment in our model.

C. Comparison with Original Campbell-Cochrane Preferences
        The preferences with exogenous habit are very similar to those in Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
The di¤erences are that the exogenous habit Xt in the utility function (11) is replaced by the external
habit Xt in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), with a law of motion indirectly determined by the process for
the corresponding aggregate surplus consumption ratio St = Ct                                           Xt =Ct ,

(17) st+1 = (1              s) s   +   s st   + (st )( ct+1            Et ct+1 );

where st = log(St ) and the corresponding sensitivity function is (st ) =                                          1
                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                         [1    2 (st   s)]1=2     1 as long
as (st ) is nonnegative and zero otherwise. Note that the law of motion for surplus consumption (12) in
the exogenous habit speci...cation is driven by innovations in the growth rate of productivity,                                                 at , whereas
the corresponding law of motion in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) is driven by innovations in the growth
rate of aggregate consumption,                     ct . In the economy in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), consumption is

   5
       Alternatively, the same ...rst-order condition implies that the level of the Sharpe ratio for any asset return satis...es
              e           e                             e
         Et (Rt +1 )= t (Rt+1 ) =      Corrt (Qt;t+1 ; Rt +1 ) t (Qt;t+1 )=Et (Qt;t+1 )              t (Qt;t+1 )=Et (Qt;t+1 );

       e
where Rt +1 = Rt+1          Rf t+1 . Since Qt;t+1 is conditionally lognormal, the maximal Sharpe ratio in levels is
                                                      2
                          e           e                   [1+ a (st )]2 2
                                                                        t(   ct+1 )
            max     [Et (Rt +1 )= t (Rt+1 )] = fe                                      1g1=2 = [1 +       a (st )] t (    ct+1 ):
         fall assetsg


Our de...nition of the (log) Sharpe ratio implies              [1+    a (st )] t (    ct+1 ) is an exact, rather than an approximate, upper bound.



                                                                                11
exogenous so that         ct =     at and these two speci...cations are identical. In our production economy, in
contrast, consumption is not identical to productivity. As we show later, though, these two speci...cations
lead to nearly identical quantitative results. In this precise sense, one can think of our baseline model
as having either Campbell-Cochrane preferences with exogenous habit or Campbell-Cochrane preferences
with external habit.

D. Competitive Search Equilibrium
     We set up a competitive search equilibrium in the spirit of the market utility approach in Montgomery
(1991). (See also Moen (1997) and, for an extensive review of the literature, Wright et al. (forthcoming).)
Let Zt be the set of human capital levels among the unemployed in period t. Since we assume free entry, we
can think of there being a large number of ...rms that target workers with any given level of human capital
z 2 Zt .6 In each period t, there are two stages. In stage 1, any ...rm that targets workers with human
capital z commits to a wage o¤ er of Wt (z ) for the present value of payments to any worker of type z it
hires and posts vacancies for such workers. In stage 2, after having observed all o¤ers, workers of type z
choose which market to search in. A market is de...ned by (z; Wt (z )), namely, a skill level and a wage o¤er
for that skill level.7 These two stages should be thought of as occurring at the beginning of each period t
right after aggregate productivity is realized.8 Then, matches are formed, output is produced, and, at the
end of the period, consumption takes place.
     We now turn to set up and characterize a symmetric equilibrium starting from stage 2.

Stage 2: Consumers Choose Market to Search
     We start by considering symmetric histories in which all ...rms have made the same o¤ers in stage 1
of period t, so that there is only one wage o¤er Wt (z ) for each level of human capital z . We refer to the
present value of all payments to a worker with human capital z from future home production or future
employment after a match formed at t dissolves at any future date as the post-match value at t and denote
it by Pt (z ), which is given recursively by

(18) Pt (z ) = Et Qt;t+1 Ut+1 (z 0 ) + (1         )Et Qt;t+1 Pt+1 (z 0 )

with z 0 = (1 + ge )z . Of course, the total value of a new match to a worker is Wt (z ) + Pt (z ), since the
current match pays Wt (z ) over its course and the worker'
                                                         s post-match value is Pt (z ). (We decompose the
total value of a match to a worker into these two pieces to keep clear what a ...rm chooses and what a ...rm

   6
     If a ...rm targeted workers with human capital z in some period and with human capital z 0 in some other period, we would
simply count that ...rm as two ...rms: one that targets z and one that targets z 0 .
   7
     Rather than envisioning one large market with many ...rms that make the same wage o¤er, we ...nd it useful to think of
every ...rm as potentially creating its own market through its wage o¤er and of workers as freely     owing between these markets
until the value of search Wt (z ), de...ned below, is equated across them. Given a set of wage o¤ers for all markets, the associated
levels of market tightness are determined by the equality of the value of search across markets. As a convention, we interpret
two or more markets with identical human capital and o¤ers as belonging to the same market.
   8
     In a monthly model like ours, one might think of these stages as all occurring early on the morning of the ...rst day of the
month. Then, on the same day consumers and ...rms match and produce that day and for the rest of the month.


                                                                12
takes as given.) The value of unemployment Ut (z ) is given by

                                                           0
(19) Ut (z ) = bAt z + Et Qt;t+1 f         wt+1 ( t+1 (z       ))[Wt+1 (z 0 ) + Pt+1 (z 0 )] + [1        wt+1 ( t+1 (z
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                              ))]Ut+1 (z 0 )g

with z 0 = (1 + gu )z . The value of search for a worker with human capital z in market (z; Wt (z )) is

(20) Wt (z ) =      wt ( t (z ))[Wt (z )   + Pt (z )] + [1          wt ( t (z ))]Ut (z ):


       Since a ...rm needs to anticipate workers'behavior in stage 2 when it contemplates an arbitrary wage
o¤er in stage 1, we also need to determine outcomes in stage 2 for any such o¤er. Given that we focus on
a symmetric equilibrium, we need only consider asymmetric histories at the beginning of stage 2 in which
                                                                ~ t (z ).
all ...rms but one have o¤ered Wt (z ) and one has o¤ered, say, W
     Consider then markets (z; Wt (z )) and (z; W    ~ t (z )). The tightness t (z ) of market (z; Wt (z )) satis...es
the free-entry condition de...ned below in (24). The tightness ~t (z ) of market (z; W    ~ t (z )) is determined as
follows. As long as the wage o¤er W ~ t (z ) is su¢ ciently attractive, workers    ow between markets (z; Wt (z ))
        ~ t (z )) until the value of search in the two markets is equated. Hence, ~t (z ) is determined by the
and (z; W
worker participation constraint W   ft (z ) = Wt (z ), which can be written as

(21)        ~         ~
         wt ( t (z ))[Wt (z )   + Pt (z )] + [1         ~
                                                    wt ( t (z ))]Ut (z )     =   wt ( t (z ))[Wt (z )   + Pt (z )] + [1           wt ( t (z ))]Ut (z )

     ft (z ) de...ned by the left side of this equality. By the one-shot deviation principle, we have maintained
with W
that after period t, regardless of whether a worker accepts the o¤er Wt (z ) in market (z; Wt (z )) or the o¤er
W                       ~ t (z )), the worker takes as given the same set of present values fUr (z )g1 and
 ~ t (z ) in market (z; W
                                                                                                        r=t
so fPr (z )g1
            r=t to be received in any period r from a combination of future home production and future
employment. Note for later that if a ...rm makes the symmetric wage o¤er W   ~ t (z ) = Wt (z ), then by the
participation constraint (21), the tightness ~t (z ) of market (z; W
                                                                   ~ t (z )) is the symmetric one t (z ).
     If the wage o¤er W~ t (z ) is su¢ ciently unattractive, then the value of search in market (z; W     ~ t (z )) is
strictly lower than that of search in market (z; Wt (z )), even if a worker with human capital z ...nds a job
in market (z; W   ~ t (z )) with probability one. This situation occurs when the wage o¤er W   ~ t (z ) is so low that
Wt (z ) > W~ t (z ) + Pt (z ). As a result, no workers search in such a market and f t (~t (z )) is zero-- clearly, it
is pointless for a ...rm to make an o¤er that attracts no workers. Then, we can think of workers'optimal
search strategies as specifying the behavior that ...rms in stage 1 anticipate will determine the tightness
~t (z ) of market (z; W
                      ~ t (z )) from any o¤er W
                                              ~ t (z ) such that Wt (z ) W
                                                                         ~ t (z ) + Pt (z ). Finally, at the end of
stage 2 of period t, each family consumes Ct .

Stage 1: Firms Choose Contingent Wage O¤ ers and Post Vacancies
       Consider the problem of any given ...rm targeting a worker with human capital z in stage 1 of period
t with state "t and current productivity At = A("t ). To set up this problem, given that we focus on a
                                                                         ~ t (z ) when all other ...rms that
symmetric equilibrium, we allow a ...rm to choose any possible wage o¤er W



                                                                        13
target workers with human capital z make the symmetric wage o¤ er Wt (z ).
       Consider market (z; Wt (z )). Any ...rm targeting a worker of type z 2 Zt incurs the cost At z to post
a vacancy. Denote by Yt (z ) the present value of output produced by a match between a ...rm and a worker
of type z and let z 0 = (1 + ge )z . Since a match dissolves with exogenous probability , the present value
Yt (z ) can be expressed recursively as

(22) Yt (z ) = At z + (1                  )Et Qt;t+1 Yt+1 (z 0 ):

Given a wage o¤er Wt (z ) for workers of type z , the value of a vacancy aimed at such workers is

(23) Vt (z ) =               At z +     f t ( t (z ))[Yt (z )       Wt (z )] + [1     f t ( t (z ))]Et Qt;t+1 Vt+1 (z ):


Note that the last term in (23) captures the idea that if a ...rm is unsuccessful in hiring a worker in market
z in period t, then the ...rm can search again in period t + 1. Free entry into market (z; Wt (z )) implies that
Vt (z ) = 0 for any t and z so that

(24)      At z =       f t ( t (z ))[Yt (z )      Wt (z )]:

    Consider now the problem of a ...rm choosing an o¤er W    ~ t (z ) possibly di¤erent from Wt (z ). We use the
speci...cation of workers'behavior in stage 2 to derive the tightness ~t (z ) associated with market (z; W ~ t (z ))
and restrict attention to serious o¤ ers, namely, o¤ers that satisfy

(25) Wt (z )           ~ t (z ) + Pt (z )
                       W

and hence lead to a positive job-...lling rate, as discussed earlier. When a ...rm makes a (serious) o¤er of
W~ t (z ), the value of a vacancy is

     ~t (z ) =
(26) V                       At z +        ~
                                        f t ( t (z ))[Yt (z )
                                                                    ~ t (z )] + [1
                                                                    W                     ~                     e
                                                                                      f t ( t (z ))]Et Qt;t+1 Vt+1 ((1     + ge )z );

where           ~ determined by the worker participation constraint (21) from wt (~t (z )), is the job-...lling
           f t ( t (z )),
                   ~ t (z )). The problem of a ...rm that posts a vacancy for a worker of type z is then
rate in market (z; W

(27)         max             ~t (z );
                             V
         ~ t (z );~t (z )g
        fW

subject to the participation constraint (21) and the serious o¤er constraint (25). Taking the ...rst-order
conditions for this problem and using the free-entry condition for period t + 1, namely, Vt+1 (z ) = 0, gives
          0 ~                                             0 ~
          f t ( t (z ))                 ~ t (z )] =       wt ( t (z ))    ~ t (z ) + Pt (z )
(28)                      [Yt (z )      W                                [W                    Ut (z )]:
               ~
          f t ( t (z ))
                                                                ~
                                                          wt ( t (z ))

In a symmetric equilibrium, this condition becomes
          0                                               0
          f t ( t (z ))                                   wt ( t (z ))
(29)                      [Yt (z )      Wt (z )] =                       [Wt (z ) + Pt (z )    Ut (z )]
          f t ( t (z ))                                   wt ( t (z ))

for all ...rms. Note that this ...rst-order condition, which determines                                    t (z )   given the values Yt (z ), Wt (z ),


                                                                                14
Pt (z ), and Ut (z ), is the key condition that guarantees e¢ ciency of a competitive search equilibrium. A
simple way to see this result is to note that if we multiply both sides of (29) by                                          t (z ),   and use   t ( t (z ))   =
            0                                                                        0
   t (z )   f t ( t (z ))= f t ( t (z ))   and 1         t ( t (z ))   =    t (z )   wt ( t (z ))= wt ( t (z )),   then this condition is equivalent
to the Hosios condition for Nash bargaining, which in turn implies e¢ ciency.

E. Equilibrium: De...nition and Characterization
     A collection of state-contingent sequences fCt ; Qt;t+1 ; St g1
                                                                   t=0 and state- and z -contingent sequences
fWt (z ); Pt (z ); Ut (z ); Wt (z ); Yt (z ); Vt (z ); t (z ); et (z ); ut (z ); vt (z )g1
                                                                                         t=0 is a competitive search equilibrium if:
i) for each t, taking as given Pt (z ), Ut (z ), Wt (z ), Yt (z ), Vt (z ), and Qt;t+1 , the wage o¤er Wt (z ) and
market tightness             t (z )   solve the ...rm'
                                                     s problem (27), ii) the collection of state-contingent sequences
fPt (z ); Ut (z ); Wt (z ); Yt (z ); Vt (z )g1
                                             t=0 satisfy the valuation equations (18), (19), (20), (22), and (23), iii)
the law of motions for employment and unemployment satisfy (8) and (9), iv) the free-entry condition (24)
holds, v) the resource constraint (10) holds, and vi) the pricing kernel fQt;t+1 g satis...es (14).
     Notice that our ...rst four preference structures satisfy this de...nition and only di¤er in the form of the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution that de...nes the stochastic discount factor of the family in (14).
In contrast, the reduced-form a¢ ne discount factor simply posits a discount factor that is not derived from
marginal utility. For that speci...cation, we de...ne a competitive search equilibrium given fQt;t+1 g and the
same de...nition applies, but we simply drop condition vi ).
     We turn now to characterizing equilibrium. We ...rst show that since market production, home pro-
duction, and the cost of posting vacancies all scale with z , all equilibrium value functions are linear in
z and market tightness, job-...nding rates, and job-...lling rates are independent of z . In establishing this
result, we let Yt denote Yt (1) and use similar notation for the remaining values.

Lemma 1 (Linearity of Competitive Search Equilibrium). In a competitive search equilibrium, labor market
tightness      t (z ),   the job-...nding rate           wt ( t (z )),     and the job-...lling rate        f t ( t (z ))   are independent of z , and
values are linear in z in that Yt (z ) = Yt z , Ut (z ) = Ut z , Pt (z ) = Pt z , and Wt (z ) = Wt z .

     This result immediately implies that to solve for equilibrium values, we do not need to record the
measures et (z ) and ut (z ) but, rather, only the aggregate human capital of employed and unemployed
                          R                       R
workers given by Zet = zet (z )dz and Zut = zut (z )dz . Integrating (8) and (9) gives the transitions
laws for the aggregate human capital of employed and unemployed workers,

(30) Zet =          (1        ) (1 + ge ) Zet       1   +       wt (1    + gu ) Zut     1;



(31) Zut =               (1 + ge ) Zet     1   + (1            wt ) (1   + gu ) Zut     1    +1     ;

which can be used to express the aggregate resource constraint as

(32) Ct         At Zet + bAt Zut               At       t (1   + gu )Zut     1;



                                                                                  15
                                                                              R
where we have used that aggregate vacancy costs satisfy Zvt =                     zvt (z )dz =        t (1   + gu )Zut   1.   In light of
Lemma 1, we denote the job-...nding rate and the job-...lling rate by                 wt   and    f t,   respectively.
       The next proposition establishes that for our ...ve speci...cations of preferences, namely, Campbell-
Cochrane preferences with exogenous habit, Campbell-Cochrane preferences with external habit, Epstein-
Zin preferences with long-run risk, Epstein-Zin preferences with variable disaster risk, and reduced-form
preferences summarized by an a¢ ne discount factor, the allocations are constrained e¢ cient in that they
solve the following restricted planning problem, namely, given the process for the date-zero discount factors
fQ0;t g from the competitive search equilibrium and the initial conditions for aggregate human capital Ze                                  1
                                                            P
and Zu 1 , the allocations fCt ; Zet ; Zut ; t g maximize E0 1
                                                             t=0 Q0;t Ct subject to (30)-(32).


Proposition 1. For all ...ve speci...cations of preferences, competitive search equilibrium allocations solve
the restricted planning problem.

       The idea behind this result is that since the competitive search wage setting mechanism leads to an
e¢ cient labor market equilibrium given the pricing kernel, the equilibrium is e¢ cient conditional on the
consumption process. There are several features to notice about this characterization. First, it holds even
for Campbell-Cochrane preferences, which lead to consumption externalities. Thus, this result shows the
precise sense in which the search-side of the model implies a type of e¢ cient wage setting and so constrained
e¢ ciency. Second, for the a¢ ne discount factor speci...cation of preferences, the precise statement of this
result is that allocations in a competitive search equilibrium given fQt;t+1 g solve this problem, where fQ0;t g
in the restricted planning problem are implied by the equilibrium fQt;t+1 g as Q0;t = Q0;1 : : : Qt                           1;t .   Third,
it is easy to show that for Campbell-Cochrane preferences with exogenous habit, Epstein-Zin preferences
with long-run risk, and Epstein-Zin preferences with variable disaster risk, equilibrium allocations not only
solve this restricted planning problem, but also solve a standard planning problem of maximizing utility--
rather than the present value of consumption given a discount factor-- subject to the same constraints and,
hence, are e¢ cient. Proposition 1 will prove helpful to shed light on the mechanism underlying our results.
Speci...cally, it will allow us to isolate the contributions of movements in the discount factor and human
capital in generating uctuations in the job-...nding rate and unemployment.

F. Characterizing the Job-Finding Rate
       Consider now the ...rst-order conditions for the restricted planning problem given by

(33)     et   = At + (1 + ge )Et Qt;t+1 (1       )   et+1   +    ut+1   ;


(34)     ut   = bAt + (1 + gu )Et Qt;t+1      t+1 wt+1 et+1     + 1         t+1 wt+1       ut+1   ;


(35)     At = (1       t ) f t ( et   ut );




                                                                16
where        et   and            ut   are the multipliers associated with the transition laws for the aggregate human capital
of employed and unemployed workers, (30) and (31), and so describe the shadow values of increasing the
stocks of human capital of employed and unemployed workers by one unit. Conditions (33) to (35) are
similar to those that arise in random search models. In particular, equation (33) is analogous to the sum of
the value of an employed worker and the value of an employing ...rm, (34) is analogous to sum of the value of
an unemployed worker and the value of an unmatched ...rm, and (35) is analogous the free-entry condition
in those models. The key di¤erence is that in our competitive search equilibrium, the planner takes into
account the impact of vacancy creation on job-...nding and job-...lling rates and, hence, internalizes the
search externality generated by ...rms posting vacancies. We can rewrite (35) as
                                               1                   et         ut
(36) log(          wt )    =          +                   log                       ;
                                                                        At
using that the job-...lling rate                          ft   and the job-...nding rate              wt   are determined by the Cobb-Douglas match-
                                                                                                                                        1
ing function m(u; v ) = Bu                           v1         we use in our quantitative analysis, which implies that                 ft   = B   wt .

Expression (36) makes it clear that the job-...nding rate                                             wt   is completely determined, up to constants,
by the value                et            ut   of hiring a worker relative to productivity, At . In turn, given fQt;t+1 g, the values
 et   and         ut   are solutions to the dynamical system determined by (33) and (34).
       To develop intuition for the solution to this system, we consider an approximation to it in which we
ignore the variation in future job-...nding rates (                                      ws   =   w   for s > t) and, after imposing the appropriate
limiting condition, solve the dynamical system forward to obtain
      2 3              2                                  3n 2 3
               X1
         et             (1 + g e )(1  )      (1 + g e )       1
(37) 4 5 =           n4                                   5 4 5 Et Qt;t+n At+n :
         ut    n=0        (1 + gu ) w   (1 + gu )(1     w)    b

It is apparent from (37) that the value                                  et        ut   of hiring a worker on the right side of (36) depends on the
present value of aggregate productivity. This value can be expressed as the present value of the surplus
ows from a match between a worker and a ...rm, namely,
                                  1
                                  X
(38)        et         ut   =              Et Qt;t+n vt+n ;
                                  n=0
                                      n            n
where vt+n = (c`                      `   + cs     s )At+n      is the surplus ow in period t + n from a match formed in period t
and     `   and        s    are the large and small roots of the vector di¤erence equation given by (33) and (34) with
corresponding weights c` and cs derived below. Observe that the surplus ow vt+n in period t + n is
proportional to productivity in that period. The present value of these ows in (38) decays with the length
of time since a match is formed, because an employed worker can lose a job and an unemployed worker
can ...nd one. Critically, as we elaborate below, the present value of these ows decays more slowly the
larger is the growth of human capital when a consumer is employed and the larger is the decay of human
capital when a consumer is unemployed. The persistence that the presence of human capital imparts to
surplus ows will imply that these ows have long durations. This feature will prove critical in amplifying


                                                                                           17
the impact of any aggregate shock on the labor market.

3. Quanti...cation
       We next describe how we choose parameters for our quantitative analysis and discuss the model'
                                                                                                    s
steady-state implications. The model is monthly and its parameters are listed in Table 1: six parameters,
fb; ; ; ; ge ;    s g,   are assigned and the remaining seven, fga ;      a ; B;   ; ; S; g, are chosen to match seven
moments from the data. Following Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017), we set the home production parameter
b to 0:6 and the matching function elasticity             to 0:5. We choose the separation rate              to match the
Abowd-Zellner corrected estimate of a separation rate of 2:8% by Krusell et al. (2017) based on CPS
data.9 We set the survival probability           to be consistent with an average working life of 30 years and the
growth rate of human capital during employment, ge , to 3:5% per year. Note that taking into account an
aggregate productivity growth of 2:2% per year, this rate matches the average annual growth rate of real
hourly wages documented by Rubinstein and Weiss (2006, Table 2b) based on the 1979-2000 waves of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) for workers with up to 25 years of labor market experience.
To make clear that our results do not rely on the depreciation of human capital during unemployment,
we set gu to zero in our baseline. We later explore the sensitivity of our ...ndings to lower rates of human
capital accumulation and higher rates of human capital depreciation. As we will discuss, our results hold
for a wide range of values for ge and gu . In particular, there exists a locus of pairs (ge ; gu ) with identical
predictions for the job-...nding rate. We discuss this point further below.
       To pin down the persistence        s   of the discount factor shock, we follow Mehra and Prescott (1985),
Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Wachter (2006) and interpret dividends as claims to aggregate con-
sumption in the model and as claims to aggregate dividends from CRSP in the data. Based on this strategy,
we choose     s   to match the observed autocorrelation of price-dividend ratios. We note for later that when
we do so, the standard deviation of the price-consumption ratio is 82% of the standard deviation of the
price-dividend ratio in the CRSP data.
       We turn now to the endogenously chosen parameters. We choose the parameters ga and                          a   of the
exogenous productivity process to match the mean and standard deviation of labor productivity growth
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) for the period between January 1947 and December 2007.10 To
pin down the match e¢ ciency parameter B and the vacancy posting cost , we normalize the mean value
of market tightness         to 1, as in Shimer (2005), and then choose B and          to reproduce two moments of the
data: a mean job-...nding rate of 46% as in Shimer (2012) and a mean unemployment rate of 5:9% from

   9
      This statistic is lower than the 3:4% monthly separation rate used by Shimer (2005) due to our correction for potential
misclassi...cation. We also experimented with a recalibration in which we used the higher separation rate in Shimer (2005)
and found very similar results. As it will become evident, employment responses in our model are mainly determined by the
duration of surplus      ows from a match rather than by the length of time a worker spends in any given match.
   10
      We use the variable "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All Persons." Note that we use data starting
from 1947 to guarantee that the time series for productivity growth conforms to our time series for unemployment, which
extends from 1948 to 2007 as in Shimer (2012).



                                                             18
BLS data between January 1948 and December 2007.
       Consider next the preference parameters, f ; S; g. We choose the rate of time preference                                     and
the mean S of the state St to match the mean and the standard deviation of the real risk-free rate rf t
constructed as it      Et   t+1 ,   where it is the one-month Treasury bill rate.11 To see how the mean S of the
process governing the state St can be chosen to generate only a modest volatility in the risk-free rate, note
that when consumption is conditionally lognormally distributed, the real risk-free rate satis...es
                                                               2 [1   +               2
                                                                              a (st )]    2
(39) rf t =     log( ) + Et ct+1 + Et st+1                                                t ("ct+1 )
                                                                          2
since    ct+1     at+1 , where       t ("ct+1 )   is the conditional standard deviation of the innovation to consumption
growth. Thus, the impact of            t ("ct+1 )   on rf t is a¤ected by the level of S through               a (st )   by (13).
       Finally, as explained, by interpreting dividends as claims to aggregate consumption in the model and to
aggregate dividends from CRSP in the data, we choose the inverse elasticity of intertemporal substitution
  in the model to match the (mean) maximum Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return measured
from the CRSP value-weighted stock index, which covers all ...rms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX,
and NASDAQ.12 This strategy is similar to that used by Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter
(2006) in a very related context.

4. Findings: Job-Finding Rate and Unemployment
       Shimer (2012) has argued that uctuations in the job-...nding rate account for over two-thirds of the
observed uctuations in unemployment and that a key issue confronting existing search models is that they
generate much too little variation in the job-...nding rate. Our study is focused solely on a mechanism that
increases the volatility of the job-...nding rate. For this reason, we purposely abstract from uctuations in
the job-separation rate. Thus, the most obvious statistics to compare in the model and in the data are
those on the job-...nding rate. We turn to do so next. (We solve all versions of our model by a global
numerical strategy described in the Appendix.)
       As Table 1 shows, our model produces a volatility of the job-...nding rate (6:60) very similar to that
in the data (6:66). The autocorrelation of the job-...nding rate in the model (0:98) is also close to that in
the data (0:94). Note, though, that even if our model exactly matched the observed time series for the
job-...nding rate, it would not be able to match the observed time series for the unemployment rate, because
the separation rate in the data varies whereas it is constant in our model. To address this issue, we follow
Shimer (2012) and construct a constant-separation unemployment rate series fut g from data from the BLS
between 1948 and 2007 with law of motion ut+1 = (1                            ut ) + (1       wt )ut   where   is set as in our baseline

  11
      To compute Et t+1 , we use an updated version of the Fama and French'      s (1993) data available from Kenneth French's
website and proxy Et t+1 by the projection of monthly CPI in          ation on twelve of its lags. Fitting a univariate AR(1)
speci...cation for Et t+1 with lags up to one year is standard. See, for instance, Hur, Kondo, and Perri (2019).
   12
      Note that we would have obtained similar results by using data from the Flow of Funds, since, as shown by Larrain and
Yogo (2008), the returns measured from CRSP are highly correlated with the returns on the aggregate stock market measured
from the Flow of Funds. In our sample, this correlation is of 0:97.


                                                                 19
(2:8%), which implies an average unemployment rate of 5:9%; see Shimer (2012) for details. For brevity,
both in Table 1 and hereafter, we refer to this series as simply the unemployment rate. Table 1 shows that
our model successfully matches the volatility of this constant-separation unemployment rate in the data
(0:75) and implies a serial correlation for it (0:99) that is very similar to that in data (0:97).
    Finally, as Table 1 shows, our model also reproduces well the highly negative correlation between
job-...nding and unemployment rates:      0:98 in the model and     0:96 in the data. This result is consistent
with Shimer'
           s (2005) emphasis that unemployment rises in recessions because the job-...nding rate falls due
to a decline in vacancy creation.
    Based on all of these statistics, we conclude that our model solves the unemployment volatility puzzle.

5. Two Critical Ingredients: Time-Varying Risk and Human Capital
    Here we demonstrate the critical roles played by preferences associated with time-varying risk and
by human capital accumulation for our results. Speci...cally, without either time-varying risk or human
capital accumulation, the model does not generate volatile job-...nding or unemployment rates. As for
preferences, we show that with standard constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences, the model
implies no volatility in the job-...nding rate and unemployment. As for human capital accumulation, we
show that even if we allow for both human capital accumulation on the job and depreciation o¤ the job, the
accumulation of new human capital on the job is the main quantitative force. See Tables 2 for a summary
of the parametrization of all models considered and their implications.

A. Role of Time-Varying Risk
    To highlight the importance of time-varying risk, we contrast our results to those from a model with
CRRA preferences in which we keep all parameters the same except that we set St = 1, where utility is
          1
          X           1
                t   Ct
(40) E0                   :
                    1
          t=0

Table 2 shows that the resulting uctuations in both the job-...nding rate and unemployment are identically
zero. We can prove this result analytically.

Proposition 2. Starting from the steady-state values of the total human capital of employed and unem-
ployed workers, Ze and Zu , with preferences of the form in (40), both the job-...nding rate and unemployment
are constant.

    In interpreting this result, it is important to note that, by construction, we have abstracted from
the standard mechanism of di¤ erential productivity across sectors of search models, which implies that an
increase in aggregate productivity At raises a consumer'
                                                       s productivity in market production but leaves a
consumer'
        s productivity in home production and the cost of posting vacancies una¤ected. In our model,
instead, an increase in At increases equally a worker'
                                                     s productivity in market and home production as
well as the cost of posting vacancies. In particular, a consumer with human capital z produces At z when

                                                      20
employed and bAt z when unemployed, and it costs a ...rm At z to post a vacancy for such a consumer.
Therefore, the only e¤ect of a change in aggregate productivity in our model is that it changes the expected
discounted value of the surplus from a match scaled by current productivity, as the right side of (36) shows.
We elaborate on this point in Section 12.
                                       .

B. Role of Human Capital
       Consider next the role of human capital in generating the uctuations in the job-...nding rate and in
unemployment that we have discussed. Here we present some quantitative examples. In the next section,
we develop further intuition for our ...ndings by characterizing the elasticity of the job-...nding rate with
respect to the exogenous state st , by showing analytically how this elasticity is a¤ected by human capital
acquisition, and by illustrating the ampli...cation e¤ect of human capital by way of simple examples.
       In Table 2, we compare our baseline model to one in which we set ge = gu = 0. We refer to this latter
model as the DMP with baseline preference. In this latter model, as well as in the other variations that
we will consider in later sections, we maintain the same parametrization as in the baseline model with the
exception of the hiring cost parameter , which is chosen to ensure that the model exactly reproduces the
mean unemployment rate in panel B of Table 1. As Table 2 shows, the volatility of job-...nding rate in this
model drops to about 2% of that in the data (0:15=6:66). Thus, absent human capital, the unemployment
rate barely moves. In the last column of Table 2, we consider the baseline model with ge = gu = 3:5 so
that human capital grows at the same rate regardless of whether a consumer is employed or unemployed.
We see that in this case too the volatility of the job-...nding rate is quite low, about 2% of that in the data
(0:15=6:66). This ...nding makes it clear that it is not the presence of human capital in and of itself that is
important for our result, but, rather, the di¤erential growth of human capital on the job and o¤ the job,
which makes hiring a worker an investment with long duration payo¤s.
       The two panels of Figure 1 plot the impulse responses of the job-...nding rate and the unemployment
rate to a one-percent decrease in productivity, starting from the ergodic mean of the state variables St ,
Zet , and Zut , for two versions of our model: the baseline model and the DMP with baseline preferences.13
Clearly, the responses of both the job-...nding rate and the unemployment rate are much larger in the
presence of human capital than in the absence of it.
       So far we have considered an extreme scenario in which all of the duration in surplus ows is due
to the growth of human capital on the job, captured by ge , by setting the depreciation of human capital
o¤ the job, captured by gu , to zero. A variety of studies, though, have documented that the wage losses
following a spell of unemployment can be substantial. In light of this evidence, we now argue that we can
lower the degree of human capital accumulation on the job and, as consistent with the evidence on wage

  13
     Note that since the model is nonlinear, the response to a shock depends on the levels of the state variables and the
size of the shock. As is standard, we compute the impulse response for, say, the job-...nding rate at t + n as Et ( wt+n j"t =
  ; St ; Zut ; Zet ) Et ( wt+n j"t = 0; St ; Zut ; Zet ) with St , Zut , and Zet all set to their ergodic means.




                                                             21
losses after unemployment, correspondingly increase the degree of human capital depreciation o¤ the job
and obtain nearly identical results as under our baseline parametrization.
          For example, a conservative estimate of the degree of human capital depreciation o¤ the job is gu =
  5:7%, which matches the average wage loss of workers with fewer than 35 years of labor market experience
after up to one year of nonemployment in the PSID.14 If we set gu =                               5:7% per year, then we need only
a value of ge of 2:11% per year to generate the same standard deviations for the job-...nding rate and
unemployment as under our baseline parametrization-- in doing so, we adjust                                 to keep mean unemployment
at its value in the baseline. To make this point more generally, in Figure 2 we graph the locus of values for
(ge ; gu ) that give rise to the same standard deviations for the job-...nding rate and unemployment as under
our baseline parametrization. We trace this locus by varying ge and gu while keeping all other parameters
...xed at their baseline values except for , which we adjust to keep the mean unemployment rate unchanged.
Clearly, our ampli...cation results hold for very modest rates of human capital accumulation on the job and
depreciation o¤ the job relative to standard estimates in the literature.

6. Inspecting the Mechanism
          Here we inspect the details of our mechanism by deriving a closed-form solution for the job-...nding rate
and its dependence on the relevant exogenous state based on the simple approximation for the multipliers
 et       and   ut   in (37). We also identify a su¢ cient statistic for the volatility of the job-...nding rate that will
turn out to be common across all preference structures we will consider.
          To this purpose, recall that the surplus ow in the n-th period after a match is formed is vt+n =
    n       n                                                                                                                                    n
(c` ` + cs s )At+n and          rewrite the expected present discounted value of this ow as Et Qt;t+n vt+n = (c`                                 ` +

cs n
   s )Pnt , where Pnt            Et Qt;t+n At+n is the price of a claim to an asset that pays a one-time dividend of
At+n in period t + n. We refer to this asset as a claim to productivity in n periods or simply a productivity
strip. Next, consider the roots and the weights associated with the solution for                                   et   and     ut   in (37). To
keep the algebra simple, we set the survival probability                      = 1 so agents do not die. Then, the large root
 `    > 1 and the small root s < 1 are given by
                  1 hp                     p                      i                         1 hp                                     p            i
          ` = 1 +      (1   )2 + 4 w ge      (1              )2       and     s   =              (1         )2 + 4       w ge            (1     )2 :
                  2                                                                         2
The corresponding weights on these roots are c` = [(1                   b)(           s)   + bge ] =(   `     s)   and cs = 1         b       c` with
          (1     ) (1 + ge )      w   < 1.15 Note that these roots and weights do not depend on the utility function
or the process for technology. Combining these formulae with (36), we then have:


     14
     We computed this value of gu using the same sample used by Buchinsky, Fougère, Kramarz, and Tchernis (2010).
     15
     In the general case with d = (1 + gu ) and e = (1 + gu ) w , we obtain `;s = (1 + gu + )=2     [(1 + gu )2 + 4                             w (1 +
              1=2
gu )(ge gu )] =2, c` = [( ` d)=( `        s )] [1 b ( s d)=e], and cs = [( s d)=( `        s )] [1 b ( ` d)=e].




                                                                  22
Proposition 3. The job-...nding rate approximately satis...es
                                 "1                    #
                    1             X
                                         n      n Pnt
(41) log( wt ) = +           log     (c` ` + cs s )      ;
                                                    At
                                                n=0

where   `,   s,   c` , and cs are given above and            is a constant.

    This proposition shows that the job-...nding rate is a weighted average of the prices of claims to future
productivity. Hence, all movements in the job-...nding rate are only due to movements in the prices of these
claims. As we will show, this result applies as stated to all preferences considered here. In particular, since
                    n      n
the weights (c`     ` + cs s )   are determined solely by the search side of the model and remain ...xed as we vary
preferences, we will show that the formula for the job-...nding rate for all ...ve preferences we examine has
this form and di¤ers across models only in terms of the expression for Pnt =At , which we characterize next.
    We simplify the calculation of the terms fPnt g in (41) by approximating the growth rate of consumption
by the growth rate of productivity,              ct+1        at+1 . Under this approximation, the pricing kernel becomes
              St+1 At+1
Qt;t+1 =       St   At           . In the next lemma, we derive a risk-adjusted log-linear approximation to Pnt =At
based on a ...rst-order perturbation of the price of strips around the risky steady state; see Lopez et al.
(2017) for details. Note that since At follows a random walk process with drift and, hence, is nonstationary,
the price Pnt = Et Qt;t+n At+n grows over time whereas the scaled price Pnt =At                                        Et Qt;t+n At+n =At , which
is the price of a claim to the growth rate of productivity At+n =At in period t + n, is stationary. Therefore,
we characterize here the dependence of Pnt =At on the exogenous state st .

Lemma 2. The price of a claim to productivity in n periods approximately satis...es
             Pnt
(42) log             = an + bn (st        s);
             At
                                                                                                                   2   2 =2,
where a0 = b0 = 0, an = log( ) + (1                    )ga + an   1   + [1           bn   1    (       bn   1 )=S ]    a       and bn satis...es
                                                                  bn    1                 bn       1   2
(43) bn = (1           s)   +   s bn 1   + 1      bn    1                                              a:
                                                                  S                       S
                                                                                                                                   n
    Note that the constant an in (42) corresponds to the log of the discount factor                                                    adjusted for
productivity growth and risk, as captured by ga and                              a   respectively. The elasticity bn of the (scaled)
price Pnt =At with respect to the exogenous state st , instead, captures how this price moves with st . The
constants fan g decrease with n as long as the drift rate ga is not too large whereas the elasticities fbn g
increase monotonically from 0 to                provided that 1                  + (1          =S )    2 =S   > 0. This condition is satis...ed
                                                                             s                         a

for any reasonable parametrization of our preferences, as the variance of the innovation to productivity                                           2
                                                                                                                                                   a

is only about 0:003%.
    Since the elasticity bn increases with the maturity n of a claim, the longer is the maturity of a claim,
the more sensitive is the price at horizon n to the exogenous state st , and so the lower is the price of a
long-maturity claim relative to a short-maturity one when st < s. To understand why fbn g are upward
sloping, consider ...rst an economy without risk (                     = 0). In this case, bn equals                    (1        n)   and increases
                                                                  a                                                               s


                                                                      23
with n since        n    decreases with n. This result is due to intertemporal substitution motives. Intuitively,
                    s

when the exogenous state st is below its mean s and expected to revert to it, consumers value current
consumption more and so are willing to pay relatively more for a claim in the near future, when the state
is expected to be close to st , and relatively less for a claim far into the future, when the state is expected
to be much closer to its mean. The third term in (43) is an adjustment factor for risk. With risk, bn
still increases with the maturity n, albeit at a lower rate, because, all else equal, a precautionary saving
motive makes consumers more willing to save, which attenuates the intertemporal substitution motive just
discussed. For our purposes, the key implication of fbn g increasing with n is that the response of the
job-...nding rate to a given shock to st is larger, the larger are the weights on long-maturity claims. We
formalize this intuition in the following proposition, where (st ) denotes the standard deviation of st .

Proposition 4. Under the approximation in Lemma 2, the response of the job-...nding rate with respect to
a change in st evaluated at a risky steady-state is given by
                                      1
                                      X
     d log( wt )              1                                      ean (c` n + cs n )
(44)             =                           ! n bn   with   ! n = P1 an ` n s n ;
         dst                                                        n=0 e (c` ` + cs s )
                                      n=0

where an and bn are given in Lemma 2 and the standard deviation of the job-...nding rate (                       wt )   satis...es
                        d log( wt )
(45)     (   wt )   =               (st ):
                            dst
       Since the elasticities fbn g of claims to productivity increase with the horizon of a claim, a change in the
exogenous state st leads to a large change in the job-...nding rate only if the weights ! n on long-term claims
to productivity are large. In Figure 3, we graph the exact (scaled) prices of productivity strips against the
state using neither the assumption that                   ct+1     at+1 nor the risk-adjusted log-linear approximation of
Lemma 2. Note that the prices of longer-maturity strips are much more sensitive to changes in the state
than those of shorter-maturity ones. Moreover, as the ...gure makes clear, the log of these prices are indeed
approximately linear in the state. In Figure 4a, we show the impulse responses of these strips to a 1% drop
in productivity. Clearly, the price of short-horizon strips falls little whereas the price of long-horizon strips
falls greatly after this shock. Thus, these ...gures together with Proposition 4 illustrate that our model
generates large variations in the job-...nding rate only when the weights f! n g are su¢ ciently large for large
n. We now turn to showing that without human capital accumulation, these weights decay very quickly.
Moreover, the larger the rate of human capital accumulation during employment relative to that during
unemployment (ge              gu ), the slower these weights decay.

DMP Model with Baseline Preferences. Consider ...rst the DMP model with our baseline preferences
and ge = gu = 0. Here the constant c` on the large root is zero and the small root, referred to as the DMP
root, is given      DM P    =1               w,   where   is the separation rate,   is the elasticity of the matching function
with respect to the measure of unemployed workers, and                     w   is the worker's job-...nding rate. Thus, in the
DMP version of our model, surplus ows n periods after a match is formed follow a ...rst-order di¤erence

                                                                    24
equation with the surplus    ow at n proportional to n  DM P At+n . The weight in the analogous expression
                                        P1
for d log( wt )=dst is ! n = ean n
                                 DM P =  n=0 e
                                               an n
                                                  DM P . For standard parametrizations, the DMP root is

substantially smaller than one so that surplus ows decay quickly at a rate of about 25% per month. To
see why, note that with         DM P   = 1              w,      = 2:8%,          = 0:5, and       w   = 46%, which is the mean
job-...nding rate in the data, it follows that         DM P    = 74:2%, which amounts to a decay rate of over 25%
                                                               24
per month. Hence, after only two years, (             DM P )        is 0:08%. Correspondingly, the weights assigned to
long-maturity productivity strips are essentially zero.

Baseline Model. In our baseline model, surplus ows follow a second-order di¤erence equation whose
                                                                    n          n
solution is such that n-th ow is proportional to (c`                `   + cs   s ) At+n .   By our above formula for the roots,
the large root    `   is bigger than one and the weight c` on this root is positive so that the discounted value
of surplus ows decays slowly over time. In turn, this fact implies that the job-...nding rate in (41) assigns
sizable weights to long-maturity productivity strips, which uctuate a lot with the exogenous state st and,
hence, greatly move with current productivity shocks. In Figure 4b, we plot the cumulative weights implied
by the DMP model with baseline preferences and our baseline model without any approximation. Clearly,
the weights in the DMP model with baseline preferences decay very quickly relative to those in our baseline
model. For a sense of the magnitude of the decay of these weights with the horizon, de...ne the (Macaulay)
                            P
duration of these weights as 1
                             n=0 ! n n and note that the duration of the weights is 3:6 months in the DMP
model with baseline preferences and 11 years in the baseline model. The expression in (44) implies that
a more relevant measure of duration is the elasticity of the job-...nding rate with respect to the exogenous
                    P
state st de...ned by 1
                     n=0 ! n bn .
                                  16 For the DMP model with baseline preferences, this modi...ed duration is

0:03 and for the baseline model, it is 0:89.

7. Implications for Wages and Stock Market Returns
       Here we discuss additional implications for our model for wages and stock market returns.

A. Implications for Wages
       Our competitive search equilibrium determines the present value of wages paid to a worker over the
course of a match with a ...rm, but not the ow wage in each period. More generally, in any model with
complete markets and commitment by both workers and ...rms to a state-contingent employment contract,
many alternative sequences of ow wages give rise to the same present value of wages. Hence, in this
precise sense, our model does not have speci...c predictions for ow wages.
       Given this indeterminacy, one possible strategy to evaluating our model is to simply refrain from any
comparison between our model and the data in terms of statistics that rely on auxiliary assumptions that

  16           P1
    The term      n=0 ! n bn is a type of Macaulay duration alternative to the standard one, where instead of weighting the
horizon length n by the fraction ! n of the present value of surplus   ows accruing at that horizon at the risky steady-state, we
weight the elasticity of the price of a claim to productivity at horizon n to the state, namely, bn .




                                                                25
pin down ow wages. Another strategy, which we adopt here, is to follow the approach popularized by
Barlevy (2008) and Bagger et al. (2014), who assume that when a match is formed at t, a ...rm commits to
pay a worker each period a share %t of the period output for the duration of the match so that wt; = %t A z
is the wage paid in period           t. Accordingly, we determine ow wages in our model as follows. For any
present value of wages Wt (zt ) = Wt zt implied by our model for a match that starts at t, we choose %t so
that the present value of the wages wt;t = %t At zt , wt;t+1 = %t At+1 zt+1 , and so on, calculated using our
stochastic discount factor, exactly equals Wt (zt ). Using this approach, we examine our baseline model'
                                                                                                       s
implications for wages.
     We ...rst discuss additional evidence on wage growth in support of our parametrization of the human
capital process. We then argue that our model is robust to the critique by Kudlyak (2014) of the degree
of rigidity of the wage process implied by prominent solutions to the unemployment volatility puzzle.
Speci...cally, we ...nd that our model is consistent with the estimated degree of cyclicality of wages by
Kudlyak (2014) and, hence, does not rely on counterfactually rigid wages.
     Consider ...rst wage growth, which is the moment that pins down the rate of human capital accumula-
tion in our model. As noted, we have set the growth rate of human capital, ge , so as to match longitudinal
wage growth with experience. We now argue that the wage process implied by our model, under the para-
metrization discussed earlier, also matches the evidence on cross-sectional wage growth with experience
documented by Elsby and Shapiro (2012). These authors report that the di¤erence in the log real wages of
workers with 30 years of experience and those with 1 year of experience is 1.2 in the data.17 Our baseline
model is consistent with this untargeted statistic as it implies a di¤erence of 1.0.
     Consider next wage rigidity. As Becker (1962) emphasizes, the present discounted value of the wages
paid to a worker over the course of an employment relationship is allocative for employment, not the ow
wage. Kudlyak (2014) proves that for a large class of search models, the appropriate allocative wage is
the di¤erence in the present values of wages between two matches that start in two consecutive periods,
as captured by the user cost of labor. Intuitively, in a search model, hiring a work is akin to acquiring a
long-term asset subject to adjustment costs. Thus, by capturing the rental price of the services of a worker
potentially employed for many years, the user cost of labor is a more suitable measure of the cost of hiring
a worker than the current wage.
     Kudlyak (2014) and Basu and House (2016) measure the cyclicality of the user cost of labor as the
semi-elasticity of the user cost to unemployment and, based on NLSY data, estimate it to be highly
procyclical. These authors estimate the user cost of labor as U Ct             P DVt       (1     )P DVt+1 , where P DVt
is an empirical measure of the present value of wages associated with a match that starts at t de...ned as
               P
P DVt = wt;t + T=t+1 [ (1      )] t wt; given the ...xed discount factor (1  ), which takes into account
the real interest rate and the separation rate, where wt; is the wage in period                    t. (See Kudlyak 2014

 17
    We consider the census years of 1980, 1990, and 2000 for consistency with the panel horizon of the data of Rubinstein and
Weiss (2006), who use the 1979-2000 waves of NLSY in their analysis of wage growth.


                                                             26
and Basu and House 2016 for details.) Intuitively, this empirical measure of the user cost is the shadow
wage that would make a risk-neutral ...rm indi¤erent between hiring a worker today, who survives in a
match with probability 1       , or tomorrow. Importantly, the user cost of labor at t does not just count
the ow wage of new hires at t but also the di¤erence in the present value of wages from t + 1 on between
a worker hired at t and a worker hired at t + 1. Hence, the user cost incorporates the potential extra cost
or bene...t of committing at t to a (possibly state-contingent) sequence of wage payments from t + 1 on,
relative to waiting and hiring an identical worker at t + 1 at the present value of wages prevailing at t + 1.
If recessions are times of scarring in that workers hired in downturns not only obtain a lower wage in the
period they are hired, but also a lower wage in any subsequent period, relative to workers hired in upturns,
then it is clear that the user cost can be much more cyclical than the ow wage.
    Kudlyak (2014) and Basu and House (2016) estimate a semi-elasticity of the user cost of labor to the
unemployment rate of      5:2% and    5:8%, respectively, which implies that a one percentage point increase
in the unemployment rate is associated with an approximately 6% decrease in the user cost of labor. Hence,
the user cost is quite procyclical. When we compute the user cost in our model, we treat the empirical
measure of the user cost in Kudlyak (2014) as simply a particular statistic on the allocative wage that
takes as inputs a sequence of ow wages, fwt; g, and the ...xed discount factor (1          ) according to the
above formulae for U Ct and P DVt . Based on the ow wages constructed as described, our model implies
a cyclicality of the user cost of labor of   6:4%. Hence, the user cost of labor in baseline model, although
untargeted, is in line with the data-- it only falls slightly more than in the data when unemployment rises.
Thus, our mechanism for unemployment volatility does not rely on a counterfactual degree of wage rigidity.

B. Implications for Stock Market Returns
    In the data, ows of payments to equity or debt holders are mostly payments for physical and intangible
capital, and depend on ...rm leverage. Our simple model without either physical or intangible capital
features none of these payments and abstracts from leverage. Indeed, as the free-entry condition makes
clear, equity ows in our model are simply payments for the upfront costs of posting job vacancies. For
these reasons, we follow the simple approach used in the asset pricing literature that dates back at least to
Mehra and Prescott (1985), which interprets stocks as claims to streams of aggregate consumption-- see,
for instance, Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter (2006). Following this approach, we price claims
to streams of aggregate consumption in the model and contrast them to stock prices in the data. In Table 3,
we compare the mean and standard deviation of the excess return, their ratio, and the mean and standard
deviation of the price-dividend ratio computed from the Flow of Funds to the corresponding statistics on
consumption claims implied by our baseline model. As apparent from the table, the two sets of statistics
are indeed close. The key point of this exercise is that our baseline model has similar implications for the
prices of such claims as does the model by Campbell and Cochrane (1999), who follow the same strategy
that we have used here.


                                                      27
8. A More General Human Capital Process
       So far, we have considered a simple process of human capital accumulation such that human capital
grows at a constant rate when a consumer is employed and decays at a constant rate when a consumer
is unemployed. In the data, though, wage growth tends to decline as experience in the labor market
accumulates. To accommodate this feature of the data, we consider a more general human capital process
as in Kehoe, Midrigan, and Pastorino (2019) in the spirit of that in Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998, 2008),
whereby human capital zt evolves according to the autoregressive process

(46) log(zt+1 ) = (1          z ) log(ze )   +   z   log(zt ) +   z "zt+1


when a consumer is employed, whereas it evolves according to

(47) log(zt+1 ) = (1          z ) log(zu )   +   z   log(zt ) +   z "zt+1


when a consumer is unemployed, where "zt+1 is a standard Normal random variable. Newborn consumers
start as unemployed with general human capital z , where log(z ) is drawn from the normal distribution
N (log(zu );   2 =(1      2 )).   We assume that zu < ze so that when a consumer is employed, on average,
               z          z

human capital zt drifts up toward a high level of productivity ze from the low average level of productivity
zu of newborn consumers. Analogously, when a consumer is unemployed, on average, human capital zt
depreciates and hence drifts down toward a low level of productivity, zu , which we normalize to 1 so that
log(zu ) = 0. The parameter              z   governs the rate at which human capital converges toward ze when a
consumer is employed and toward zu when a consumer is unemployed. Hence, the higher                   z   is, the slower
human capital accumulates during employment, the slower it depreciates during unemployment, and the
slower wages grow with experience. Incorporating idiosyncratic shocks "zt+1 allows the model to reproduce
the dispersion in wage growth rates observed in the data. (See Rubinstein and Weiss 2006.)
       A consumer with human capital zt produces At zt when employed but, in contrast to our baseline
model, bAt when unemployed. Also in contrast to our baseline model, we assume that a ...rm incurs the
cost At to recruit a consumer with any level of human capital. (Recall that the earlier scaling of home
production and the cost of posting vacancies by zt was purely motivated by analytical convenience to
allow the model to aggregate.) To ensure that the job-...nding rate           wt (z )   lies between zero and one, we
assume that the matching function is mt (ubt (z ); vt (z )) = minfubt (z ); Bubt (z ) vt (z )1     g. A competitive
search equilibrium is de...ned as before with the free-entry condition for market z now given by

(48)     At     f t ( t (z ))[Yt (z )   Wt (z )];

with equality if vacancies are created in an active market z in that the measure of vacancies vt (z ) is strictly
positive. Here we focus on our baseline preferences with exogenous habit. It is easy to show that for any
of the preferences we consider, the competitive search allocations solve the restricted planning problem
described above.


                                                                     28
    We parametrize the model as before with few modi...cations. With zu normalized to one, the parameters
of the human capital process are ze ,   z,   and   z.   We target a net annual wage growth over the ...rst 10 years
in the labor market of 5:5%, based on the estimates by Rubinstein and Weiss (2006) discussed earlier, and
a di¤erence in the log real wages between workers with 30 years of experience and those with 1 year of
experience of 1:2, based on the estimates by Elsby and Shapiro (2012) also discussed earlier. These two
targets help pin down    z   and ze . We choose    z    to match the standard deviation of annual wage growth for
workers with up to 10 years of labor market experience, which is 1:2 percentage points according to the
estimates by Rubinstein and Weiss (2006) from the NLSY.
    Since, unlike our baseline model, this version of the model is not amenable to aggregation, we need
to record the measures of human capital among employed and unemployed workers, (et (z ); ut (z )), as part
of the endogenous state of the economy. This feature makes the model much more di¢ cult to solve
numerically than our baseline model. For this reason, we use a variant of the algorithm by Krusell and
Smith (1996) that, unlike in typical applications such as those in Winberry (2018), needs to accurately
capture time-varying risk in aggregate variables.
    Notwithstanding this complexity, this version of the model too successfully solves the unemployment
volatility puzzle. In particular, in Table 4 we see that the model produces only a slightly lower volatility
for the job-...nding rate and unemployment than in the data, respectively, 6:38 versus 6:66 and 0:65 versus
0:75. In this sense, our earlier results based on a simple model of human capital accumulation are robust
to extensions that capture additional features of the micro data on returns to labor market experience.

9. Toward a Real and Financial Business Cycle Model
    The well-known early business cycle work by Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996) integrated search
theory into real business cycle models. While ambitious, those contributions did not attempt to make their
models consistent with any asset pricing patterns. Since those early contributions, the subsequent literature
has mostly shied away from doing so and, instead, focused on models without physical capital. Here we
embed our mechanism into a real business cycle model with such capital retaining the preferences considered
so far. We thus construct a simple real and ...nancial business cycle model that solves the unemployment
volatility puzzle and is in line with key patterns of job-...nding rates, unemployment, output, investment,
and asset prices in the data. Note that in contrast to the classic separation result between the real and
...nancial sides of an economy by Tallarini (2000), here including time-varying risk greatly ampli...es the
uctuations of real variables.
    Consider then the following extension of our baseline model. The production functions for a consumer
with human capital z when paired with physical capital depend on whether the consumer produces goods
or vacancies in the market or goods at home. We assume that a consumer with human capital z paired with
Ket (z ) units of physical capital produces (At z )1       Ket (z ) units of goods when employed, whereas when
paired with Kut (z ) units of physical capital produces (bAt z )1      Kut (z ) units of goods at home. We follow


                                                            29
Shimer (2011, p. 100) by assuming that the activity of hiring workers uses only labor in that a consumer
with human capital z produces At z vacancies. There are costs of adjustment for the aggregate capital
stock, but for a given level of the aggregate capital stock, capital can be costlessly moved between the
market production and the home production of goods. We assume that the aggregate investment decision
is made at the end of period t        1 and that the aggregate capital stock Kt that enters period t is divided
between its two uses after the time t aggregate shock is realized.
    We consider our baseline preferences and examine the competitive search allocations that solve the
natural planning problem. It is immediate that the economy aggregates in a similar fashion as does the
economy of our baseline model. The aggregate resource constraint can then be written as

     Ct + It       (At Zet )1   Ket + (bAt Zut )1    Kut    At Zvt ;
               R
where Ket =     Ket (z )et (z )dz is the measure of physical capital used by employed consumers; we use a
                                                                         R
similar notation for Kut . Aggregate vacancy costs are given by Zvt = zvt (z )dz = t (1 + gu )Zut 1 . The
aggregate capital stock follows the accumulation law Kt+1 = (1         )Kt + (It =Kt ) Kt with Ket + Kut   Kt .
We choose      (I=K ) = [(I= K )1      1=
                                             1]=(1    1= ) as in Jermann (1998). We set   = 1=4,    = 0:10=12,
and the curvature parameter           of the adjustment cost function so that the model produces a standard
deviation of investment growth relative to consumption growth equal to that in the data.
    We turn now to the results, reported in Table 5. Note that relative to our baseline model without
physical capital, agents in this model have another way to smooth consumption, namely, by decreasing
investment in physical capital in downturns and increasing it in upturns. Doing so decreases consumption
risk and, therefore, slightly dampens the uctuations in the price of risk, which, in turn, partly reduces
the uctuations in the present value of surplus ows and so the resulting uctuations in the job-...nding
rate. Overall, though, this augmented model gives rise to a standard deviation of unemployment that is
very similar to that in the baseline model and is 95% (0:71=0:75) of that in the data.

10. Results for Alternative Preferences
    We ...rst show that we obtain quantitative results for our other preferences similar to those obtained
for our baseline preferences. We then inspect the mechanism generating them and emphasize that they
formally all work in a nearly identical way.

A. Quantitative Results for Alternative Preferences
    Here we present results for Campbell-Cochrane preferences with external habit, Epstein-Zin preferences
with long-run risk, Epstein-Zin preferences with variable disaster risk, and an a¢ ne discount factor.

Campbell-Cochrane Preferences with External Habit
    We adapt the setup of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) with external habit designed for a pure exchange
economy, discussed earlier, to our production economy. The only di¤erence from the original Campbell-


                                                           30
Cochrane speci...cation is that we replace the sensitivity function with
                        ("ct+1 ) 1
(49)     t (st )   =                [1     2 (st     s)]1=2      1:
                       t ("ct+1 ) S

Here ("ct+1 ) and           t ("ct+1 )   are, respectively, the unconditional and conditional standard deviations of the
innovations to aggregate consumption growth "ct+1 =                              ct+1   Et ct+1 . This sensitivity function is slightly
di¤erent from that in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter (2006), who consider economies in which
consumption is exogenous and exhibits a constant conditional variance so ("ct+1 )= t ("ct+1 ) = 1. When
this is the case, our sensitivity function reduces to theirs. Our production economy, instead, features
endogenous consumption with time-varying conditional volatility. The term                                     ("ct+1 )= t ("ct+1 ) in (49)
adjusts for this time-varying conditional volatility, and so helps the model generate stable interest rates
over time by ensuring that intertemporal substitution motives and precautionary saving motives almost
o¤set each other to replicate the observed volatility of interest rates. We choose the parameters of this
model to equal those of the baseline model except that we slightly adjust the mean surplus consumption
ratio from 0:2066 to 0:2087 to match the standard deviation of the risk-free rate. Tables 2 and 6 con...rm
that this model produces nearly identical results to those produced by the baseline model.

Epstein-Zin Preferences with Long-Run Risk
       We consider next a model with Epstein-Zin preferences, a slow-moving predictable component in
productivity as in Bansal and Yaron (2004), and discount rate shocks as in Albuquerque et al. (2016) and
Schorfheide et al. (2018). In particular, preferences are now given by
                                                                  1
                                                         1    1
                                1
        Vt = (1            )St Ct     +        Et Vt1
                                                    +1
                                                         1
                                                                        :

Productivity growth now has a long-run risk component xt in that

(50)     at+1 = ga + xt +            a "at+1   and xt+1 =        x xt   +    x a "xt+1 ;


where the shocks "at and "xt are standard normal i.i.d. and orthogonal to each other. The growth rate of
discount factor shocks              log(St ) =      st follows an autoregressive process given by

(51)     st+1 =        s   st +     s a "st+1 ;


where the shock "st is standard normal i.i.d. and orthogonal to the other shocks. The pricing kernel is
                                    2               3
                  Ct+1        St+1 4       Vt+1     5
     Qt;t+1 =                                     1      :
                   Ct          St     E V1      1
                                                         t t+1

       We set the model's parameters as follows. We select the mean and standard deviation of the produc-
tivity growth process to match those in the data. We choose the parameter                                s   governing the volatility of
the discount factor shock to match the standard deviation of the risk-free rate. We select a risk-aversion
coe¢ cient         of 4:3 to match a maximum Sharpe ratio of 0:45 for the consumption portfolio.

                                                                            31
    For ease of comparison with the baseline model, we set the persistence                                         s   of the process for st equal
to that in baseline, and choose the persistence                            x   of the long-run risk state xt so that the model generates
the same standard deviation of the price-consumption ratio as in the baseline model. We pick a large
elasticity of intertemporal substitution of 10 ( = 0:1). To understand this choice, note ...rst that with an
elasticity of intertemporal substitution equal to one, the volatility of the job-...nding rate is exactly zero--
see the Appendix for a proof of this claim. As noted by Kilic and Wachter (2018) in a related context,
a large elasticity parameter is not necessarily inconsistent with the available evidence of a low elasticity
of intertemporal substitution of consumption, which reects the weak correlation between consumption
growth and interest rates. Indeed, when we estimate the contemporaneous elasticity of consumption
growth with respect to interest rates based on data simulated from our model, using powers of the states
st and xt and lagged consumption growth as instruments, we ...nd a coe¢ cient of around 0:2, which is
consistent with estimates in the literature (see, for instance, Hall 1988 and Beeler and Campbell 2012).
    Lastly, note that the volatility of the productivity process                                    2   +   2   is the sum of the volatility of
                                                                                                    a       x
                                                                                                        2       2 2             2 ).
the i.i.d. component, "at , and the persistent component, xt , with                                     x       x a =(1         x      We assume that
the persistent component accounts for the same share                                  2 =( 2   +   2)   = 0:0445 of volatility of productivity
                                                                                      x    a       x

growth as that chosen by Bansal and Yaron (2004), which pins down the value of                                             x.

    In Tables 2 and 7, we show that with these preferences, the model can produce around 92% of the
observed volatility of unemployment (0:69 in the model versus 0:75 in the data respectively).

Epstein-Zin Preferences with Variable Disaster Risk
    We adopt a discrete-time version of the model of Wachter (2013) with Epstein-Zin preferences and a
slow-moving probability of rare disasters. In this case, the speci...cation of preferences becomes
                                                                   1
                                                      1        1
                     1
(52) Vt = (1       )Ct         +      Et Vt1
                                           +1
                                                      1
                                                                       :

The process for productivity growth, now driven by a discrete-valued jump component jt+1 , is given by

        at+1 = ga +    a "at+1            jt+1 ;

where the disaster component jt+1 is a Poisson random variable with intensity st , which evolves as
                                          p
(53) st+1 = (1      s )s   +   s st   +       st   s "st+1 :


    As before, we choose the mean and the standard deviation of the productivity growth process to match
those in the data. We choose an ergodic mean disaster intensity s of 3:55% per year as in Wachter (2013)
to match the mean disaster intensity in the data. We select values for the remaining parameters so as
to generate a volatility       s   for the disaster intensity of 0:0083 to reproduce the standard deviation of the
risk-free rate, and a risk aversion coe¢ cient of 2:65 to target a maximum Sharpe ratio of 0:45. For ease
of comparison with the baseline model, we choose a persistence                                     s    of the disaster intensity of 0:9966 to


                                                                                 32
generate the same standard deviation of the price-consumption ratio as in the baseline model. Lastly, as
in Wachter (2013), we set the disaster impact                                     to 0:26 and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution to
10 ( =    0:1).18
       In Tables 2 and 8, we show that the version of the model with these preferences produces only a
slightly higher volatility of unemployment in normal times (0:77), that is, in times without a disaster, than
in the data (0:75). Importantly, these results are derived under the assumption of competitive search and
thus do not rely on either ine¢ cient real wage stickiness or exogenous movements in scaled hiring costs as
in Kilic and Wachter (2018).

An A¢ ne Discount Factor
       So far we have studied consumption-based discount factors derived from underlying utility functions.
Here we argue that our results also hold for reduced-form discount factors of the type considered by Ang
and Piazzesi (2003) among others, which are speci...ed as functions of an exogenous state whose innovations
are also innovations to productivity. This approach is similar to that in Hall (2017), who also speci...es a
reduced-form discount factor. Speci...cally, we assume that
                                                         1                        2 2
        log(Qt;t+1 ) =        (   0         1 st )         (   0         1 st )     a        (   0   1 st ) a "at+1 ;
                                                         2
where the exogenous state st follows the autoregressive process

(54) st+1 =     s st   +     a "at+1


and is driven by uctuations in productivity, "at+1 . Productivity growth still follows a random walk given
by     at+1 = ga +         a "at+1 .      This discount factor is termed a¢ ne because it implies that both the risk-free
rate rf t and the conditional standard deviation of the log of the pricing kernel                                            t (log(Qt;t+1 ))   are a¢ ne in
the exogenous state st , since rf t =                      0           1 st   and       t (log(Qt;t+1 ))   =(    0      1 st ) a .   Recall from (16) that
 t (log(Qt;t+1 ))   is also the maximum Sharpe ratio for continuously compounded lognormally distributed
returns. Hence, the parameters                       0   and       1   control the mean and the volatility of the risk-free rate, whereas
the parameters         0   and        1   control the mean maximum Sharpe ratio and the volatility of the excess return.
       We investigate the quantitative properties of this a¢ ne discount factor model for the volatility of
the job-...nding rate and unemployment by keeping the parameters for the mean and standard deviation of
productivity growth, ga and                  a,   as in the baseline model and by choosing the four parameters (                                0;   1;   0;   1)

to reproduce the mean and standard deviation of the risk-free rate, the maximum Sharpe ratio, and the
volatility of the excess return. For ease of comparison with the baseline model, we choose the persistence
 s   of the exogenous state to generate the same standard deviation of the price-consumption ratio as in the
baseline model.

  18
    When we estimate the contemporaneous elasticity of consumption growth to interest rates on data simulated from our
model using powers of st and lagged consumption growth as instruments, we ...nd estimates between 0:01 and 0:5 despite the
assumption that = 0:1.


                                                                                        33
    In Tables 2 and 9, we show that this model produces about 97% of the volatility of unemployment in
the data (0:73 in the model and 0:75 in the data).

B. The Mechanism for Other Preferences
    Note ...rst that Proposition 3 holds as stated for our models with Campbell-Cochrane preferences
with external habit, Epstein-Zin preferences with long-run risk, Epstein-Zin preferences with variable
disaster risk, and the a¢ ne discount factor. The reason is simply that this result depends only on the
search side of the model and not on the discount factor that a particular preference and shock structure
implies. It turns out that an analogue of Lemma 2 holds for each of these preferences as well. For
Campbell-Cochrane preferences with external habit, the log-linear approximation in (42) holds with the
same constants given in Lemma 2 except that the constant S in bn is replaced by S . Proposition 4 then
applies as stated. For Epstein-Zin preferences with long-run risk, the analogue of Lemma 2 holds with
log (Pnt =At ) = an + bn st + cn xt , where bn =               n )=(1                          n )=(1
                                                   s (1        s        s ),   cn = (1   )(1   x        x ),   and the
constants an are given in the Appendix. For the remaining preferences, the prices of claims to strips have
the same form as (42) with constants provided in the Appendix. Then, Proposition 4 applies as stated.
    In order to provide some intuition as to how these elasticities and the associated weights vary across
models, in Figure 5, we graph these elasticities scaled by the volatility of the relevant state, and the
corresponding weights. Notice that in all these models, these scaled elasticities increase with the horizon
n. Hence, the intuition for the role of human capital is the same for all these models: the greater the degree
of human capital accumulation, the larger the weights placed on long-horizon claims, which are relatively
more sensitive to changes in the state, and so the larger the volatility of the job-...nding rate. Therefore,
as far as the volatility of the job-...nding rate is concerned, all of these models work in the same way.

11. Distinguishing Mechanisms: A Comparison with Hall (2017)
    Here we compare our model with competitive search to the model of Hall (2017) with alternating
o¤er bargaining. Our model and Hall'
                                   s model emphasize distinct mechanisms that generate volatility
in unemployment. The key mechanism in our model relies on the interaction between time-varying risk
and human capital accumulation. In contrast, the key mechanism in Hall (2017) relies on the interaction
between time-varying discount factors (rather than time-varying risk) and a type of real wage stickiness
resulting from ine¢ cient wage setting, which implies a counterfactual degree of wage rigidity.
    It has long been known that one way to reproduce the observed uctuations in unemployment is to
impose a form of wage stickiness. Intuitively, if the cost of employing a worker does not decrease much
in downturns, then ...rms' incentives to hire workers are greatly reduced and, as a result, unemployment
sharply declines. Recent evidence on the extent of actual wage rigidity, though, has challenged the relevance
of this mechanism. For instance, Kudlyak (2014) and Basu and House (2016) document that the user cost
of labor is highly procyclical. Here we show that the cyclicality of the user cost of labor in Hall (2017)



                                                          34
is much lower than that estimated by Kudlyak (2014) and Basu and House (2016). In this sense, the
allocative wage in Hall'
                       s model is much stickier than in the data.
    We then show that the alternating o¤er bargaining game of Hall (2017) and Hall and Milgrom (2008)
can support e¢ cient allocations and, hence, the competitive search allocations, as long as the parameters of
the bargaining game are chosen appropriately. The key condition to achieve e¢ ciency is that the duration
of a job opportunity, de...ned as the mean length of time available to form a match if bargaining continues
until it exogenously breaks down, be short (one month). We emphasize that the values of the parameters
of bargaining in Hall (2017) needed to reproduce the observed volatility of unemployment are very far from
those that yield e¢ cient outcomes and, according to Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2016), imply
a somewhat implausible duration of a job opportunity of over 6 years. Namely, workers and ...rms must
believe that bargaining can continue for over 6 years if no agreement is reached, for the model to produce
sizable uctuations in unemployment. In contrast, Christiano et al. (2016) argue that a reasonable length
of time for the duration of a job opportunity with such alternating o¤er bargaining is at most one quarter.

A. Alternating O¤er Bargaining
    We briey lay out the alternating o¤er bargaining game of Hall (2017). Using our notation, the
formulae for the resource constraint, the post-match value Pt , the unemployment value Ut , the present
value of output in a match Yt , the value of a vacancy Vt , and the free-entry condition in the alternating
o¤er bargaining equilibrium are identical to those in the competitive search equilibrium, namely, (10), (18),
(19), (22), (23), and (24), but without human capital accumulation in that ge = gu = 0 and z = 1 for all
consumers. The only two remaining di¤erences between Hall's model and our model is that wages in Hall'
                                                                                                     s
model are set in an imperfectly competitive rather than a competitive way and the stochastic discount
factor Qt;t+1 is an exogenous rather than an endogenous one.
    The game can be described as follows. The worker makes the ...rst wage o¤er with probability p and
the ...rm makes the ...rst wage o¤er with probability 1    p. In each subsequent period, ...rms and workers
deterministically alternate making o¤ers each period, if bargaining has not broken down, until an o¤er is
accepted. If period t is one in which the ...rm makes the o¤er, we denote the o¤er by Wf t , whereas if period
t is one in which the worker makes the o¤er, we denote it by Wwt -- these o¤ers are contingent on the
exogenous state "t , but we have suppressed their explicit dependence on "t for simplicity. In each period,
with probability   bargaining exogenously breaks down, in which case the ...rm returns to the market with
an un...lled vacancy and the worker enters unemployment. When the ...rm o¤ers Wf t in period t, then the
worker can either accept it, reject it and make a countero¤er Wwt+1 in period t + 1 if bargaining does not
exogenously break down, or abandon negotiations and immediately return to unemployment. The ...rm
has symmetric options if it is the worker's turn to make an o¤er. The cost of bargaining to the worker is
that in each period of bargaining, the worker only receives the value of home production bAt rather than
a wage, so the implicit delay cost is the di¤erence between foregone wages and home production. The cost


                                                     35
of bargaining to the ...rm is the cost    At of making a countero¤er to the worker at t; we refer to          as the
haggling cost. Thus, the three parameters that characterize this bargaining scheme are (p; ; ).
     As explained in Hall and Milgrom (2008), standard recursive logic implies that the ...rm will make the
best possible o¤er from its perspective so that the worker will prefer to accept it rather than to make a
countero¤er, in the event of no exogenous breakdown, or to abandon negotiations. Thus, the ...rm'
                                                                                                s o¤er
Wf t satis...es

(55) Wf t + Pt = max fbAt + (1           )Et Qt;t+1 (Wwt+1 + Pt+1 ) +     Et Qt;t+1 Ut+1 ; Ut g ;

where the maximum ensures that the worker does not strictly prefer unemployment today to accepting
such an o¤er. Of course, the ...rm'
                                  s o¤er Wf t must be smaller than the discounted value of output from
the match with the worker, Yt , or else the ...rm would prefer to stay idle. Thus, Wf t             Yt . In turn, the
worker will make the best possible o¤er from the worker's perspective so that the ...rm will prefer to accept
it rather than to make a countero¤er, in the event of no exogenous breakdown, or to abandon negotiations.
Therefore, the worker'
                     s o¤er satis...es

(56) Yt     Wwt = maxf      At + (1        )Et Qt;t+1 (Yt+1   Wf t+1 ); 0g;

where the maximum ensures that the ...rm does not strictly prefer to abandon negotiations rather than
to accept the o¤er. Clearly, the worker will only make o¤ers such that employment is preferable to
unemployment, that is, Wwt + Pt          Ut must hold. Since a family consists of a large number of consumers
who are independently drawn to make the ...rst o¤er in bargaining, the value to a family of the wages of
all its consumers who are bargaining at t is Wt = pWwt + (1         p)Wf t . Likewise, Wt is the value to the ...rm
of the present value of wages from bargaining.

B. The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor
     Here we show that Hall (2017) generates sizable uctuations in unemployment only under a parame-
trization of wage setting that yields very rigid and, as we will discuss in the next subsection, ine¢ cient
wages. It turns our that the critical parameter governing the stickiness of wages in Hall (2017) is the
probability of exogenous breakdown of bargaining, . It is not easy to interpret this exogenous breakdown
probability based on actual bargaining behavior because, in equilibrium, the ...rst o¤er is accepted regard-
less of the value of . We ...nd it therefore useful to translate      into units of time by calculating the mean
duration of the opportunity to bargain to form a match, if bargaining continues until it exogenously breaks
down. Correspondingly, we refer to 1= as the duration of a job opportunity during bargaining. It turns
out that the longer is the duration of a job opportunity, the stickier are real wages. In Hall'
                                                                                              s baseline
model this duration is 77 months.
     In Table 10, the third column illustrates the parameters and results in Hall (2017) reproduced from
the computer code on Hall'
                         s website. Note that when the duration of a job opportunity is 77 months,



                                                         36
the cyclicality of the user cost of labor is 0:1%. That is, after a one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate, the user cost of labor actually slightly increases. Recall that Kudlyak (2014) estimates
that after a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, the user cost of labor falls by 5:2%--
Basu and House (2016) obtain a similar estimate of 5:8%. In this sense, Hall'
                                                                            s model generates an extreme
degree of wage rigidity that is at odds with the estimated cyclicality of the user cost of labor.
    We now turn to determine the duration of a job opportunity that generates the observed degree of
wage cyclicality. As the second column in Table 10 shows, at 1= = 2:6 months, the model generates the
observed cyclicality of the user cost of labor. With this degree of stickiness, however, the model generates
1/25th of the volatility of unemployment in the data (0:03=0:75). (For this exercise, as we vary the duration
of a job opportunity, we adjust the vacancy posting cost in Hall'
                                                                s code to keep the mean unemployment
rate unchanged.)
    The idea behind Hall's mechanism is simple: in downturns the user cost of labor does not fall, even
though the present value of what a worker will produce over the course of a match greatly falls. Hence,
...rms greatly contract their vacancies in recessions. Such a mechanism, though, is inconsistent with the
evidence on the cyclicality of the user cost of labor.

C. E¢ ciency under Alternating O¤er Bargaining
    We have shown that the results in Hall (2017) depend critically on the duration of a job opportunity,
1= . When this duration is short, the model generate very small uctuations in unemployment, whereas
when it is long, the model generates large uctuations. Here we link this key parameter to the e¢ ciency
of the resulting allocations: when the duration is short, allocations are close to e¢ cient and thus close to
the competitive search ones, but when the duration is long, allocations are very ine¢ cient.

Proposition 5. When the probability p that the worker makes the ...rst o¤ er equals the elasticity of the
matching function with respect to the measure of unemployed workers, then the allocations in a sequence
of bargaining games indexed by the breakdown probabilities f n g1
                                                                n=1 converge to the constrained e¢ cient
allocations as   n   converges to one.

    Recall that an allocation is constrained e¢ cient if it solves the restricted planning problem of Propo-
sition 1. Proposition 5 directly applies to the model in Hall (2017) with an exogenous discount factor. It
also applies to all ...ve versions of our model if we modify the equilibrium concept from that of competitive
search equilibrium to that of alternating o¤er bargaining equilibrium. For our model with baseline pref-
erences, Epstein-Zin preferences with long-run risk, and Epstein-Zin preferences with disaster risk, these
allocations also converge to the e¢ cient allocations.
    This result o¤ers an additional interpretation of the results in Table 10, namely, that ine¢ ciencies are
central to the ampli...cation mechanism in Hall (2017): the lower is 1= , the more e¢ cient are the allocations
in Hall (2017), the smaller is the impact of changes in the stochastic discount factor on the volatility of
the job-...nding rate, and so the lower is the volatility of unemployment-- by Proposition 5, allocations are

                                                         37
e¢ cient when    = 1. Indeed, for Hall'
                                      s model to generate the observed volatility of unemployment, the
economy has to be very ine¢ cient in that the duration of a job opportunity has to be 6.2 years rather than
one month.
    We can shed further light on the mechanism in Hall (2017) by solving for the time-varying Nash
bargaining weights of workers and ...rms that produce the job-...nding rates in the alternating o¤er bargaining
equilibrium. Recall that the e¢ cient allocations are achieved under Nash bargaining with a constant
bargaining weight equal to , which equals 1=2 in both Hall'
                                                          s and our parametrizations. In Figure 7,
we plot this time-varying Nash bargaining weight for a worker in Hall'
                                                                     s economy. We see that in deep
downturns, the worker's bargaining weight increases sharply relative to its level in booms. Thus, a key
intuition for Hall'
                  s mechanism is that ...rms understand that during downturns workers will demand much
larger surplus shares in order to accept a job. Anticipating such behavior, ...rms drastically cut vacancies
and so unemployment drops.

12. Comparison with the Di¤erential Productivity Mechanism of Search Models
    We now show that the mechanism of our model works quite di¤erently from those of the models
addressing the Shimer puzzle examined by Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017). That literature builds in a
di¤ erential productivity across sectors mechanism. Speci...cally, it assumes that an increase in productivity
leads to an increase in the productivity of working in the market relative to both the productivity of
working at home and the cost of posting vacancies. Then, as Shimer (2005, p. 25) explains, "an increase in
labor productivity relative to the value of nonmarket activity and to the cost of advertising a job vacancy
makes unemployment relatively expensive and vacancies relatively cheap. The market substitutes toward
vacancies." That is, in a boom, the di¤erential increase in productivity in the market draws workers out
of nonmarket activity and into the market.
    In that literature, authors compute the steady-state response of the job-...nding rate and unemployment
to a steady-state change in aggregate productivity. We show that our model works di¤erently by proving
two results. First, if we perform the same steady-state experiment in our model, we obtain no change in the
job-...nding rate. Second, once we modify the models in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017) so that productivity
enters those models as it does ours, then in the basic matching model and the alternating o¤er bargaining
model of Hall and Milgrom (2008), a change in steady-state productivity has similarly no e¤ect on the
job-...nding rate. In the Appendix, we show an analogous result for the training cost model of Pissarides
(2009), also reviewed by Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017). (Note that our results are reminiscent of the result
on the neutrality of productivity shocks by Shimer 2010. See also a related intuition by Ljungqvist and
Sargent 2017 in footnote 28 of their paper, page 2664.)

A Steady-State Change in Aggregate Productivity in our Baseline Model. We consider the
experiment conducted by Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017) in our model, namely a steady-state increase in
A, and obtain the following result. For simplicity, we abstract from growth.

                                                      38
Proposition 6. In our baseline model, the steady-state levels of the job-...nding rate and unemployment
are independent of steady-state productivity, A.

       To see why, note that Qt;t+1 =                at a steady state where St = S and Ct = C by (14). Evaluating the
expression for the job-...nding rate in (36) at a steady state gives log(                      w)   =   + (1   ) log ((   e   u )=A) =       ,
where     e   and
              are the steady-state versions of (33) and (34), namely,
                    e
                     h                       i                           h                                                               i
(57) e = 1+ (1+ ge ) (1    ) e +          u
                                               and     u
                                                          = b + (1+ gu )                                  w
                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                   +(1        w)
                                                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                                             :
     A                         A         A            A                                                        A                   A
Clearly, (    e     u )=A    is independent of A and so is the job-...nding rate. Notice that key to this result is
that the steady-state value of the discount factor does not vary with the steady-state value of A. Since
this same property holds for a broad class of consumption-based discount factors, including all of those
considered here, all of these discount factors are consistent with Proposition 6.

Basic Matching Model.                     Consider the basic matching model in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017). Using
notation similar to ours, in this model consumers are risk neutral with discount factor                                   . A consumer
produces A units of output when employed and b units of output when unemployed. The cost of posting
a vacancy is , the exogenous separation rate is , the worker's bargaining share is , and the job-...lling
rate for a ...rm is     f(   ) given market tightness . Equation (12) in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017, p. 2635)
shows that the equilibrium value of market tightness is determined by the free-entry condition, which we
rearrange and express as
                                              (A    b)
(58)      = (1      )   f(   )                                     :
                                 1       [1              f(   )]
These authors then di¤erentiate this equation to derive d log( )=d log(A) and explain how their measure of
fundamental surplus given by A b is critical for understanding the magnitude of this derivative. In contrast,
in our model the output produced in the market and the cost of posting a vacancy are proportional to
productivity so that b and               are replaced by bA and A, respectively. Observe that scaling home production
b by A is consistent with the ...ndings in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016), as discussed earlier.
Scaling       by A is consistent with the view in Shimer (2010) that posting vacancies absorbs a ...xed amount
of workers'time in recruiting that could otherwise be devoted to producing goods. When this is the case,
the free-entry condition becomes
                                               (1   b)A
(59)     A = (1         )   f(   )                                      :
                                     1    [1              f(       )]
Since A cancels out from both sides of this equality,                            is constant and thus d log( )=d log(A) = 0.

Proposition 7. In the basic matching model, if home produced output and the cost of posting a vacancy
are proportional to productivity, then the change in steady-state unemployment with respect to a change in
steady-state productivity is zero regardless of all other parameters.

       Note that this result holds regardless of the size of the home production parameter b, which plays

                                                                            39
an important role in the debate that originated with Shimer (2005) and Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008).
More generally, this property holds independently of the size of the fundamental surplus, which, instead,
is central to the analysis in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017).

Hall and Milgrom (2008): Alternating O¤er Bargaining Model. A similar result also applies
to alternating o¤er bargaining models. Consider the exposition in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017) of Hall
and Milgrom (2008). In this model, ...rms and workers make alternating o¤ers and after each unsuccessful
bargaining round, the ...rm incurs a haggling cost of                     of making a new o¤er while the worker receives b.
There is a probability                   that the job opportunity exogenously expires across bargaining rounds and the
worker reenters unemployment. Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017) assume that                          =    so the probability that
a job opportunity expires equals the probability of exogenous separation between a ...rm and a worker.
Under this assumption, the free-entry condition (equation (36), p. 2648 of Ljungqvist and Sargent 2017)
can be rearranged to obtain
                      f( )                       b + (1    )(A + )
(60)      =                              A                         :
              1        (1        )                  1 + (1     )
Now, suppose we extend the earlier idea in Shimer (2010) that recruiting workers takes a ...xed amount
of an existing worker'
                     s time to the idea that each round of bargaining also absorbs a ...xed amount of a
worker'
      s time in haggling. Under this interpretation, it is natural to scale both                     and    by A, since both
parameters reect the foregone opportunity of producing goods for a worker engaged in either recruiting
or bargaining. Hence, (60) becomes
                       f(    )                   b + (1    )(1 + )
(61)     A=                                  1                     A:
                  1        (1        )              1 + (1     )
Since A cancels out from both sides of this equality,                     is constant and so d log( )=d log(A) = 0. Note that
this same result holds even if                    does not equal   because all value functions are proportional to A.

Proposition 8. In the alternating o¤ er bargaining model, if home produced output, the cost of posting a va-
cancy, and the haggling cost are proportional to productivity, then the change in steady-state unemployment
with respect to a change in steady-state productivity is zero regardless of all other parameters.

       In sum, our model produces large movements in response to productivity changes but works di¤erently
from those analyzed by Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017) in their excellent synthesis of the work on the
unemployment volatility puzzle. All of these models depend critically on the di¤erential productivity
mechanism, while ours does not.

13. Conclusion
       We propose a new mechanism that allows search models to reproduce the observed uctuations in
the job-...nding rate and unemployment at business cycle frequencies. Our model not only solves the
unemployment volatility puzzle of Shimer (2005) but also is immune to the critiques of existing mechanisms


                                                                     40
that address it, namely, those by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) on the cyclicality of the
opportunity cost of employment, by Kudlyak (2014) and Basu and House (2016) on the cyclicality of
wages, and by Borovicka and Borovickova (2019) on the asset pricing implications of existing mechanisms.
    To this purpose, we augment the textbook search model with two features: preferences from the macro-
...nance literature that match the observed variation in asset prices, and human capital accumulation on
the job that is consistent with longitudinal and cross-sectional evidence on wage growth with experience.
In such a framework, investing in hiring workers becomes a risky endeavor with long duration ows of
the surplus from a match between a worker and a ...rm. Hence, shocks to either productivity or directly
to discount factors make the present value of these surplus ows uctuate sharply over the cycle. In
turn, uctuations in the present value of these surplus ows imply that investments in hiring workers are
highly cyclical and, hence, that job-...nding rates and unemployment are as volatile as in the data. We
show that both new features we introduce play a critical role: if we abstract from either preferences that
generate time-varying risk or human capital accumulation, the model generates only negligible movements
in unemployment. We show that the same intuition applies once we augment the model with physical
capital. Overall, our results show that re-integrating search and business cycle theory is both a tractable
and promising avenue of future research.

References
Albuquerque, Rui, Martin Eichenbaum, Victor X. Luo, and Sergio Rebelo. 2016. Valuation risk and asset
pricing. Journal of Finance 71 (6), 2861-2904.
Andolfatto, David. 1996. Business cycles and labor-market search. American Economic Review 86 (1),
112-132.
Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi. 2003. A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dynamics
with macroeconomic and latent variables. Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (4), 745-787.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing puzzles.
Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481-1509.
Barlevy, Gadi. 2008. Identi...cation of search models using record statistics. Review of Economic Studies
75 (1), 29-64.
Basu, Susanto, and Christopher L. House. 2016. Allocative and remitted wages: New facts and challenges
for Keynesian models. Handbook of Macroeconomics 2 (Chapter 6), Editor(s): John B. Taylor and Harald
Uhlig, 297-354.
Becker, Gary. 1962. Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political Economy
70 (5), 9-49.
Beeler, Jason, and John Y. Campbell. 2012. The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: An
empirical assessment. Critical Finance Review 1 (1), 141-182.
Belo, Federico, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein. 2015. Dividend dynamics and the term


                                                    41
structure of dividend strips. Journal of Finance 70 (3), 1115-1160.
Binsbergen, Jules, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen. 2012. On the timing and pricing of dividends.
American Economic Review 102 (4), 1596-1618.
Borovicka, Jaroslav, and Katar¬
                              na Borovicková. 2018. Risk premia and unemployment uctuations. New
York University Working Paper.
Buchinsky, Moshe, Denis Fougère, Francis Kramarz, and Rusty Tchernis. 2010. Inter...rm mobility, wages
and the returns to seniority and experience in the United States. Review of Economic Studies 77 (3),
972-1001.
Burdett, Kenneth, Shouyong Shi, and Randall Wright. 2001. Pricing and matching with frictions. Journal
of Political Economy 109 (5), 1060-1085.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-51.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2016. Unemployment and business
cycles. Econometrica 84 (4), 1523-69.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2016. The cyclicality of the opportunity cost of
employment. Journal of Political Economy 124 (6), 1563-1618.
Cochrane, John H., 2011. Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66, 1047-1108.
Cochrane, John H., 2017. Macro-...nance. Review of Finance 21, 945-985.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57, 937-96
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Hagedorn, Marcus, and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and
vacancies revisited. American Economic Review 98 (4), 1692-1706.
Hall, Robert E., 1988. Intertemporal substitution in consumption. Journal of Political Economy 96 (2),
339-357.
Hall, Robert E., 2005. Employment uctuations with equilibrium wage stickiness. American Economic
Review 95, 50-65.
Hall, Robert E., 2017. High discounts and high unemployment. American Economic Review 107, 305-330.
Hall, Robert E., and Paul R. Milgrom. 2008. The limited inuence of unemployment on the wage bargain.
American Economic Review 98 (4), 1653-1674.
Hosios, Arthur J. 1990. On the e¢ ciency of matching and related models of search and unemployment.
Review of Economic Studies 57 (2), 279-298.
Hur, Sewon, Illenin Kondo, and Fabrizio Perri. 2019. Ination, debt, and default. Mimeo.
Jermann, Urban J. 1998. Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary Economics 41 (2),
257-275.

                                                   42
Kehoe, Patrick J., Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino. 2019. Debt constraints and employment.
Journal of Political Economy 127 (4), 1926-1991.
Kilic, Mete, and Jessica A. Wachter. 2018. Risk, unemployment, and the stock market: A rare-event-based
explanation of labor market volatility. Review of Financial Studies 31 (12), 4762-4814.
Kudlyak, Marianna. 2014. The cyclicality of the user cost of labor. Journal of Monetary Economics 68,
53-67.
Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, and Ay¸
                                                          segül S
                                                                ¸ahin. 2011. A three state model of
worker ows in general equilibrium. Journal of Economic Theory 146 (3), 1107-1133.
Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, and Ay¸
                                                          segül S
                                                                ¸ahin. 2017. Gross worker ows over
the business cycle. American Economic Review 107 (11), 3447-76.
Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. 1998. Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy.
Journal of Political Economy 106 (5), 867-896.
Larrain, Borja, and Motohiro Yogo. 2008. Does ...rm value move too much to be justi...ed by subsequent
changes in cash ow? Journal of Financial Economics 87 (1), 200-226.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent. 1998. The European unemployment dilemma. Journal of
Political Economy 106 (3), 514-550.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2008. Two questions about European unemployment. Econo-
metrica 76, 1-29.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. 2017. The fundamental surplus. American Economic Review
107, 2630-2665.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Harald Uhlig. 2015. Comment on the Campbell-Cochrane habit model. Journal of
Political Economy 123 (5), 1201-1213.
Lopez, Pierlauro, David Lopez-Salido, and Francisco Vazquez-Grande. 2017. Risk-adjusted linearizations
of dynamic equilibrium models. Working paper, Bank of France.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott. 1985. The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary
Economics 15, 145-61.
Merz, Monika. 1995. Search in the labor market and the real business cycle. Journal of Monetary
Economics 36 (2), 269-300.
Moen, Espen, R. (1997). Competitive search equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy 105 (2), 385-411.
Montgomery, James D. 1991. Equilibrium wage dispersion and interindustry wage di¤erentials. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 106 (1), 163-179.
Pissarides, C., 2009. The unemployment volatility puzzle: Is wage stickiness the answer? Econometrica
77, 1339-69.
Schorfheide, Frank, Dongho Song, and Amir Yaron. 2018. Identifying long-run risks: A Bayesian mixed-
frequency approach. Econometrica 86 (2), 617-654.



                                                    43
Shimer, Robert. 2005. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American
Economic Review 95 (1), 25-49.
Shimer, Robert. 2010. Labor markets and business cycles, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Shimer, Robert. 2012. Reassessing the ins and outs of unemployment. Review of Economic Dynamics 15
(2), 127-148.
Tallarini, Thomas D. Jr. 2000. Risk-sensitive real business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 45 (3),
507-532.
Wachter, Jessica A. 2005. Solving models with external habit. Finance Research Letters 2 (4), 210-226.
Wachter, Jessica A. 2006. A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates. Journal of
Financial Economics 79 (2), 365-399.
Wachter, Jessica A. 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market volatility?
Journal of Finance 68 (3), 987-1035.
Winberry, Thomas. 2018. A method for solving and estimating heterogeneous agent macro models.
Quantitative Economics 9 (3), 1123-1151.
Wright, Randall, Philipp Kircher, Benoît Julien, and Veronica Guerrieri. Directed search: A guided tour.
Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.




                                                    44
     Table 1: Parametrization and Results for Model with Campbell-Cochrane Preferences with Exogenous Habit
                    Panel A: Parameters                                                   Panel B: Moments
                    Endogenously Chosen                                             Targeted                      Data     Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                    2.22       Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)               2.22        2.22
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                     1.84       S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)               1.84        1.84
B , efficiency of matching technology                   0.455       Mean job-finding rate                          0.46        0.46
, hiring cost                                           0.975       Mean unemployment rate                          5.9         5.9
 , time preference factor                               0.999       Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                    0.92        0.92
S , mean of state St                                   0.2066       S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                    2.31        2.31
, inverse EIS                                             5.0       Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                    0.45        0.45

                          Assigned                                                   Results

b, home production parameter                              0.6       S.d. job-finding rate                          6.66         6.60
 , probability of separation                            0.028       Autocorrelation job-finding rate               0.94         0.98
 , matching function elasticity                           0.5       S.d. unemployment rate                         0.75         0.75
, survival probability                                 0.9972       Autocorrelation unemployment rate              0.97         0.99
s , persistence of state                               0.9944       Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate    -0.96        -0.98
ge , human capital growth when employed (%p.a.)           3.5       Elasticity user cost labor to u (Kudlyak)      -5.2         -3.6
Note: Labor productivity in the data is measured as nonfarm business sector real output per hour from the BLS. The maximum
Sharpe ratio in the data is the Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return from the CRSP value-weighted stock index covering
all firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.




                                  Table 2: Role of Preferences and Human Capital Accumulation
                                                                Alternative Preferences                Alternative Human Capital
                                    Data    Baseline   CRRA     CC    EZ w/      EZ w/       Affine       ge = 0     ge = .035
                                                                       LRR      Disasters    SDF          gu = 0     gu = .035

S.d. job-finding rate                6.66     6.60     0.00      6.69    6.36      5.66         7.52       0.15         0.15
Autocorr. job-finding rate          0.94     0.98       --       0.99   0.99      0.99         0.99       0.99         0.99
S.d. unemployment rate               0.75    0.75      0.00      0.75   0.69      0.77         0.73       0.02         0.02
Autocorr. unemployment rate          0.97    0.99       --       0.99   0.99      0.99         0.99       0.99         0.99
Correlation u, job-finding rate     -0.96    -0.98      --      -0.98   -0.98     -0.98        -0.97      -0.98        -0.98
Note: For the results in the last two columns, we adjust the value of  to keep mean unemployment constant.




                                     Table 3: Implications of Baseline Model for Stock Prices
Statistics                                                                        Data                                     Model
Mean excess return (%p.a.)                                                        6.96                                      6.30
S.d. excess return (%p.a.)                                                        15.6                                      14.1
Mean excess return / s.d. excess return (p.a.)                                    0.45                                      0.45
Mean log price-dividend ratio                                                     3.51                                      3.36
S.d. log price-dividend ratio                                                     0.44                                      0.36
Note: The data cover January 1947 to December 2007 and refers to statistics for the CRSP value-weighted stock index covering
all firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ and statistics for the market value of outstanding equities and net
equity payouts from the Flow of Funds. A consumption claim is a claim to the aggregate consumption process. The equity index
claim is a claim to aggregate net equity payouts.
Table 4: Parameterization and Results for More General Human Capital Model and Preferences with Exogenous Habit
                Panel A: Parameters                                               Panel B: Moments
               Endogenously Chosen                                            Targeted                          Data     Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)        2.22       Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                         2.22      2.22
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)         1.84       S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                         1.84      1.84
, hiring cost                                1.60       Mean unemployment rate                                    5.9       5.9
 , time preference factor                   0.999       Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                              0.92      0.92
S , mean of state St                       0.1779       S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                              2.31      2.31
, inverse EIS                                 4.5       Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                              0.45      0.45
z
¯e , human capital growth when employed      1.90       Log wage difference 0-30 years of experience             1.21      1.21
z , persistence human capital              0.9969       Log wages difference 0-10 years of experience (%)        0.55      0.55
z , std. dev. of human capital shocks       0.033       Std. dev. annual w growth 1-10 years exp. (p.p.p.a.)     1.19      1.19

                      Assigned                                                 Results

b, home production parameter                  0.6       S.d. job-finding rate                                     6.66     6.38
 , probability of separation                0.028       Autocorrelation job-finding rate                          0.94     0.99
 , matching function elasticity               0.5       S.d. unemployment rate                                    0.75     0.65
, survival probability                     0.9972       Autocorrelation unemployment rate                         0.97     0.99
s , persistence of state                   0.9944       Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate               -0.96    -0.99
B , efficiency of matching technology       0.455
Note: The standard deviation of annual wage growth is computed in percentage points per annum (p.p.p.a.).




     Table 5: Parametrization and Results for Model with Physical Capital and Preferences with Exogenous Habit
                    Panel A: Parameters                                                  Panel B: Moments
                    Endogenously Chosen                                            Targeted                     Data     Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                 1.36       Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                1.36      1.36
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                  1.79       S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                1.79      1.79
B , efficiency of matching technology                0.455       Mean job-finding rate                           0.46      0.46
, hiring cost                                          2.0       Mean unemployment rate                           5.9       5.9
 , time preference factor                            0.999       Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                     0.92      0.92
S , mean surplus consumption                        0.2887       S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                     2.31      2.31
, inverse EIS                                          7.0       Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                     0.45      0.45
 , curvature of production function                   0.25       Mean labor share of output                      0.70      0.70
 , curvature of adjustment cost                       0.25       Ratio s.d. invest. to consumption growth         4.5       4.5

                          Assigned                                                 Results

b, home production parameter                           0.6       S.d. job-finding rate                           6.66      6.45
 , probability of separation                         0.028       Autocorrelation job-finding rate                0.94      0.99
 , matching function elasticity                        0.5       S.d. unemployment rate                          0.75      0.71
, survival probability                              0.9972       Autocorrelation unemployment rate               0.97      0.99
s , state persistence                               0.9944       Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate     -0.96     -0.98
 , physical capital depreciation rate               0.1/12
ge , human capital growth when employed (%p.a.)        3.5
Note: Labor productivity in the data is measured as total factor productivity from John Fernald's website. The maximum Sharpe
ratio in the data is the Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return from the CRSP value-weighted stock index covering all
firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.
      Table 6: Parametrization and Results for Model with Campbell-Cochrane Preferences with External Habit
                   Panel A: Parameters                                                   Panel B: Moments
                   Endogenously Chosen                                               Targeted                      Data    Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                  2.22        Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                 2.22      2.22
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                   1.84        S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                 1.84      1.84
B , efficiency of matching technology                 0.455        Mean job-finding rate                            0.46      0.46
, hiring cost                                         0.975        Mean unemployment rate                            5.9       5.9
 , time preference factor                             0.999        Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      0.92      0.92
¯, mean surplus consumption
S                                                    0.2087        S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      2.31      2.31
, inverse EIS                                           5.0        Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                      0.45      0.45

                         Assigned                                                    Results

b, home production parameter                            0.6        S.d. job-finding rate                            6.66      6.69
 , probability of separation                          0.028        Autocorrelation job-finding rate                 0.94      0.99
 , matching function elasticity                         0.5        S.d. unemployment rate                           0.75      0.75
, survival probability                               0.9972        Autocorrelation unemployment rate                0.97      0.99
s , habit persistence                                0.9944        Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate      -0.96     -0.98
ge , human capital growth when employed (%p.a.)         3.5
Note: Labor productivity in the data is measured as nonfarm business sector real output per hour from the BLS. The maximum
Sharpe ratio in the data is the Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return from the CRSP value-weighted stock index
covering all firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.




           Table 7: Parametrization and Results for Model with Epstein-Zin Preferences with Long-Run Risk
                   Panel A: Parameters                                                   Panel B: Moments
                   Endogenously Chosen                                               Targeted                      Data    Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                  2.22        Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                 2.22      2.22
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                   1.80        S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                 1.84      1.84
B , efficiency of matching technology                 0.455        Mean job-finding rate                            0.46      0.46
, hiring cost                                          1.31        Mean unemployment rate                            5.9       5.9
 , time preference factor                             0.998        Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      0.92      0.92
s , relative s.d. st                                 0.0379        S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      2.31      2.31
, risk aversion coefficient                             4.3        Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                      0.45      0.45

                         Assigned                                                    Results

b, home production parameter                            0.6        S.d. job-finding rate                            6.66      6.36
 , probability of separation                          0.028        Autocorrelation job-finding rate                 0.94      0.99
 , matching function elasticity                         0.5        S.d. unemployment rate                           0.75      0.69
, survival probability                               0.9972        Autocorrelation unemployment rate                0.97      0.99
x , persistence of xt                                0.9977        Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate      -0.96     -0.98
s , persistence of st                                0.9944
ge , human capital growth when employed (%p.a.)         3.5
, inverse EIS                                           0.1
rel. size xt component of productivity               0.0445
Note: Labor productivity in the data is measured as nonfarm business sector real output per hour from the BLS. The maximum
Sharpe ratio in the data is the Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return from the CRSP value-weighted stock index covering
all firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. The productivity process is governed by at+1 = ga + xt + a at+1
where xt+1 = x xt + x a xt+1 and the preference shock is governed by st+1 = s st + s a st+1 .
       Table 8: Parametrization and Results for Model with Epstein-Zin Preferences with Variable Disaster Risk
                    Panel A: Parameters                                                  Panel B: Moments
                    Endogenously Chosen                                              Targeted                      Data    Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                  2.22        Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                 2.22      2.22
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                   1.84        S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                 1.84      1.84
B , efficiency of matching technology                 0.455        Mean job-finding rate                            0.46      0.46
, hiring cost                                          1.22        Mean unemployment rate                            5.9       5.9
 , time preference factor                             0.998        Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      0.92      0.92
s , disaster intensity volatility parameter          0.0083        S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      2.31      2.31
, risk aversion coefficient                            2.65        Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                      0.45      0.45

                           Assigned                                                  Results

b, home production parameter                            0.6        S.d. job-finding rate                            6.66      5.66
 , probability of separation                          0.028        Autocorrelation job-finding rate                 0.94      0.99
 , matching function elasticity                         0.5        S.d. unemployment rate                           0.75      0.77
, survival probability                               0.9972        Autocorrelation unemployment rate                0.97      0.99
s , persistence disaster intensity                   0.9966        Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate      -0.96     -0.98
ge , human capital growth when employed (%p.a.)         3.5
, inverse EIS                                           0.1
s, disaster intensity (%p.a.)                          3.55
, disaster impact                                      0.26
Note: Labor productivity in the data is measured as nonfarm business sector real output per hour from the BLS. The maximum
Sharpe ratio in the data is the Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return from the CRSP value-weighted stock index covering
all firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. The productivity process is governed by at+1 = ga + a at+1 - jt+1
                                                                                                 
with variable disaster intensity and the state process is governed by st+1 = (1 - s )s + s st + st s st+1 .




                     Table 9: Parametrization and Results for Model with Affine Stochastic Discounts
                    Panel A: Parameters                                                  Panel B: Moments
                    Endogenously Chosen                                              Targeted                      Data    Model

ga , mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                   2.22       Mean productivity growth (%p.a.)                 2.22      2.22
a , s.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                    1.84       S.d. productivity growth (%p.a.)                 1.84      1.84
B , efficiency of matching technology                 0.455        Mean job-finding rate                            0.46      0.46
, hiring cost                                           0.90       Mean unemployment rate                            5.9       5.9
µ0                                                   .00077        Mean risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      0.92      0.92
µ1                                                     -.042       S.d. risk-free rate (%p.a.)                      2.31      2.31
0                                                       25.6       Maximum Sharpe ratio (p.a.)                      0.45      0.45
1                                                       0.83       S.d. excess return                               15.6      15.6

                           Assigned                                                  Results

b, home production parameter                            0.6        S.d. job-finding rate                            6.66      7.52
 , probability of separation                          0.028        Autocorrelation job-finding rate                 0.94      0.99
 , matching function elasticity                         0.5        S.d. unemployment rate                           0.75      0.73
, survival probability                               0.9972        Autocorrelation unemployment rate                0.97      0.99
s , state persistence                                0.9944        Correlation unemployment, job-finding rate      -0.96     -0.98
ge , human capital growth when employed (%p.a.)         3.5
Note: Labor productivity in the data is measured as nonfarm business sector real output per hour from the BLS. The maximum
Sharpe ratio in the data is the Sharpe ratio of the aggregate stock market return from the CRSP value-weighted stock index
covering all firms continuously listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.
                         Table 10: Hall (2017) with Alternative Durations of Job Opportunities
                                                                          Data               Model in Hall (2017)
                                                                                          1/ = 2.6           Original
Parameters
Avg. duration of job opportunity during bargaining (in months)              ­                 2.6                77
Per-round probability bargaining ends,                                      ­               1/2.6               1/77
Bargaining delay cost,                                                      ­                1.01               0.57
Results
S.d. quarterly unemployment rate (in pp)                                   0.75              0.03                0.97
Cyclicality of user cost of labor to unemployment (%)                      -5.2              -5.2                0.10
Note: The probability that a job opportunity breaks down after n rounds of bargaining is  (1 -  )n so the expected duration of a
job opportunity during bargaining is  + 2 (1 -  ) + . . . + n (1 -  )n-1 + . . . = 1/ rounds.
           Figure 1: Responses to Productivity Shock for Preferences with Exogenous Habit

                (a)   Job-Finding Rate                                                     (b)   Unemployment

                                                                            0.15
    0


  -0.2

                                                                             0.1
  -0.4


  -0.6


  -0.8                                                                      0.05



   -1


  -1.2                                                                           0

           10           20    30             40         50       60                   10         20    30       40   50   60




Note: Impulse responses of the job-finding rate and unemployment to a -1% permanent productivity shock.
Generalized impulse response functions are based on 10,000 simulations.




         Figure 2: Locus of (ge , gu ) with Same Job-Finding Rate Volatility as in Baseline Model

                                    0

                                    -2

                                    -4

                                    -6

                                    -8

                                   -10

                                   -12

                                   -14

                                   -16

                                   -18

                                   -20
                                         0        0.5        1        1.5    2       2.5         3    3.5


Note: We vary ge and gu while keeping the remaining parameters at their baseline values except for ,
which is adjusted to reproduce the same mean unemployment rate across parametrizations.
                  Figure 3: Prices of Productivity Strips for Preferences with Exogenous Habit

                                 0.5

                                  0

                                -0.5

                                  -1

                                -1.5

                                  -2

                                -2.5

                                  -3

                                -3.5

                                  -4
                                   -2.8    -2.6       -2.4   -2.2   -2   -1.8           -1.6   -1.4       -1.2   -1



          Note: Price of underlying claims to productivity at different horizons as function of the state.




                Figure 4: Responses to Productivity Shock for Preferences with Exogenous Habit

   (a)   Prices of Productivity Strips by Maturity                                  (b)    Cumulative Weights by Maturity

                                                                                1
    0%
                                                                            0.9

                                                                            0.8
    -2%
                                                                            0.7

    -4%                                                                     0.6

                                                                            0.5
    -6%
                                                                            0.4

    -8%                                                                     0.3

                                                                            0.2
   -10%
                                                                            0.1

   -12%                                                                         0
          0       1        2           3          4             5                   0                 5               10   15   20




Note: Impulse responses of the prices of productivity strips to a -1% permanent productivity shock. Generalized
impulse response functions are based on 10,000 simulations.
                                   Figure 5: Determinants of Volatility of Job-Finding Rate

   (a)   Campbell-Cochrane with External Habit                              (b)   Epstein-Zin with Long-Run Risk

         1                                                 1          0.4                                                1

     0.9                                                   0.9                                                           0.9
                                                                     0.35
     0.8                                                   0.8                                                           0.8
                                                                      0.3
     0.7                                                   0.7                                                           0.7
                                                                     0.25
     0.6                                                   0.6                                                           0.6

     0.5                                                   0.5        0.2                                                0.5

     0.4                                                   0.4                                                           0.4
                                                                     0.15
     0.3                                                   0.3                                                           0.3
                                                                      0.1
     0.2                                                   0.2                                                           0.2
                                                                     0.05
     0.1                                                   0.1                                                           0.1

         0                                                  0          0                                                  0
             0   10   20      30      40   50   60   70   80                0      10     20   30   40   50   60   70   80




   (c)   Epstein-Zin with Variable Disaster Risk                                   (d)   Affine Discount Factor

    0.35                                                   1          1.4                                                1

                                                           0.9                                                           0.9
     0.3                                                              1.2
                                                           0.8                                                           0.8

    0.25                                                   0.7         1                                                 0.7

                                                           0.6                                                           0.6
     0.2                                                              0.8
                                                           0.5                                                           0.5
    0.15                                                              0.6
                                                           0.4                                                           0.4

     0.1                                                   0.3        0.4                                                0.3

                                                           0.2                                                           0.2
    0.05                                                              0.2
                                                           0.1                                                           0.1

         0                                                  0          0                                                  0
             0   10   20      30      40   50   60   70   80                0      10     20   30   40   50   60   70   80




                           
Note:  (wt ) = | n=1 n bn |  (st ) for Campbell-Cochrane preferences with external habit, affine stochastic
                                                                                         
discount factor, and Epstein-Zin preferences with variable disaster risk, and  (wt ) = | n=1 n bn |  (st ) +
   
| n=1 n cn |  (xt ) for Epstein-Zin preferences with long-run risk.
Figure 6: Time-Varying Worker Bargaining Power in Hall (2017)


  0.95                                                      0.09


   0.9
                                                            0.075
  0.85


   0.8                                                      0.06


  0.75
                                                            0.045
   0.7


  0.65                                                      0.03
         1950   1960   1970   1980    1990    2000   2010

Note: Constructed from data in Hall (2017).
