                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     IMPACT INVESTING

                                         Brad M. Barber
                                          Adair Morse
                                         Ayako Yasuda

                                       Working Paper 26582
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26582


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Brad Barber is on the advisory board of Vert Asset
Management and was co-principal investigator for the CalPERS Sustainable Investment Research
Initiative grant.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Brad M. Barber, Adair Morse, and Ayako Yasuda. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impact Investing
Brad M. Barber, Adair Morse, and Ayako Yasuda
NBER Working Paper No. 26582
December 2019
JEL No. A13,G11,G23,G24,G41,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

We document that investors derive nonpecuniary utility from investing in dual-objective VC
funds, thus sacrificing returns. Impact funds earn 4.7 percentage points (ppts) lower IRRs ex post
than traditional VC funds. In random utility/willingness-to-pay (WTP) models investors accept
2.5-3.7 ppts lower IRRs ex ante for impact funds. The positive WTP result is robust to fund
access rationing and investor heterogeneity in fund expected returns. Development organizations,
foundations, financial institutions, public pensions, Europeans, and UNPRI signatories have high
WTP. Investors with mission objectives and/or facing political pressure exhibit high WTP; those
subject to legal restrictions (e.g., ERISA) exhibit low WTP.


Brad M. Barber                                  Ayako Yasuda
Graduate School of Management                   Graduate School of Management
One Shields Avenue                              UC Davis
3218 Gallagher Hall                             3206 Gallagher Hall
University of California                        One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616                                 Davis, CA 95616-8609
bmbarber@ucdavis.edu                            asyasuda@ucdavis.edu

Adair Morse
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
morse@haas.berkeley.edu
I. Introduction
       Do investors knowingly accept lower expected financial returns in exchange for
nonpecuniary benefits from investing in assets with both social and financial objectives? Classic
asset pricing models generally define an investor's objective function using utility over wealth or
consumption. While there have been innovations in the form of these utility functions (Epstein and
Zin 1989; Laibson 1997), wealth generation is the common goal of investors. Economists are now
taking seriously the possibility that investors might value positive societal externalities in utility
in addition to wealth. Theoretical models consider the implications of these nonpecuniary
preferences in a variety of settings (e.g., Andreoni, 1989; 1990; Fama and French 2007; Hart and
Zingales 2017; Niehaus 2014), yet, these models start from a relatively untested assumption that
nonpecuniary motives affect the allocation of capital in a way that reflects an intentional
willingness to pay for impact.
       A natural starting point is to look for indications of demand for nonpecuniary benefits by
the sources of capital themselves. As of April 2019, 2,372 organizations representing $86 trillion
in asset under management have become signatories to the United Nations Principles of
Responsible Investment (UNPRI). Virtually all major consulting groups have implemented a
social impact practice, and all major investment banks have an impact division to meet corporate,
institutional, and private wealth demands for impact considerations in investment. These
indications of demand for investing with a social conscience do not imply that investors readily
accept a tradeoff between financial returns and nonpecuniary benefits. For instance, the signing of
the UNPRI accords does not imply that a holder of capital necessarily must tilt investment toward
impact. Rather, UNPRI investors can comply by adhering to principles of governance within their
investing entity.
       An important, recent empirical literature on SRI (socially responsible investment) mutual
funds shows that the demand for responsibility is growing rapidly (Bialkowski and Starks, 2016),
reflecting both preferences and social signaling (Riedl and Smeets, 2017). However, performance
in public market SRI has not been statistically different from other mutual funds in this period (see
the amalgamation of evidence in Bialkowski and Starks, 2016). Hence, the tilt toward SRI need
not reflect a willingness to pay in wealth for nonpecuniary benefits.
       Thus, we study a different asset market ­ impact investing ­ to ask whether the theoretical
assumption that investors are willing to pay for impact holds. Two primary instrument types that



                                                                                                    1
receive the largest capital allocation among impact investors are private debt and private equity.1
While private debt is the largest category, we are not aware of any data sources for private debt
impact investments. Instead, we focus on impact funds, which are predominantly VC and growth
equity funds that are structured as traditional private equity funds but with the intentionality that
is the hallmark of impact investing. The Global Impact Investing Network (GIIN) defines impact
investing as "investments made with the intention to generate positive, measurable social and
environmental impact alongside a financial return."2 Thus, an impact investor exhibits an intention
to generate both positive social or environmental returns and positive financial returns. Green
washing investments, which is branding for an appearance of impact intentionality (Starks, Venkat
and Zhu, 2017) and purely for-profit investment in sectors that associate with positive externalities
(e.g., health, education, clean energy) do not meet the intentionality criteria. In our data collection,
we ensure that we only choose impact VC funds that explicitly market a dual agenda.
           Besides the data availability, the VC institutional setting brings an additional advantage.
Because VC funds only fundraise at the inception of the fund and investors contractually commit
their capital for the duration of the fund (typically 10 years), the timing of capital flowing in and
out of funds is not a concern in our setting. This institutional feature allows us to focus on the
investors' discrete choice to invest in traditional VC funds versus impact VC funds among the
observable choice set at a given point in time.
           These advantages in the impact-versus-traditional VC market provide us with an ideal
setting to identify any ex ante willingness-to-pay for impact that investors may exhibit. We ask:
(a) whether investors are intentionally willing to forego expected financial returns in exchange for
expectation of impact, (b) whether this willingness to pay depends on the source of the capital
(e.g., pension fund, bank, or development organization), and (c) whether the evidence points to
any attributes (e.g., mission objectives, household versus institutional ownership, the legal or
regulatory framework governing the allocation of capital) that explain heterogeneity in investor
willing to pay for impact?
           Using Preqin data, we construct a sample of 24,000 VC and growth equity (to which we
refer together as VC for simplicity) investments by about 3,500 investors over the period 1995-
2014. These investments reflect 4,659 funds ­ the combination of traditional VC and impact VC


1
    GIIN Annual Impact Investor Survey 2016.
2
    https://thegiin.org/impact-investing/need-to-know/#what-is-impact-investing


                                                                                                      2
funds. We manually isolate 159 of these funds as being impact funds using a strict criterion that
the fund must state dual objectives in its motivation. Investors are not all alike in their portfolio
choice decisions; thus, we also manually look up the ultimate source of capital for each of the
3,500 investors and code them into ten investor types. Our final piece of data coding is to codify
the impact agenda themselves in more detail. The impact agenda of impact VCs are quite broad,
including funds that seek to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, encourage the development of
women and minority-owned firms, alleviate poverty in developing countries, or develop local
business communities.
        Our primary analysis estimates the willingness to pay (WTP) for impact across investor
types and attributes. To set the stage for this analysis, we estimate reduced form regressions of
impact fund performance compared to that of traditional VC funds. We document that the
annualized internal rate of return (IRR) on impact funds is 4.7 percentage points (ppts) lower than
traditional VC funds, after controlling for industry, vintage year, fund sequence, and geography.
        Reduced form estimations suggest investors may be willing to forego returns, but this
evidence is not sufficient. Selection in observability of VC fund returns may affect this analysis,
and, more fundamentally, ex post performance estimations do not necessarily reveal ex ante
decisions to invest as a function of expected returns.
        To investigate whether investors willingly forego expected return at the time of their
investment decision, our primary empirics employ a discrete choice methodology using investors'
observed choices of investments (yes/no decisions in a random utility framework) among a large
set of VC funds fundraising in a year as the dependent variable. This approach builds on a large
literature on hedonic pricing techniques, which provide tools for estimating implicit prices of
attributes that a good possesses (e.g., Court, 1939; Griliches, 1961; Rosen, 1974; McFadden, 1974,
1986). Cameron and James (1987) introduce the idea that willingness to pay can be estimated in
discrete choices over alternatives. In discrete choice models, the choices made by agents over
alternatives can be used to infer the sensitivity of the choice probability to price and other attributes
(McFadden, 1974). Cameron and James (1987) note that if one re-parameterizes the sensitivity of
choice to an attribute by scaling it relative to the sensitivity of choice to price, the result is an
estimate of the individual's willingness to pay for that attribute.
        A relevant example of the method is Huber and Train (2001), who study households who
choose among a set of electricity providers. They are interested in the tradeoffs in price households



                                                                                                       3
make when choosing characteristics of the provider (e.g., local utility vs. conglomerate), making
inference as to people's willingness to pay to do business with a more expensive local provider.
Analogously, we study the choice of alternatives of funds and ask whether investors exhibit a
willingness to pay for the impact characteristic of a fund.
       Our empirical analysis relies on two key independent variables: an impact fund dummy
variable (the hedonic variable) and an ex-ante estimate of expected return for each fund (the price
variable in a hedonic model), which we model using historic data on a fund's characteristics that
investors would observe at the time of fundraising. From investors' choices, we find that both the
ex-ante expected returns and the impact fund designation positively relate to the probability of
investing in a fund. We estimate a logit model over the choice of funds fundraising in a given
vintage, including investor fixed effects (i.e., a conditional logit model) or similar-investor
dynamic groupings (to capture time-varying investor demand for the asset class). Our
specifications include a rich array of fund and investor characteristics to model dimensions of
portfolio choice preference. Measuring how sensitive the investment rate is to a fund's expected
return allows us then to convert the desirability of impact into a willingness to pay for impact via
standard hedonic methodologies.
       We address two main methodological concerns with respect to the estimation and inference
in our VC setting. First, unlike traditional hedonic models, our price variable is an estimate ­ the
forecast expected returns ­ and thus has measurement error. This likely induces over dispersion
in expected return forecasts and attenuation bias in the expected return coefficient in the logit
model. Since WTP has the expected return coefficient in the denominator, attenuation does not
affect the sign of the estimated WTP but increases its magnitude. To address the magnitude issue,
we apply a shrinkage estimator, which provides an asymptotic correction for the attenuation bias
in the expected return coefficient.
       Second, investors may have differential exposure or access to opportunity sets of funds to
invest in, thus inducing them to have different expected return forecasts for the same fund. Mis-
specifying this heterogeneity may induce a bias in the expected return coefficient, thus affecting
the magnitude of our WTP estimates. Heterogeneities in expected returns is plausible in our private
investment setting, but the exact mechanism is difficult to pin down with precision given the
limitation in our private equity data. As empiricists we are agnostic as to whether parsimony vs.
specificity in the expected return model brings us closer to the true expected return used be each



                                                                                                  4
investor. Thus, we use both a parsimonious homogenous expected return model and a
heterogenous expected return model to estimate expected returns and report WTP estimates based
on both models to generate a range of plausible WTP estimates. Furthermore, we estimate the
model under both rationed and expanded opportunity set assumptions and find that our impact
coefficient and WTP estimates consistently positive and stable. Overall, we report that the
aggregate willingness to pay for impact is between 2.5 percent to 3.7 percent in expected IRR.
       Willingness-to-pay (WTP) for impact is not in equal magnitude across investor types. Five
noteworthy investor groups exhibit a positive WTP for impact. (i) Development organizations have
a high WTP for impact, presumably reflecting their direct impact mission. (ii) Foundations also
have a small but positive WTP for impact in some specifications, again reflecting their mission
orientation. (iii) Financial institutions ­ banks and insurance companies ­ have high WTPs, likely
reflecting their incentives to invest in local communities either to comply with the Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) and/or to garner goodwill from the community or politicians/regulators.
(iv) Public pension funds have a high WTP for impact, in line with the tendency for state pensions
in the U.S. to prefer investments within their home state (Hochberg and Rauh, 2013) to bring
spillover economic benefits, nonpecuniary political benefits, and direct social objective benefits.
(v) Investors in Europe, Latin America, and Africa have a higher WTP.
       We then explore six investor attributes that might capture differential utility from investing
in impact across investors; namely, whether the capital is (1) held by households (as opposed to
an organization), (2) intermediated by an asset manager, (3) held by an organization with a mission
objective, (4) held by an organization facing regulatory or political pressure to invest in impact,
(5) held by an organization subject to laws restricting investments in impact, or (6) held by an
organization (e.g., corporation) with charters that restrict investments in impact.
       We find that mission-focus (i.e., development organizations and foundations) is associated
with a positive WTP of 3.4 to 6.2 ppts in expected excess IRR. This result is robust to including
the LP geography fixed effects interacted with impact (i.e., within each geography, investor
mission orientation is positively related to WTP for impact). Likewise, organizations expressing
their mission by signing the UNPRI have a similarly higher WTP, especially after their signing.
These UNPRI results are robust to including either LP geography fixed effects interacted with
impact or LP Type fixed effects interacted with impact.




                                                                                                   5
        Next, we find that political or regulatory pressure is associated with a positive WTP. In our
most conservative models, WTP for impact associated with pressure is 2.3-3.3 ppts in expected
excess IRR. Legal restrictions against investments for non-financial motives (e.g., ERISA and
UPMIFA) are associated with a lower WTP for impact. In contrast, we find no evidence that
organizational charters that require a focus on financial returns (e.g., corporate charters that require
shareholder wealth maximization) lower the WTP for impact. In addition to the LP geography-
impact interaction, these estimates for attributes (4)-(6) are further robust to including the LP Type
fixed effects interacted with impact, thus exploiting international (e.g., U.S. vs. non-U.S.)
differences in laws for a given LP type governing attributes (4)-(6).
        Finally, we provide evidence on whether investors' WTP varies across the different types
of impact, though we characterize this evidence as preliminary given the small sample sizes in
each type. Impact funds focused on environmental impact, poverty alleviation, and women or
minorities generate the highest WTP estimates. In contrast, impact funds focused on small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and social infrastructure (e.g. health, education, and mainstream
infrastructure) funds do not generate investment rates that reliably differ from those of traditional
VC funds. These preliminary findings, which we hope provides fodder for future research, suggest
that the internalization of utility from public good investing depends on how much the good is
viewed as a public good versus an endeavor that could be profitable.
        There is little prior academic work on impact investing by private investment vehicles.
Kovner and Lerner (2015) study 28 community development venture capital funds in the U.S.,
finding that these funds tend to invest in companies at an earlier stage, in industries outside the VC
mainstream, and with fewer successful exits. Geczy, Jeffers, Musto, and Tucker (2018) analyze
contracts of impact funds and document that these contracts provide specific impact goals,
indicating that investors intentionally seek impact when investing in these funds.
        Our work relates to the broader literature on socially responsible investing (SRI) that dates
back as far as Milton Friedman's 1970 doctrine on responsible investing. 3 A survey by Renneboog,
Ter Horst, and Zhang (2008) highlights the tension of SRI investing, concluding that investors in
SRI funds may (but not with certainty) be willing to knowingly forego some expected financial
returns for social or moral considerations. Consistent with the idea that investors in SRI funds


3
 "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase Its Profits," The New York Times Magazine, September 13,
1970. Also see Geczy et al. (2003).


                                                                                                             6
value attributes other than performance, Benson and Humphrey (2008), Renneboog, Ter Horst,
and Zhang (2011) and Bialkowski and Starks (2016) show that SRI fund flows are less sensitive
to performance than non-SRI flows while Bollen (2007) documents SRI funds have less volatile
flows. Hartzmark and Sussman (2019) document Morningstar sustainability ratings introduced in
2016 resulted in large reallocations of capital toward funds with high sustainability ratings.
Similarly, one strand of the SRI literature argues the nonpecuniary interests of investors affect the
expected returns of investors; stocks preferred for nonfinancial reasons earn lower returns than
spurned stocks. Building on this idea, Hong and Kacpercyzk (2009) find that stocks subject to
widespread negative investment screens earn strong returns (also see Chava 2014). In other work,
Dimson et al. (2015) provide evidence that investor engagement with the management of publicly
traded firms on a collection of environmental, social, and governance issues is associated with
positive abnormal returns. The above studies highlight the potential importance of nonpecuniary
motives when investing, which dovetails with our analysis of the performance of impact funds and
investors' willingness to pay for impact.
       Our paper also relates to a strand of the private equity literature that focuses on
understanding demand. For example, Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai (2007) and Sensoy, Wang
and Weisbach (2014) compare returns earned by different types of LPs. Our findings complement
those of Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai (2007), Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Vissing-Jørgensen
(2014), and Hochberg and Rauh (2013) in finding the importance of relationship and geography
in understanding investment patterns in private equity.


II. Data and Statistics
II.a. Data and Impact Funds Designation
       Our data on funds, investors, and performance come from Preqin's Investor Intelligence
and Performance Analyst datasets. We initially search all private equity funds (which include
buyout, balanced, and various types of funds of funds) for impact funds. However, the majority of
impact funds we identify are venture or growth oriented. Impact buyout funds are a relatively
recent phenomenon and was quite rare during much of our sample period. For example, Bain
Capital raised its first "Double Impact Fund" only in 2017, and KKR did not set up its impact-
investing unit until 2018. Thus, we restrict our study to one of VC and growth equity, which we
loosely refer to as VC.



                                                                                                   7
           Our first task is to designate funds as being impact or traditional VC, using the criterion
that an impact fund must state the dual objectives of generating a positive externality in addition
to earning financial returns. To identify such funds, we proceed in the following three steps.
1. We form an impact potentials list, combining (i) text search of articles in Factiva using a list
      of impact-related keywords4 to describe funds, (ii) four third-party lists of impact funds and
      managers        (ImpactBase        (www.impactbase.org),   Impact50   list   in    ImpactAssets
      (www.impactassets.org), ethos funds in Preqin (www.preqin.com), and MRI Manager
      Database in Cambridge Associates (www.cambridgeassociates.com)), and (iii) list of funds
      with majority geographic focus on countries with GDP per capita less than $1400. 5 Our
      potentials list consists of 323 VC and growth impact funds, once we impose the further
      restriction that the fund appears in the Preqin Performance Analyst database.
2. We manually read descriptions and online resources about funds and fund families, and screen
      out funds that do not explicitly aim to be double bottom-line, or state a dual objective. This
      results in the elimination of 146 funds from the sample (e.g., some large traditional global fund
      of funds like one managed by HarbourVest Partners that do not bear any resemblance to impact
      investing).
3. We further restrict the sample to funds with vintage years between 1995 and 2014 and investor
      information exists for at least one LP per fund in Preqin's Investor Intelligence database. This
      results in the elimination of 18 funds.
           The screening process above results in our final sample of 159 impact funds. Note that we
likely fail to designate some funds as impact (false negatives) due to a lack of detailed information,
but our approach yields a clean sample of impact funds (i.e., false positives are unlikely).
           Impact funds have diverse goals, so it is useful to consider specific examples of impact
funds in our final sample. Bridges Ventures is a London-based family of funds "...dedicated to
sustainable and impact investment..." that uses an "...impact-driven approach to create returns for
both investors and society at-large." Bridges has several funds in our sample including the
CarePlaces Fund, which builds care homes for the elderly. Its limited partners include university
endowments, banks, pension funds, and high-net-worth investors. NGEN Partners is a Manhattan-


4
    See Table A1 for the list of keywords.
5
    See Table A2 for the list of low GDP per capita countries.



                                                                                                     8
based family of funds that "...invests in companies that positively improve the environment and
human wellness" and manages three funds in our impact dataset (NGEN Partners I and II, and
NextGen Enabling Technologies Fund). The North Texas Opportunity Fund "...seeks to invest in
companies located in or willing to expand operations to underserved North Texas region markets,
with a special emphasis on the southern sector of Dallas. The firm invests in minority or women
owned or managed companies located anywhere in North Texas."
         To parsimoniously categorize these diverse impact goals, we construct six impact
categories: environmental impact, minority and women funding, poverty alleviation, social
infrastructure development (e.g., health, education, and mainstream infrastructure), small and
medium-sized enterprise (SME) funding, and focused regional development (jobs creation and
economic development funds in a specific region). For each impact fund, we read fund descriptions
in three databases (Preqin, Capital IQ, and ThomsonOne) as well as in the fund's own marketing
materials on their websites and code the impact objectives of the fund using these six categories,
allowing funds to have multiple objectives.
         Figure 1 depicts the percentage of the 159 impact funds for each of stated impact goals.
The smallest impact categories are minority and women funding (11% of funds) and social
infrastructure development, which includes health and education as well as other social or physical
infrastructure (16%). The remaining impact categories are more common with the most prevalent
being poverty alleviation (43%) and SME funding (42%), followed by focused regional
development (33%), and environmental impact (28%).
         We augment our Preqin data with the list of UNPRI signatories and signing years, which
we obtain from UNPRI. As of November 16, 2015, there were 1,422 signatories (297 asset owners,
931 investment managers, and 194 professional service managers) who collectively manage $59
trillion. We match UNPRI signatories to our dataset using investor names. Investors that are
subsidiaries of a UNPRI signatory are also coded as signatories, but not investors who are parents
of UNPRI signatory subsidiaries.


II.b. Fund Statistics
         Our analysis focuses on 4,659 funds with vintage years from 1995 to 2014. Table 1 presents
descriptive statistics for the 4,500 traditional VC funds on the left and the 159 impact funds on the
right.



                                                                                                   9
       Although traditional VC funds are larger than impact funds ($204.6 million v. $129.6
million at the mean and $102 million versus $83 million at the median), the mean commitment
size does not differ by impact versus traditional VC. When we average across investors in a fund
and then calculating the mean of this average across funds, we find that the mean commitment size
for impact funds is $27.1 million, which is not significantly different from the mean commitment
size of $22.2 million for traditional VC funds. One might wonder if the difference arises because
we are more likely to observe commitment size for traditional funds and thus are more likely to
observe smaller capital commitments. This does not appear to be the case as we observe
proportionately more investment amounts for impact investments (38.0%) than for traditional
funds (32.6%). Note that the motivation for our decision to use discrete choice of investments
rather than commitments in dollars as the outcome variable is transparent in Table 1; of the 23,986
investments we observe only 7,867 (32.8%) have data on commitment size.
       In terms of realized performance, traditional funds have a mean (median) IRR of 11.6%
(7.4%), while impact funds have mean (median) IRR of 3.7% (6.4%). The same pattern emerges
for value multiples (VMs) and imputed public market equivalents (PMEs). (Note that we do not
observe fund cash flows for our sample funds; thus, the imputed PMEs were calculated using
regression coefficients from Table IA.IV of Harris et al. (2014), which use the S&P 500 as a
benchmark, and observed IRRs and value multiples for our sample funds.) The imputed PMEs for
impact funds suggest that they do not beat the public market on average, while traditional VC
funds do (albeit with significant time variation).
       Our preferred measure of performance, percentile rank, is based on a fund's performance
ranking (either IRR or VM, based on data availability) relative to cohort funds of the same vintage
and geography (five regions). Percentile ranks adjust for the large temporal and geographic
variation that trouble any inference using the other performance measures, which are notoriously
difficult to risk adjust (Korteweg and Sorensen, 2010; Sorensen, Wang, and Yang, 2014; Korteweg
and Nagel, 2016). In particular, VC funds of vintages from the mid- to late-1990's realized very
right-skewed IRRs, when impact funds were relatively rare (only 14 of our sample funds have
vintage years between 1995 and 1999).
       Table 1 reports that traditional funds have a mean (median) percentile rank of 0.49 (0.50),
while impact funds have mean (median) rank of 0.34 (0.28). The difference of 0.15 (0.22) in
percentile rank translates to a difference of about 3.0% (4.7%) in excess IRR centered at the median



                                                                                                 10
in historical returns. Appendix Table A3 provides the mapping of percentile ranks to excess IRRs,
which are calculated as a fund IRR less the median IRR for the fund's vintage year and geography
cohort. Although this mapping includes the strong VC return years of the late-1990s, the post-2000
sample yields estimates that are within 1.2 ppts of the full sample mapping for percentile rank
differences 0.40 or less.
       Table 1 reports a large difference in the standard deviation of IRRs for traditional funds
versus impact funds (32.06% versus 15.17%). This difference is not statistically significant, but
the magnitude of the difference triggers concern about risk differences. When we look into the
source of these standard deviation differences, we find that the difference in return dispersion is
again due to the lack of impact funds during the dot.com boom in the 1990s together with the
highly right-skewed performance of traditional VCs during this period. Among traditional funds
of late-1990s vintage, 22 earned IRRs greater than 100%. From 2000 onwards, the standard
deviation of IRRs for traditional and impact funds are similar (16.8% versus 14.7%). Likewise,
even in the full sample, the downside risk (measured as the standard deviation of funds with IRRs
less than 50%) is statistically and economically the same across traditional (14.3%) and impact
(15.2%) funds. Furthermore, our results are quantitatively similar if we restrict our sample to funds
from 2000 onwards.
       Another potential data concern is the observability of returns among VC funds. Preqin data
are similar to other databases in return statistics (Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan, 2014), but the
observability of returns may vary depending on a fund's impact status. In unreported tests, we use
the fact that public pensions are often required to disclose their holdings and returns (Metrick and
Yasuda, 2010) to ensure robustness of our results to a setting unlikely to be affected by selection
in observability.
       Panel B of Table 1 reports the geography of impact-versus-traditional funds. We collapse
Preqin codes of the geographic focus of fund investments to eight regions and designate a fund to
have a geographic focus if more than a third of all geographic descriptors are concentrated in a
given region. Most funds (84%) focus on only one of the eight global regions and a small
percentage have no geographic focus (3.5%). Impact funds tilt more toward developing countries
including Africa, Latin America, and Emerging Europe than traditional funds.
       Panel C of Table 1 reports the industry foci of impact-versus-traditional funds. We collapse
the Preqin codes to 11 different industries (business services, energy, consumer, diversified,



                                                                                                  11
industrials, information technology, health care, infrastructure, food and agriculture, real estate,
and media/communications) and code a fund as having an industry focus if more than a third of
industry sector descriptors are concentrated in a given industry. Both self-described diversified
funds and funds that lack any focus on particular industries (according to our coding method) are
categorized as "diversified." Impact funds are more likely to be energy or diversified funds, and
less likely to be IT, health care, or media and communication funds than traditional VC.


II.c. Investor (LP) Statistics
        We categorize investors into nine types by doing manual web searches for each investor in
our sample. We refer to these groupings as LP types, reflecting the limited partner designation of
investors in private equity. Our goal is to attribute the investing to the source of capital (rather than
the intermediary). Thus, for asset managers, we search each manager to uncover whether the asset
manager specializes in serving a particular constituent (e.g., public pensions).
        Development Organizations include multinational, national, and regional organizations
that invest with development purposes in mind (e.g., International Finance Corporation, Ireland
Strategic Investment Fund, and New Mexico State Investment Council). Financial Institutions
include banks and insurance companies. (When we separately analyze banks and insurance
companies, we obtain similar results for each group.) Corporation & Government Portfolios
include corporations who invest in VC (e.g., Cisco and Siemens), state-owned corporations (e.g.,
China Steel and China Oceanwide Holdings), and sovereign wealth funds that are not
development-oriented (e.g., Abu Dhabi Investment Authority).6 Wealth Managers include family
offices (e.g., Merrion Family Trust) and advisers who serve retail or high net worth clients (e.g.,
BNY Mellon Wealth Management). Private Pensions are primarily corporate pensions, but also
include multiemployer retirement funds (e.g., Carpenters' Pension Fund of Illinois).7 Foundations,
Endowments, and Public Pensions are self-explanatory. Finally, Institutional Asset Managers, a
residual category, include LPs who manage money for a diverse institutional client base (e.g.,
Adams Street Partners), where the capital appears to be primarily institutional capital with a
mixture of constituents.


6
  We sort sovereign wealth funds into development organization and government portfolios following Dyck and Morse
(2011).
7
  There are 81 multiemployer pension funds and the majority are union-backed. Our results by LP type and LP
attributes are qualitatively similar if we group these multiemployer pension funds with public pensions.


                                                                                                              12
       In Table 2, Panel A, we provide descriptive statistics on LPs. The smallest categories in
terms of LP counts are endowments and wealth managers, but even these have close to 200 distinct
LPs participating in the market. The total number of investments by LP type generally mirrors the
patterns of LP numbers. The average LP makes 6.9 fund investments. The most active investors
are public pensions (15.4 funds per investor), private pensions (8.9 funds) and development
organizations (8.3 funds). The average LP has 4.3 years of experience as an LP, though this number
is positively skewed. Public pensions, private pensions, and endowments are the most experienced
LPs. Overall, 9% of LPs are UNPRI signatories. Institutional asset managers are the most likely
to sign the UNPRI (17.9%), followed by wealth manager (14.4%) and public pensions (13.4%).
Foundations, corporations, and endowments are extremely unlikely to be UNPRI signatories.
       The last two rows of panel A present statistics across the 23,986 investments made by the
3,460 LPs. The penultimate row of Panel A, last column, reports that for 33.4% of investments,
there is a prior investment relationship between the LP and fund family. The last row of Panel A,
last column, reports the home bias rate, which is strikingly large with 75.8% of investments made
into funds focusing on the home region of the LP headquarters.
       In Table 2, Panel B, we present the regional distribution of LP headquarters. Focusing on
all LPs (last column of Table 2), nearly half of all LPs are in North America, while another 29%
are in Developed Europe. However, the regional distribution of LPs varies by LP type. For
example, 82% of endowment LPs are in North America, while only 34% of financial institution
LPs are in North America. Relative to other LPs, development organization LPs have greater
presence in Emerging Europe, Africa, Central and South America, and Emerging Asia-Pacific.


III. Realized Performance Results
       Our starting point, and the topic of this section, is reduced form regressions of fund
performance. An economic conjecture is that impact funds will earn below average returns because
they impose a constraint (the generation of positive externalities) on the investment opportunity
set, which hurts performance. Alternatively, it is possible that the market fails to fully price the
opportunities in the sectors that impact funds target (e.g., natural resources, infrastructure
development), thus resulting in above-market opportunities for impact funds (though this argument
requires a friction in pricing). We consider both possibilities and test for performance differences
between impact and traditional VC funds.



                                                                                                 13
       We analyze the realized (or last reported) performance of funds in our sample: internal rate
of return (IRR), value multiple (VM), and the average percentile rank of a fund relative to its
vintage year and region cohort (Rank). We include funds with vintage years 1995 through 2012 in
this analysis and use last reported performance for funds with later vintage years that are not yet
completely liquidated. We regress a fund's IRR on a key impact dummy variable (IMPj) that equals
one for impact funds and step in control variables (denoted by the matrix X) in estimating six
variations of the following regression:

                                    IRR =  +  IMPj + X  +  j .                                 (1)
                                   ! j
In model (1), we estimate a univariate regression with only the key impact dummy, which recovers
the average difference in IRR between traditional VC funds and impact funds from Table 1. In
model (2), we add controls for fund size, fund sequence number, and vintage year. In model (3),
we add controls for fund industry and fund geography.
       In the remaining model variations, we introduce time-varying controls for fund industry
and geography. Ideally, we would like to include vintage-geography-industry fixed effects, but we
lack degrees of freedom to do so (since some geographies and industries have few funds). As a
compromise, we consider models with vintage-geography and static industry fixed effects (Model
4), vintage-industry and static geography fixed effects (Model 5), and fixed effects for 60 clusters
of vintage year, industry and geography (Model 6). In the last model, we cluster funds into six
three-year vintage groups (1995-1997 to 2010-2012), two geographies (North America/Europe
versus the rest of world), and five industry groups (Information Technology and Business Services,
Diversified and Consumer Discretionary, Health Care, Media and Communications, and Other
Industries in Table 1, Panel C).
       In each regression, we estimate robust standard errors clustered by vintage year and
geography. The six regressions are also estimated using either a fund's VM as the dependent
variable or a fund's percentile rank as the dependent variable.
       Table 3 reports the coefficient estimates on the key impact dummy variable. We find that
impact funds reliably underperform traditional VC funds. Focusing first on IRR results in columns
(1) to (3) of Panel A, the univariate regression of column (1) reveals that impact funds
underperform traditional VC funds by 7.89 ppts (p<.01). When we add controls for fund size,
sequence number, and vintage year in column (2), the performance spread grows to 9.94 ppts
(p<.01). Finally, in column (3) we add controls for fund geography and industry. While fund


                                                                                                 14
geography and industry explain some of the performance variation, the performance spread of 4.70
ppts remains reliably negative. Models (4) to (6) introduce finer controls on industry and
geography as discussed above and yield results similar to those of model (3). Thus, industry and
geography explain some of the variation in performance between impact and other funds.
However, models with industry and geography controls may underestimate the differences
between impact and traditional funds if we misclassify some impact funds as traditional funds and
impact funds are more prevalent in some industries and geographies.
        The analysis of value multiples (Panel B) and percentile ranks (Panel C) are qualitatively
similar to the analysis of IRRs. Value multiples for impact funds are reliably less than those of
traditional VC funds, ranging from 0.194 to 0.465 depending on model specification. Percentile
ranks for impact fund are also reliably less than those of traditional VC funds, ranging from 7.8 to
15.8 ppts depending on model specification.
        These performance results represent one contribution of our analysis as we document
impact funds underperform traditional VC funds. However, this fund level analysis of realized
returns is not immune from concerns of selection in observability of VC fund returns. More
fundamentally, ex post performance estimations do not necessarily reveal ex ante decisions to
invest as a function of expected returns. As motivated in the introduction, we are interested in an
intentional willingness to pay for impact if any, and its variation across different investors. Thus,
we now turn to a willingness to pay model of this ex ante choice, which builds on the hedonic
pricing and resource choice literatures.


IV. Willingness to Pay Methodology
        This section presents the discrete-choice hedonic model for estimating investors'
willingness to pay (WTP) for impact funds, closely following Cameron and James (1987) and
Huber and Train (2001). In the original applications of these models WTP might be, for example,
a homebuyer's willingness to pay for a porch, estimated from homebuyers' purchase choices
among the houses for sale at a cross-section in time. Analogously, WTP in our context is the
hedonic value of investing in impact, estimated from investors' choices of investments from
investment opportunities available at a cross-section in time.8 Our WTP model is different from


8
  VC fund structures only allow investments at fund formation. Thus, the choice of a VC investment is considered
relative to other funds of the same vintage.


                                                                                                             15
the housing example in that the price variable in our setting is an unobserved expected return,
requiring an additional layer of estimation that we discuss in detail below.


IV.a. Random Utility Model of Willingness to Pay
        Consider investor i facing a binary choice of whether to invest in fund j. A random utility
                        
model of latent utility "# from such an investment is given by:
                                     /        /
                        "# = )r# + + . .,# +  2 2,"# + µ" +  " IMPACT# + e"# .                                   (2)

        The first terms <)r# +, .,# , 2,"# = and the four parameters {, . , 2 , µ" } govern the creation
of utility from an investor's portfolio choice. )r# + is the expected return for fund j. .,# is a matrix
of non-price fund characteristics that enter the portfolio choice preference for the investment (e.g.,
geography, sector, fund size). 2,"# is a matrix of investor characteristics governing investor
preferences, including the investors' recent intensity of investing in the asset class, the proximity
to the investment, and the prior relationship with the VC firm. Beyond these investor-specific
variables, investors may differentially value exposure to the asset class within the larger portfolio
choice of all of their capital, which we cannot see. Thus, we allow for investor fixed effects, µ" , as
a heterogeneous baseline utility of investing in VC. Investors' VC investment portfolio size may
grow or shrink over time, and their baseline utility may fluctuate. Therefore, we also introduce
time-varying investment intensity bins, described more fully in the results section V.a.
        The final term in equation (2), IMPACT# ,is a dummy variable equal to one if fund  is an
impact fund (and 0 otherwise). Investors may have specific utility for impact; therefore, we index
" by i. To make this investor heterogeneity operational, we cluster investors by investor types.9
        Omitted from equation (2) are explicit risk variables that might enter into a standard
portfolio choice decision. Differences in liquidity, which might generally carry return implications,
are not relevant in our context, since investing in the VC asset class ­ whether traditional or impact
­ involves liquidity lock-up and no trading. Differences in fund-specific risk might be a concern.
We control for the portfolio choice variables .,# to absorb risk differences as they relate to the
industry sectors, geography, and size of funds chosen. Yet, residual risk differences could be


9
 An alternative is to estimate a random effects logit (mixed logit) model of investor choice (Revelt and Train 1998);
however, we found the computation to be prohibitive costly given the very extreme choice (1 fund chosen out of about
100) in VC selection. Also, given that many investors only invest in a few funds, the model was not precisely
estimable.


                                                                                                                 16
correlated with a fund being IMPACT. If so, we would expect the ex post standard deviation of
impact VC performance to be different from traditional VC. As discussed in Section II.b in
conjunction with Table 1, Panel A, we find no such difference except in the dot.com period when
some traditional VC funds had outsize IRRs of 100% or more and drove up the skewness of return
distribution for traditional funds. In contrast, downside risk is not statistically and economically
different between traditional and impact funds. Finally, our results are robust to restricting our
sample to 2000 onwards.


IV.b. Logit Specification and Willingness to Pay
                          
           Random utility "# is not directly observable to the econometrician, who instead only
observes the investor's choice to invest or not. The observable, discretized investment decision
                                     
"# corresponds to the latent utility "# as follows:
                                                         
                                               "# =1 iff "# > 0
                                                         
                                               "# =0 iff "#  0.                                       (3)
Under the assumption that the error term "# is distributed iid extreme value, this form of random
utility can map to a logistic distribution with a mean 0 and variance 2/3; thus, a logit estimation
can uncover the parameters of equation (2):
                                 /        /
                 ("# ) = )r# + + . .,# +  2 2,"# + µ" +  " IMPACT# + e"#                              (4)
Following Cameron and James (1987) and Huber and Train (2001), the willingness to pay for
impact (WTP) for investor i is:10
                                                                   O][Q
                                                               \       ^OSTUVWXY _
                                             O)PQ +                                          a[
                              WTPi=                        =         O]Q
                                                                                     [
                                                                                         =        .   (5)
                                         ROSTUVWXY Z                                         b
                                                       [                ^
                                                                         O)PQ +



IV.c. Expected Returns Formation
           Estimation of a discrete choice hedonic model requires a price variable, which in our
context is the expected return for each fund, )r# + . As motivated by the literature on the


10
     Technically, IMPACT is a discrete choice variable; thus the correct form is:
                                            ][ f.h       # = 1no][ f.h        # = 0n
                                   " =                      Op                      .
                                                                   ^O)PQ+
The continuous time version is provided above for readability.


                                                                                                      17
determinants of fund performance (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Sorensen 2007), we estimate
expected returns, with estimates denoted q )r# +, based on fund characteristics observable at the time

of investment. We start with the assumption that all investors have the same model for predicting
fund returns and later relax this assumption. We begin by considering an investor who is making
decisions about VC investments offered in the market in a particular vintage year, say 1995, as an
example. The investor forms return expectations based on the information set available for the VC
asset class at that point in time. The information set consists of the average asset class return
observed recently and a fund-specific skill adjustment. Skill in the VC asset class shows up to the
econometrician as persistence in fund series performance. To estimate the strength of persistence
and the average observed asset class return, 1995 investors would use data covering vintage funds
1983 to 1990 (because of the time lag in realizing returns in VC).11 Denoting these 1983 to 1990
vintage years as being in set v, we assume the 1995 investors use the following simple linear model
to gauge parameters:
                                     .vvw   .vvw          xy"zy
                               #s =  u    + .    #s               + #s .                                           (6)
The return #s of fund j in these look-back vintage years v is a function of the performance of the
                                                         xy"zy
prior funds managed by the same VC firm (#s                      ) and the overall asset class performance for
funds in vintage pool v (the constant).
         Using the coefficients from the estimation of (6), we apply them to funds which are raising
capital in 1995 to forecast expected returns for any 1995 fund j as:
                                    q )#.vvw + =   .vvw    .vvw xy"zy
                                                  }u    + }.    #.vvw .                                            (7)
We roll forward this process to the remaining vintage years, until we have an estimate of expected
returns for each fund j with vintage years from 1995-2014.
         By definition, these forecast expected returns have measurement error since we do not
observe the actual expected returns.12 In our context, this measurement error is a common problem
of over-dispersion in expected return forecasts, given by the simple relation:

11
   The typical private equity fund invests in companies during years 1 to 5 of the fund's life and liquidates those
investments after year 5. It is during this liquidation phase that the fund's performance becomes clear to investors.
Thus, a 1995 investor would have a good indication regarding the performance of funds with vintage years 1983 to
1990 because these funds would be 6 to 13 years old in 1995. In contrast, funds with vintage years 1991 to 1994 would
still be in their investment phase with no or limited liquidations.
12
   Our forecast model uses fully realized fund percentile rank as dependent variables in Equation (6), while as of 1995,
some of the 1983-1990 vintage funds are yet fully realized (assuming 10-year fund life, 1983-1985 funds are at least
10 years old, whereas 1986-1990 funds are still less than 10 years old). This may introduce measurement errors to our


                                                                                                                    18
                                            q )r# + = )r# + + ,
                                                                                                                   (8)
where )r# + is the true but unobservable expected return, and  is measurement error that is
uncorrelated with )r# +. The importance of this over-dispersion comes when we turn to estimating

WTP in the logit formation. Over-dispersion in q )r# + may cause attenuation bias in the ·

coefficient on q )r# + when we estimate the logit equation (4), relative to the true  if we had the
                                       a[
precise )r# +. Because WTPi=                , attenuation in · implies an over-estimate of WTP.
                                       b

         We take two steps to correct the bias. First, we seek to remedy a source of error, which is
our inability to observe the soft information entering the assessment of skill. We augment equation
(6) to include indicator variables as to whether the fund is missing prior fund performance
                       xy"zy
information R#                 Z, is a first-time fund R# Z, and/or is an impact fund R# Z. This
augmented model, dropping the vintage subscripts to reduce equation clutter, is given by:
                                  xy"zy               xy"zy
                # =  u + . #                + 2 #             + , # +  #
                                                 xy"zy
                                  + w R#                  # Z                                                       (9)
                                  + ,, R#  # Z + # .

In estimating these regressions, we use percentile ranks as the performance measure. Table 4
reports a summary of estimates from the 20 rolling regressions estimating equation (9),
corresponding to fund expectations formed from 1995 to 2014. In Panel A, we summarize the
coefficient estimates and associated t-statistics on the model's independent variables across the set
of rolling estimations. Consistent with the literature, prior fund performance carries the vast
majority of the explained variation. The only other reliable relationship is that that first-time funds
tend to have subpar performance.13


model in one or more ways. For example, if investors apply interim-to-final rank transition in their true expected return
formation using their soft information, our model approximates that with some measurement errors. Alternatively,
investors may attempt to isolate the component of performance persistence that is due to skill (and investable) from
spurious correlation due to contemporaneous exposures (Korteweg and Sorensen, 2017), in which case our naive
model also produces forecast expected return with measurement errors. Furthermore, investors may be heterogeneous
in their soft information possessed to form their expected returns. We present our expected return model that
incorporates investor heterogeneity in the next section.
13
   We consider a number of robustness checks to ensure our results are not driven by the specific model that we use
to predict expected returns. First, our results are robust to alternative specifications of the expected return model of
equation (5). For example, we add additional lags of past fund performance, fund industry fixed effects, and fund
geography fixed effects. These additional variables are not consistently related to fund performance nor does their
inclusion materially affect the WTP estimates. Consequently, we opt for the more parsimonious model.


                                                                                                                     19
        Second, we employ a correction for the logit estimates attenuation by applying a shrinkage
procedure used in practice. Because over-dispersion is a common issue in portfolio choice,
investors knowingly shrink extreme forecasts toward a global mean, as in the seminal portfolio
optimization models of Jorion (1986) and as applied in expected returns or cost of capital
estimations in Fama and French (1997).
        The shrinkage procedure begins with regressing realized fund return (# ) on the estimated
expected returns q )r# +:

                                     # = u + . q )r# + + # .                                     (10)
Our estimates are u = 0.25
                      ^ amd . = 0.50
                                ^ .The  estimates imply that our q )r# + has some
                            xu.uu.            xu.uu.

information about future returns (.  0) , but that q )r# + is imprecise (.  1andu  0) .

Then, following standard shrinkage procedure, we calculate the shrinkage estimate of expected
returns q Z·y"·` )r# +, as the prediction from equation (10):
                              q Z·y"·` )r# + = 0.25 + 0.50
                                                          q )r# +.                               (11)
Whereas q )r# + has a ranking range of 0.16 to 0.72 (on a natural percentile rankings range of 0 to

1), q Z·y"·` )r# + has a range of only 0.28 to 0.61, reflecting the shrinkage to address imprecision.

We use q Z·y"·` )r# +to estimate Equation (4).

        Importantly, using the true realized returns to shrink the dispersion in estimated expected
returns asymptotically eliminates attenuation bias in the logit WTP estimation when the following
two key assumptions are added to a classic errors-in-variable analysis:
    (i) The ex post residual of realized fund returns relative to true expected returns is uncorrelated
        with )r# +. Specifically, covR)r# +, Z = 0, wherethisresidualisgivenby:
                                               # = )r# + +                                        (12)
        This condition assumes that the unexpected part of realized returns is not systematically
        higher [or lower] for funds with high expected returns and is the implicit assumption made
        in the asset pricing literature, which uses realized returns to understand temporal and cross-
        sectional variation in unobserved expected returns.
                In venture capital, returns are highly nonlinear and positively skewed. To deal with
        this issue, our empirical analysis uses percentile ranks relative to cohort funds, which are
        bounded between 0 and 1. In theory, these bounds could generate cov()r# +, )<0, since an


                                                                                                    20
        expected percentile rank near one (zero) will have negative (positive) estimation error
        because of the boundary. In practice, we do not believe these boundary conditions are
        binding on errors since true expectations of percentile ranks would not approach the
        boundary; stated differently, investors do not expect to be able to pick the top and bottom
        performing funds from a cohort. The actual range of percentile ranks that we estimate after
        shrinkage is 0.28 and 0.61, with a standard deviation of 0.035. This range is a reasonable
        estimate of the range of ex-ante expected percentile ranks and they are far from the
        boundary conditions.
    (ii) Measurement error  in forecast expected returns, q )r# + = )r# + +  from equation (8), is

        uncorrelated with the residual in the realized return relative to the true expected return,
        cov(, ) = 0. We can think of no reason why errors in our forecast returns would be
        correlated with errors in realized returns.
In Appendix B, we show that the bias in our WTP estimates is positively related to the two
covariance terms and is positive if ( R)r# +, Z + (,  ) > 0 ).  To simplify the analysis
below, we also assume the measurement error  in forecast expected returns, q )r# + = )r# + + 

from equation (8), is uncorrelated to the true expected returns, covR)r# +, Z = 0; this assumption
only affects the absolute magnitude of the attenuation bias if the two assumptions above are
violated.
        To show how shrinkage with realized returns removes attenuation under (i) and (ii) from
above, imagine a simple model of an outcome variable y (investment in a private equity fund in
our case) such that  =  + )r# + +  , where the econometrician must estimate with q )r# +

instead of )r# +. The standard estimate of the slope coefficient in the classic errors-in-variable
analysis is:
                                                   2
                                                   )P Q+
                                     plimR·Z =                   = ,                         (13)
                                                 2      2
                                                 )P +
                                                      + p
                                                       Q
where < 1 is the attenuation bias. Note that the slope parameter (. ) of the shrinkage regression
of equation (10) yields an estimate of this attenuation bias:
                                                                       -±
                       «z¬Rq )PQ +,yQZ       «z¬R)PQ+²p,)PQ+²³Z          ®¯Q°
                 . =                     =                        = -±              = .      (14)
                           -±                     -±         ±
                                                           ²-´                  ±
                                                                              ²-´
                            q ®¯ °
                                                   ®¯Q°                ®¯Q°
                                Q

Thus, the shrinkage regression provides a valid correction for the attenuation bias.


                                                                                                21
IV.d. Heterogeneity in Expected Returns Forecast and Use
          The logit model described in Eq. (4) assumes that investors are homogenous in their
forecast of expected returns. In practice, investors may exhibit heterogeneity in their forecast of
expected returns because of different forecast mechanisms or because of interest in only a subset
of funds (Hochberg et al. 2014; Cavagnaro et al. 2019). The dimension of concern to us is bias at
the LP investor type level. Thus, we estimate q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# + uniquely for each investor type as a

robustness check on our results. To implement these expected return forecasts, we limit the set of
funds in which an investor has an interest to those funds with investment by investors of the same
type (e.g., financial institutions, development organizations, foundations, etc.).14 Estimating by LP
type also allows us to incorporate prior relationships as part of the forecast. Different investor types
have different propensities to have a prior relationship with a fund in question, which will provide
heterogeneity in the use of soft information.15 These heterogeneous expected return estimates are
correlated with the homogeneous expected returns (with a correlation coefficient of 0.76), but as
anticipated have more variation (a standard deviation of 0.042 versus 0.035).
          Having estimated LP type-specific expected returns for each fund, we then estimate:
 (" ) = q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# + + .
                              /           /
                                ).,# + +  2 2,"# + µ" +  µ¶x· IMPACT# + "# .                                                 (15)
We are agnostic about which estimates are superior and report estimates from both the
homogenous and heterogenous expected return models to generate a range of reasonable WTP
estimates. While the heterogenous model is theoretically appealing, as empiricists we are not
confident that the introduction of heterogeneity necessarily improves the precision of our estimates
and are concerned that it might introduce unintended bias in our estimate due to the quality of our
LP holdings data. For instance, there are some unobserved LP investments due to data limitations,
but the heterogenous model draws a bright line between funds in which we observe at least one
investment from a given LP type vs. funds with no observed investments by the LP type. The



14
   The forecast   q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# + will only be defined over a subset of funds. Because we are interested in how our
estimate of WTP varies when allowing          q Z·y"·` )r# + to be instead unique to an investor type, q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# +, we want
to reproduce the full dataset of funds as the opportunity set for investment. Thus, we fill in                  q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# + =
q
Z·y"·` )r# + for the funds j not estimated by a particular investor type.
15
   For each fund in a given LP type sample, we calculate the average of the relationship dummy variable across all
LPs who invested in that fund and add this relationship propensity as an additional independent variable to Equation
(9) when estimating LP type-specific expected returns.


                                                                                                                                 22
introduction of this type I error may more than offset the theoretical benefit of heterogenous
expected return model.
       As a final robustness check in our analysis of WTP patterns across LP types, we allow for
the possibility that investors are heterogeneous in their use of expected returns because they face
different portfolio choice considerations. The model described in Eq. (15) assumes that investors
are homogenous in their use of forecast expected returns, though forecasts vary across LP types.
Yet, investors may exhibit heterogeneity in their portfolio diversification model (e.g., preferring
investments in a particular industry or geography). Thus, in our analysis of WTP across LP types
we allow heterogeneous expected returns forecasts to interact with the industry and geography.
       We amend equation (15) to allow for these heterogeneities by investor type:
       (" ) = q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# + + .
                                    /
                                      ).,#  q µ¶x·,Z·y"·` )r# ++ + .
                                                                   /
                                                                     ).,# + +
       /
       2 2,"# + µ" +  µ¶x· IMPACT# + "# .                                                      (16)
The resulting WTP for impact embeds a richer investor type-level application of the role of returns
in the portfolio choice model while maintaining a baseline property of hedonic discrete choice
models that heterogeneities in the magnitude of the coefficient on the hedonic variable (impact
designation in our case) be calculated relative to common coefficients on the price variable
(representing the change in utility per unit of price) that are fixed across the choice agents. This
WTP calculation is:
                                         »µ¶x·
                                         
                              WTPtype=        ¾ » q/ ½             ,                           (17)
                                               f + . ).,# +µ¶x· n

where )½.,# +      is the average of exposures to the industry, geography and discretized fund size
              µ¶x·

buckets by investor type.

V. Willingness to Pay Results
V.a. Aggregate WTP Results
       Table 5, reports coefficient estimates from the logit model of investment choice, akin to
those used in the discrete choice implementations in venture capital (Ljungqvist et al., 2006;
Bottazzi et al., 2016). Panel A presents the results using homogenous expected returns
(corresponding to Eq. (4)); Panel B uses heterogenous expected returns (Eq. (15) but with a single
impact coefficient). The dependent variable is an investment indicator variable. The set of
observations are all potential investments into the funds that close in a given year by all of the


                                                                                                 23
active LPs with at least one fund investment in that vintage year. This crossing of all LPs and all
VC funds active in each vintage year yields over 3 million fund-LP observations, pooled across
years. Our main independent variables of interest are Expected Returns (forecasted and shrunk per
the methodology section) and Impact. To prevent the impact coefficient from picking up LPs'
portfolio choice demand for particular investment characteristics, we include fixed effects for fund
vintage, geography and industry. We also include two variables capturing paired characteristics
between the investor and the fund. First, following Hochberg and Rauh (2013), we include a home
bias variable, defined as whether fund j focuses its investments on the home region of investor i,
where we consider eight major regions globally. Second, because the prior relationship between
an investor and a particular VC fund manager matters (Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai 2007;
Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Vissing-Jørgensen 2014), we include an indicator variable for a prior
investment relationship between investor i and any prior fund managed by fund j's fund manager.
We measure expected fund size as the 3-year prior average of the median fund size in the vintage
and market (U.S. or non-U.S.).
           We first show our aggregate WTP result with two models of investor heterogeneity in terms
of their preferences for the VC asset class. In column (1), we absorb investment rate
heterogeneities with 368 dynamic (i.e., time-varying) buckets of LP type crossed with the discrete
number of prior investments in the previous 3 years. Each investor group consists of investors of
same LP type (e.g., development organization, foundation, pension, etc.) and the same average
number of investments per year made in the prior three years. In column (2), the model is
conditional logit at the individual LP investor level. The conditional logit levels LPs according to
their average likelihood of investing in a VC fund. We prefer the dynamic LP investment groups
of column (1). The benefit is in allowing for dynamic appetite for the VC asset class, since we
cluster together, for example, all foundations which have 5 total investments in the prior 3 years
or public pension funds with 20 investments in the VC asset class in the prior 3 years, etc.16
           In Panel A, column (1), the coefficient on impact is 0.591, and the coefficient on expected
returns is 3.354 (p<.01 for both coefficients). The WTP estimate is reported as the ratio of these
estimates. We find that investors are willing to pay 18 percentile ranks (0.18 = 0.591/3.354) for
impact, where a percentile rank runs from 0 (0th percentile) to 100 (100th percentile). In column
(2), estimates from the conditional logit model imply a similar WTP of 17 percentile ranks. A

16
     In earlier drafts of the paper, we estimated linear probability models and obtain similar results.


                                                                                                          24
WTP of 18 percentile implies that the average investor is indifferent (obtains identical utility)
between investing in an impact fund at the 41 percentile rank of its vintage-geography cohort and
investing in a traditional VC fund at the 59 percentile rank. In terms of the expected excess IRR
of the fund, this suggests that investors who invest in impact funds are willing to give up 3.7 ppts
in expected excess IRR (see Appendix Table A3 for the mapping of percentiles to excess IRRs).
This 3.7 ppts is 11% of a cross-sectional standard deviation of IRRs (0.32).
       In Panel B, column (1), the estimated impact coefficient and expected return coefficient
are 0.613 and 4.655, which yields a WTP = 0.13 = .613/4.655. A WTP of 13 percentile rank
suggests that investors are willing to give up 2.5 ppts in expected excess IRR, which is lower than
the estimate in Panel A. In Panel B, column (2), conditional logit estimates yield a similar WTP
estimate. Overall, our WTP framework suggests that an investor willingness to pay lies between
2.5% to 3.7% in IRR. These WTP estimates are smaller, but within one standard error of the
performance shortfall that we estimate in the reduced-form regressions of Table 3.
       In columns 1 and 2, we assume that the investment opportunity set for all LPs in a given
year is the set of funds completing fundraising that year. In practice, opportunity sets may be either
more restrictive or more expansive.
       One story is that some LPs are more likely to invest in high-performing funds, either due
to LP skill differential or assortative matching between elite VC firms and elite LPs (Cavagnaro
et al. 2019; Lerner et al. 2019). Sensoy, Wang and Weisbach (2014) document that access
disparities between LP types (e.g., endowments vs. pensions), as well as returns to such access
disparities, largely dissipated in the 1999-2006 period. Yet the possibility remains that some
specific LPs continue to enjoy exclusive access to top-performing VC firms that is denied to the
rest, and that this in turn makes investors who invest in (less exclusive) impact funds appear to
accept lower financial returns.
       Another possibility is that fundraising campaigns may last longer than a year for some
funds. In such cases, funds with vintage year y were effectively fundraising in year y-1, and LPs
who were in the market in year y-1 had the opportunity to invest in that fund. Yet another
possibility is that for some LPs the fund selection/due diligence may take more than a year. In
those cases, LPs who did not pull the trigger till year y+1 were effectively looking to invest in year
y, and had the opportunity to invest in vintage y funds.




                                                                                                   25
       Columns (3)-(6) report results of tests where LPs are designed to have either more
restricted or expanded opportunity sets. In column (3) and (4), we present estimates using the same
empirical model as column (1), except we restrict the possibility of investing in funds managed by
elite VC firms only to a subset of LPs who have already invested in the VC firms' previous funds.
The two columns differ in the way we define an elite VC firm. In column (3), elite VC firms are
those with at least one fund with top-quartile performance (ranked against its vintage cohorts)
among the three previous funds. In column (4), we define elite VCs as the 15 VC firms that are
chosen as "Best VCs" in Metrick and Yasuda (2010). We find that our impact coefficient and WTP
estimates are quite robust to these rationed opportunities sets, with only slight variation across
columns.
       In columns (5) and (6), we turn to considering an expansion of opportunity sets, rather than
a rationing. In column (5), we assume that the fund raised in year y was also fundraising in year y-
1 if more than 5 years had lapsed between the vintage years of the current fund and the previous
fund. Operationally, we treat these funds as being in the market in both y-1 and y. In column (6),
we assume that LPs who made no investments in year y but invested in y+1 were in fact already
looking to invest in year y but passed. Alternatively, some of those LPs with investments in year
y+1 actually made the commitments into the funds in year y, but the funds did not close until y+1.
Either way, operationally we treat these LPs as being in the market in both y and y+1. In both
columns (5) and (6), the sample size expands because either the set of funds (column (5)) or the
set of LPs (column (6)) in a given year is greater than in our baseline sample. Again we find that
our aggregate WTP estimates are very robust to the expanded opportunity sets, as the results in
columns (5) and (6) are very similar to those in column (1).
       Before proceeding to the analysis of WTP across different LP types, we estimate the WTP
across five geographic regions using the model of column (1), but interacting impact with five
regions. We summarize the WTP by region in Figure 2. Circumstantial evidence suggests that
demand for impact should be higher for investors domiciled in Europe. In their 2014 report, the
Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA) reported that 59% of total managed assets in
Europe are in SRI strategies compared to only 18% of assets in the US, 17% of assets in Australia,
and 1% of assets in Asia. This suggests that Europeans value positive externalities more than
others. Our results strongly confirm the circumstantial evidence. North Americans have a positive
and significant WTP for impact, but it is smaller than the baseline estimate (10-12 percentile ranks



                                                                                                 26
or 1.6-2.2 ppts in expected excess IRR). In contrast, investors from Developed Europe and from
Africa, Latin America, and Eastern Europe have much higher WTP of 20-28 percentile ranks and
25-35 percentile ranks, respectively, corresponding to an expected excess IRR WTP of 4.2 to 8.7
ppts.


V.b. WTP by LP Type
          In this section, we estimate variation in WTP across LP types. The WTP estimate of 13-18
percentile ranks as reported in Table 5, column (1), is an average effect among all investors in our
sample. It does not imply that all investors exhibit the same willingness to pay. In practice,
investors are likely to be heterogeneous in their taste for impact with some investors valuing the
attribute more than others for social, institutional, legal or regulatory reasons.
          Table 6 presents the results. In all columns we allow investors' taste for impact to vary
across nine LP types and five geographic regions. In column (1), we estimate the logit model using
homogenous expected returns corresponding to Eq. (4). In column (2), we use heterogenous
expected returns corresponding to Eq. (15).
          Figure 3 summarizes the WTP results by LP type. We find that development organizations,
financial institutions and public pensions have large positive WTP for impact with estimates
ranging from 13-27 percentile ranks (2.5-6.2 ppts in excess IRR). In contrast, endowments,
corporations, institutional managers, wealth managers, and private pensions have negligible WTP
for impact, as their impact coefficients in the logit model are not significantly different from zero.
Foundations have a small positive and statistically significant WTP (6 percentile ranks) in column
(2). Although the WTP magnitudes fluctuate across models, the patterns across LP types are very
robust.
          In addition to testing the null that the individual WTPs are equal to zero, we also test the
null hypothesis that LP types have equal WTP; we can easily reject the null hypothesis that the
WTP is equal across LP types (p<.001). In pairwise tests of the null hypothesis of equal WTP, we
cannot reject the null in pairwise tests for Development Organizations, Financial Institutions, and
Public Pensions. These are the same LP types who exhibit a robustly positive WTP for impact
throughout our analysis. We always reject the null that these three LP types' WTPs are equal
pairwise to WTPs of the other six LP types.




                                                                                                   27
       One explanation for our results might be that investors look as if they are willing to pay for
impact, but in reality they erroneously expect returns on impact funds to be comparable to those
earned on other VC funds. Because this story would be applicable to investors new to impact
investing but not for investors repeatedly choosing impact VC funds, we can test this prediction.
In untabulated results, we re-estimate the specification of Table 5 column (1) modified to include
the impact dummy interacted with an indicator for an LP having prior impact investing experience.
We find that both the impact indicator and the interaction term are positive and significant, with
the interaction term coefficient being twice as large as the impact coefficient. Put simply, investors
with prior investments in impact funds are much more likely to invest in impact. This result
combined with the PME result that impact funds on average do not beat the market ex post (Table
1) suggests that our main results are capturing investors' preferences rather than inaccurate beliefs.
       As a robustness check of observed variation in WTP across LP types, we allow for variation
in the portfolio choice considerations of LPs as described in Eq. (16) with results summarized in
column (3). The general pattern of WTP across LP types is quite similar with the exception of
institutional LPs who have a greater WTP when we consider portfolio choice considerations.
       Finally, column (4) of Table 6 reports a model where we exclude the forecast expected
returns. Forecasted expected returns, from our main specification, are lower for impact funds.
Thus, we expect that, by excluding these forecasts, the coefficients on impact interacted with the
investor types should be lower as this variable is picking up a lower desirability for the fund
associated with missing variable of expected returns. Indeed, this is what we find. The coefficients
on all the impact interactions with investor type shift negatively, while the patterns of relative
magnitudes of impact coefficients across investor types align exactly with our previous
specifications.


V.c. Attributes
V.c.1. Discussion of Investor Attributes
       In this section, we analyze the origins of varying utility over impact by studying attributes
of investors that could motivate WTP. Table 7 presents six investor attributes (across columns)
and their mapping to the ten LP types (rows). The first three attributes characterize inherent LP
features. Household categorizes investors based on the constituents of the capital (organizations
or households). Intermediated classifies the LP types based on whether the capital is intermediated



                                                                                                   28
through an asset manager, with an observation that intermediation creates distance between the
ultimate owner of capital and those who facilitate capital allocations. Mission identifies investors
(development organizations and foundations) that have an impact mission as a primary goal.
         The last three attributes (Pressure, Laws, and Charters) characterize the implicit or explicit
rules governing different investors' ability and desire to invest in impact funds. For these attributes,
we exploit the fact that laws governing these rules vary by geography, thereby allowing us to
estimate the WTP associated with these rules within an LP type fixed effect model. Although we
do not claim causal identification, this within-LP-type estimation strategy offers suggestive
evidence that rules may directly affect WTP for impact.
         Pressure (column 4) identifies regulatory or political pressures that encourage impact
investment. Worldwide, public pensions, despite commonly being subject to a fiduciary duty
standard, may face political pressure to increase the (perceived or real) welfare of voting
populations.17 Likewise, financial institutions worldwide may have incentives to invest in impact
funds that serve low- to moderate-income communities if such investments garner goodwill from
customers or regulators. However, in the U.S., additional regulations (or the threat to regulate) are
imposed on financial institutions in a way not operative in other countries. Specifically, U.S.
commercial banks are subject to investment obligations to serve their local low- and moderate-
income communities under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) (CRA Investment
Handbook, 2010, p.24). Likewise, insurance companies in some of the large U.S. states (e.g.,
Texas, New York, and California) must comply with state-level insurance regulations akin to the
CRA that require them to invest in local communities. Even outside of those states, insurance
companies in the U.S may face pressure to invest in impact locally in order to preempt passage of
a federal CRA-like regulation for insurance (Gainer 2009). We exploit this geographic variation
by coding Pressure equal to one for U.S. financial institutions (banks and insurance companies),
as well as for public pensions worldwide, and zero for others.
         Laws (column 5) identifies investors facing fiduciary duty legal restrictions against impact
investing. While most public pensions worldwide face formal (legal or regulatory) restrictions to
act solely for the benefit of pension recipients by achieving target investment returns and providing


17
   Public pensions may also face pressure to serve the political interests of their boards, which are often pro-labor and
consider local job creation as an important policy goal. Consistent with this idea, Dyck, Manoel, Morse, and Pomorski
(2016) and Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh (2018) both document that the investments of public pensions are affected
by the degree to which the boards governing the pensions are appointed by government officials.


                                                                                                                     29
liquidity while minimizing risks and costs, regulations concerning investing principles of other
entities such as endowments, foundations, and private pensions are typically less restrictive.
However, in the U.S., foundations, endowments, and private pensions face more restrictive
fiduciary standards than their non-U.S. counterparts. U.S. private pensions are subject to the 1974
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which states that a pension plan fiduciary
could consider non-financial factors (such as environmental or social impact) only if doing so
would result in the same level of return at the same level of risk as comparable investment
alternatives.18 Likewise, the Uniform Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act (UPMIFA),
which governs the management of U.S. foundations and university endowments, imposes fiduciary
standards similar to those of ERISA (see Geczy, Jeffers, Musto and Tucker, 2015). However,
unlike ERISA, UPMIFA provides an additional duty of obedience to the unique charitable mission
of the organization. Furthermore, tax laws in the U.S. create an additional hurdle on foundations.
The U.S. tax authority requires foundations to maintain a 5% annual payout rate to keep their tax-
exempt status; impact investments in the form of program-related investments (PRIs) can count if
certain eligibility tests are met.19 While the policy may have been intended to encourage PRIs, the
ambiguity around the test outcome and the perceived threat of tax-exempt status loss may subdue
foundations' WTP for impact in their investment portfolio.
         Charters (column 6) identifies restrictions against impact investment in the form of
organizational charters, excluding investors already covered by legal restrictions (column five)
under the assumption that legal restrictions are more binding. Charters require organizations to
maximize value for shareholders, which may constrain investments into impact funds. The list of
organizations bound by charters includes financial institutions, corporations, non-U.S. private




18
   U.S. NAB (2014). The ERISA guideline issued in 2008 and in effect until 2015 went even further, stating that
pensions "... may never subordinate the economic interests of the plan to unrelated objectives, and may not select
investments on the basis of any factor outside the economic interest of the plan" (Johnson (2014)) and that those who
consider noneconomic factors could be challenged later for noncompliance with ERISA absent a written record
demonstrating no financial sacrifice was made. The new ERISA guideline issued in 2015 withdraws this language and
reverts to the original ERISA restrictions. See: https://www.dol.gov/opa/media/press/ebsa/ebsa20152045.htm.
19
   Specifically, the PRIs must further the foundation's organization mission, and the financial returns cannot be a
primary purpose of the investment. In practice, PRI investors are required to demonstrate that conventional investors
maximizing returns would not invest at the same term as their investment terms. This is simple if the financial
instrument used is a below-market return debt security. Precisely for this reason, below-market-return loans are
popular vehicles for PRIs. In contrast, equity vehicles are relatively rare, possibly because of the perceived risk of
violating the PRI eligibility requirement if it makes too much profit ex post.


                                                                                                                  30
pensions (subject to fiduciary responsibility via their parent corporate charters), and institutional
asset managers (subject to fiduciary standards of the institutional sources of capital).
          Finally, as we noted in the introduction, both the number of and the dollar amount of assets
managed by organizations that are UNPRI signatories have sharply increased in the recent years.
Since investors signing the UNPRI are doing so with a cost of compliance, it is plausible that they
also have higher willingness to pay for impact compared to non-signatories because of a mission
objective. This mission objective may be a fixed attribute for the investor or may reflect some
time-varying interest in generation of non-pecuniary benefits from their portfolios. Thus, we
introduce two final variables ­ an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the investor is a
UNPRI signatory and an indicator variable that takes a value of one for UNPRI signatories in the
years after signing.


V.e.2. WTP Results by Attribute
          Table 8 reports the role of investor attributes in generating WTP for impact. The
specification is again the logit estimation with dynamic LP investment groups. Columns (1)-(3)
present the results using homogenous expected returns; columns (4)-(6) are for heterogenous
expected returns. The columns differ as follows. Column (1) and (4) provides the baseline logits.
Column (2) and (5) includes fixed effects for LP geography interacted with impact. This forces the
estimation to identify attributes' effects beyond regional preferences for impact. Column (3) and
(6) includes LP type interacted with impact fixed effects. The inherent LP type attributes ­ Mission,
Household, and Intermediated ­ do not vary by geography and thus drop in this specification.
          We report three main attributes results that inform our understanding of investors' WTP
for impact. First, having a mission objective increases investors' WTP for impact. Investors with
Mission objectives have a WTP for impact of 17-27 percentile ranks (3.4-6.2 ppts in expected
excess IRR). We also find evidence supporting a mission objective in considering the coefficients
on UNPRI variables. Both the UNPRI Signatory and the UNPRI Post-Signing variables have
positive and significant coefficient across columns. The WTP of being a Signatory type is 6-12
percentile ranks, while that for a Post-Signing dummy is additional 17-22 percentile ranks. UNPRI
signing captures both temporal and cross-sectional differences in investors' willingness to pay for
impact.




                                                                                                   31
       Second, investors facing Pressure from political or regulatory institutions exhibit a high
WTP. In the saturated model of columns (3) and (6), the estimated WTPs for Pressure are 12-16
percentile ranks (2.3-3.3 ppts in excess IRR). This evidence is consistent with the interpretation
that investors facing Pressure returns to satisfy the pressure they face from constituents or to
comply with regulators to allocate capital to investments that generate positive externalities.
       In auxiliary analyses, we find the effect of Pressure can be linked to a preference for local
investments by investors who face pressure to invest with impact. We previously noted that
financial institutions within the U.S. are subject to regulatory pressure to invest locally, while
public pensions funds worldwide are subject to political pressure to do so. In both of these
scenarios, the mechanism of pressure acts locally. We test whether pressure is a local concept and
find that indeed this is the case: investors subject to pressure are much more likely to invest in
impact funds that are focused on generating externalities at home than abroad or in another
unrelated region (see Appendix Table A4).
       Third, we find that Laws of fiduciary duty against dual-agenda impact investing have a
significantly negative effect on decisions to invest in impact. In the saturated model of columns
(3) and (6), the estimated WTPs for Laws are -20 to -28 percentile ranks (-4.2 to -6.7 ppts in excess
IRR). Laws like ERISA and UPMIFA matter. In contrast, we find that having Charter restrictions
against impact alone does not materially affect their demand for impact on average; shareholders'
recourses (e.g., lawsuits and management turnover) do not seem to bind against impact investing
in a way that we can identify.
       Note that our results are a mixture of utility from regulatory compliance, social signaling
and preferences as underlying investor motivations. We do not attempt to disentangle the sources
of utility across different investors, but our results have some counterparts in the literature. Akin
to our Mission result, Riedl and Smeets (2017) document that both signaling and preferences
explain investors' SRI decisions. Yet, in our data, investors that are subject to regulatory Pressure
may be more driven by the signaling benefits or regulatory compliance. For example, financial
institutions may be interested in impact investing as a method of complying with regulator or
fostering local goodwill (a form of social signaling). Likewise, pension managers may have
signaling incentives over the distilling perception of local job creation that drives portfolio
decisions (Dyck et al., 2016; Andonov et al., 2018). As a counterpoint, Bauer et al. (2019) find in
an experiment using a Dutch pension program that retirees themselves support allocating more of



                                                                                                  32
their retirement portfolios to sustainable investments even when they expect financial returns to
be lower. Disentangling between these underlying mechanisms is an important question that we
leave for future research.




V.f. WTP by Impact Category
       In this section we examine whether investors' willingness to pay for impact varies by the
impact category (e.g., the environment, women and minority businesses, poverty). Figure 4
presents the results of the logit model estimation of Table 5, column (1), but interacts the impact
dummy with each of the six impact categories we describe in Section II.a. Note that these
categories are not mutually exclusive, as a given fund can meet the criteria of more than one impact
category.
       The results indicate that investors exhibit a positive willingness to pay when considering
investing in impact funds focusing on environment, poverty, and women or minority issues.
Investors are willing to forego 15-22 percentile ranks (3.0-4.7 ppts in excess IRR) in performance
when investing in these impact categories. Notably, these are all arguably categories with high
public good or externality content. In contrast, investors do not exhibit significantly higher WTP
when considering investing in impact funds focusing on SME funding relative to nonimpact funds.
However, 57% of impact funds in the SME category also have a poverty focus and are thus
captured by the poverty category. SME funds without a poverty focus often target particular
geographic areas (e.g. Oregon Investment Fund) and are unlikely to attract interest from investors
other than local financial institutions and pensions.


VI. Conclusion
       Our goal has been to understand whether investors are willing to accept lower financial
returns for nonpecuniary benefits of intentional impact investing. We document that ex post
financial returns earned by impact funds are 4.7 ppts lower than those earned by traditional VC
funds, even after controlling for a host of fund characteristics. To examine whether investors in
impact funds willingly trade off expected financial returns at the time of investment decisions, we
use a hedonic pricing framework of willingness to pay for impact. We find that impact investors




                                                                                                 33
are on average willing to forgo 13 to 18 percentile ranks of vintage-geography benchmarked
performance or about 2.5 to 3.7 ppts in expected excess IRR.
       Willingness to pay varies considerably over who controls the capital. To unpack the
heterogeneity across investors, we categorize investors into nine broad categories. Investors in
three of the nine categories ­ development organizations, financial institutions, and public
pensions ­ exhibit reliably positive willingness to pay for impact. We then delve into what
attributes of investors affect investors' willingness to pay for impact. Not surprisingly, investors
with organizational missions and investors who are PRI signatories (especially post-signing) have
high WTP. In addition, we find that investors facing political and/or regulatory pressure (e.g.,
banks and insurance companies in the U.S. that face CRA and other equivalent requirements) and
those benefiting from political or local goodwill exhibit a higher willingness to pay for impact. In
contrast, laws restricting financial return-sacrificing investment (e.g., ERISA and UPMIFA in the
U.S.) may hinder WTP for impact. Since the number of high-fiduciary LPs affected by such legal
restrictions is large (1,258 out of 3,504 in our sample), this finding has important implications for
how subtle shifts in legal interpretations of institutions' fiduciary duty may affect investors'
willingness to pay for impact. For example, in the U.S., the IRS and Treasury issued guidance on
mission-related investments in September 2015, assuring that it is possible for private foundations
to make a prudent investment using the foundation's assets that advances the foundation's
charitable purpose, even if the investment offers a lower rate of return, higher risk, or lower
liquidity than alternative investments that do not further charitable purposes. To the extent that
(either real or perceived) risk of a tax penalty from making impact investments had a negative
effect on their WTP prior to this ruling, this regulatory shift may affect foundations' WTP in the
future years. Moreover, recent growth in fundraising by impact buyout and impact infrastructure
funds by mainstream GPs like KKR and Bain Capital is consistent with asset managers meeting
investors' demand for dual-bottom-line funds. Since a positive loading on the impact implies lower
performance-sensitivity in fundraising, these GPs may find the impact designation valuable for
their objective of maximizing NPV of future fee revenues (Chung et al. 2012).
       In combination, our results provide compelling evidence that investors are willing to pay
for nonpecuniary characteristics of investments. This result indicates that the capital allocation
decisions, though certainly governed by the linchpin risk-return tradeoff of wealth maximization
in standard utility models, are also shaped by the real-world consequences of the investments that


                                                                                                  34
people make. The willingness to pay for impact varies considerably across legal and regulatory
environments, investor geography, and time. This variation opens up a number of avenues for
future research that explores the factors that govern the variation that we document.




                                                                                           35
References
Andonov, A., Y. V. Hochberg, and J. D. Rauh, 2018, Political representation and governance:
   Evidence from the investment decisions of public pension funds. The Journal of Finance,
   73(5), 2041-2086.
Andreoni, J., 1989, "Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity and Ricardian
   equivalence," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97 (6), p. 1447-1458.
Andreoni, J., 1990, "Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of warm-glow
   giving," The Economic Journal, Vol. 100 (401), p. 464-477.
Bauer, R., T. Ruof, P. Smeets, 2019, "Get Real! Individuals Prefer More Sustainable Investments",
   Unpublished working paper.
Bialkowski, J., and L. Starks, 2016, "SRI Funds: Investor Demand, Exogenous Shocks and ESG
   Profiles," Unpublished working paper.
Benson, K. and J Humphrey, 2008. "Socially responsible investment funds: Investor reaction to
   current and past returns." Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol 32(9): pp. 1850­1859.
Bollen, Nicholas P. B., 2007 "Mutual fund attributes and investor behavior," Journal of Financial
   and Quantitative Analysis, 42, p.683-708.
Bottazzi, L, M. Da Rin, and T. Hellmann, 2016, The Importance of Trust for Investment: Evidence
   from Venture Capital, Review of Financial Studies 29, 2283-2318.
Cameron, Trudy Ann. and Michelle D. James, 1987. "Efficient estimation methods for closed
   ended contingent valuation survey data." Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 69, p. 269­
   276.
Cavagnaro, D. R., Sensoy, B. A., Wang, Y., & Weisbach, M. S., 2019. Measuring institutional
   investors' skill at making private equity investments. The Journal of Finance 74, 3089-3134.
Chava, S. 2014, "Environmental externalities and cost of capital." Management Science 60, 2223-
   2247.
Chung, J. , Sensoy, B. , Stern, L. , Weisbach, M. , 2012. Pay for performance from future fund
   flows: the case of private equity. Review of Financial Studies 25, 3259­3304 .
Court, A.T., 1939, Hedonic price indexes with automotive examples in "The Dynamics of
   Automobile Demand," General Motors, New York, pp. 98-119.
CRA Investment Handbook, 2010, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Dimson, E., O. Karakas, and X. Li, 2015, "Active Ownership" Review of Financial Studies 28,
   3225-3268.
Dyck, A., Lins, K. V., Roth, L., & Wagner, H. F. (2019). Do institutional investors drive corporate
   social responsibility? International evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 131(3), 693-
   714.
Dyck, A., P. Manoel, A. Morse, and L. Pomorski, 2016, "Bureaucrats, Politicians and Risking-Up
   in Public Pension Funds," Unpublished working paper.
Dyck, A., A. Morse, 2011, "Sovereign Wealth Fund Portfolios', Unpublished working paper.



                                                                                                36
Epstein, L. G., and S. E. Zin, 1989, "Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
   consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework," Econometrica: Journal of the
   Econometric Society, 937-969.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2007, "Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices," Journal of
   Financial Economics, 83(3), 667-689.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1997, "Industry costs of equity", Journal of Financial
   Economics 43, 153-193.
Gainer, Bridget, 2009, "What Lessons Does the CRA Offer the Insurance Industry?", P.
   Chakrabarti, D. Erickson, R. Essene, I. Galloway, and J. Olson, Ed., Revisiting the CRA:
   Perspectives on the Future of the Community Reinvestment Act, Federal Reserve Banks of
   Boston and San Francisco.
Geczy, Christopher and Jeffers, Jessica and Musto, David K. and Tucker, Anne M., 2018,
   "Contracts with Benefits: The Implementation of Impact Investing," Working Paper
Geczy, Christopher, Jessica S. Jeffers, David K. Musto, and Anne M. Tucker, 2015, "Institutional
   Investing when Shareholders are Not Supreme," Working Paper.
Geczy, Christopher, Robert F. Stambaugh, and David Levin, 2003. "Investing in Socially
   Responsible Mutual Funds." Wharton Working Paper.
Global Impact Investing Network, 2017, Annual Impact Investor Survey.
Griliches, Z. (1961). Hedonic price indexes for automobiles: An econometric of quality change.
    In "The price statistics of the federal government" (pp. 173-196). NBER.
Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, and S. Kaplan, 2014, "Private Equity Performance: What Do We Know?"
   Journal of Finance 69, 1851-1882.
Hart, O. and L. Zingales, 2017, "Companies Should Maximize Shareholder Welfare Not Market
   Value," Working Paper.
Hartzmark, S.M. and A.B. Sussman, 2019, "Do Investors Value Sustainability? A Natural
   Experiment Examining Ranking and Fund Flows." Working Paper.
Hochberg, Y., A. Ljungqvist, and A. Vissing-Jørgensen, 2014, "Informational hold-up and
   performance persistence in venture capital", Review of Financial Studies 27, 102-152.
Hochberg, Y. and J. Rauh, 2013, "Local Overweighting and Underperformance: Evidence from
   Limited Partner Private Equity Investments" Review of Financial Studies 26(2), 403-451.
Hofstede, G. (2011). Dimensionalizing cultures: The Hofstede model in context. Online readings
   in psychology and culture, 2(1), 8.
Hong, H. and M. Kacperczyk, 2009, "The Price of Sin: The Effects of Social Norms on Markets"
   Journal of Financial Economics 93, 15-36.
Huber, Joel and Kenneth E. Train, 2001. "On the Similarity of Classical and Bayesian Estimates
   of Individual Mean Partworths." Marketing Letters, Vol. 12 (3), p. 259-269.
Johnson, K., 2014, "Introduction to Institutional Investor Fiduciary Duties," International Institute
   for Sustainable Development Report.



                                                                                                  37
Jorion, Philippe, 1986, "Bayes-Stein estimation for portfolio analysis." Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis 21, 279-292.
Kaplan, Steven and Antoinette Schoar, 2005. "Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence
   and Capital Flows," Journal of Finance, 60 (4), 1791-1823.
Korteweg, Arthur and Stefan Nagel, 2016, "Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Venture Capital", The
   Journal of Finance 71, 1437-1470.
Korteweg, Arthur and Morten Sorensen, 2010, "Risk and Return Characteristics of Venture
   Capital-Backed Entrepreneurial Companies", Review of Financial Studies 23, 3738-3772.
Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2017, Skill and luck in private equity performance,
   Journal of Financial Economics 124, 535­562.
Kovner, Anna and Josh Lerner, 2015, "Doing Well by Doing Good? Community Development
   Venture Capital, " Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 24, 643-663.
Laibson, David, 1997, "Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 112(2), 443-478.
Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, Jason Mao, Nan R. Zhang, 2019, "Investing outside the box:
   Evidence from alternative vehicles in private capital," NBER Working paper #24941.
Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang, 2008. "Secrets of the Academy: Drivers of
   University Endowment Success." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22 (3), 207­22.
Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai. 2007. "Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices: The
   Limited Partner Performance Puzzle," Journal of Finance, 62: 731-764.
Liang, Hao, and Luc Renneboog, "On the Foundations of Corporate Social Responsibility"
   forthcoming in Journal of Finance.
Ljungqvist, A., F. Marston, and W. Wilhelm, Jr., 2006, "Competing for Securities
   Underwriting Mandates: Banking Relationships and Analyst Recommendations," Journal of
   Finance 61, 301-340.
McFadden, Daniel L., 1974. "Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior." In
  Frontiers in Econometrics, Zarembka P (ed.). Academic Press: New York.
McFadden, Daniel, 1986. "The Choice Theory Approach to Market Research." Marketing Science,
  Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 275-297.
Metrick, Andrew and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, Venture Capital and the Finance of Innovation, 2nd
   Edition, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Niehaus, P., 2014, "A Theory of Good Intentions." Working Paper.
Riedl, Arno and Smeets, Paul, 2017, "Why Do Investors Hold Socially Responsible Mutual
   Funds?" Journal of Finance 72, 2505-2550.
Renneboog, L., J. Ter Horst, and C. Zhang, 2008. "Socially responsible investments: Institutional
   aspects, performance, and investor behavior," Journal of Banking & Finance, 32, 1723­1742
Renneboog, Luc, Jenke Ter Horst, and Chendi Zhang, 2011. "Is Ethical Money Financially Smart?
   Nonfinancial attributes and money flows of socially responsible investment funds," Journal of
   Financial Intermediation, Vol. 20 (4): pp. 562-588.


                                                                                              38
Revelt, D. and Train, Kenneth E., 1998. "Mixed Logit with Repeated Choices: Households'
   Choices of Appliance Efficiency Level." Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 80, pp. 647­
   657.
Rosen, S., 1974. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure competition.
   Journal of political economy, 82(1), 34-55.
Sensoy, B., Y. Wang, and M. Weisbach, 2014, "Limited Partner Performance and the Maturing of
   the Private Equity Industry," Journal of Financial Economics 112, p.320-343.
Sørensen, M., 2007, How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture capital.
   The Journal of Finance, 62(6), 2725-2762.
Sorensen, Morten, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2014, "Valuing Private Equity", Review of
   Financial Studies 27, 1977-2021.
Starks, L., P. Venkat and Q. Zhu, 2017, "Green Wash or Green Walk: The ESG Responsiveness
    of Institutional Investors." Working Paper.
U.S. National Advisory Board (NAB), 2014, "Private Capital, Public Good".




                                                                                               39
                                            Appendix A

       Table A1 contains a list of search terms used to identify impact funds.

       Table A2 contains the list of countries with GDP per capita less than $1400.

       Table A3 presents the mapping of percentile ranks to excess IRR.

       In Table A4, we test the home bias argument for the pressure result in Section V.e.2 by
adding a triple interaction of Impact, Pressure, and Homebias, a dummy variable that equals one
if the fund is in the same region as the LP. Table A4 reports logit estimates with dynamic LP
investment groups akin to the attribute table (Table 8), where we add fixed effects for the
interaction of impact and LP geography (column 1 and 4), the interaction of impact and LP type
(column 2 and 5), or both interactions (columns 3 and 6). In columns (1) to (3), we show the
Pressure WTP results of Table A5 are qualitatively unchanged from Table 8 when we pare down
the model to focus only on Impact and Pressure (Table A5, column 2, is akin to Table 8, column
3). The key result is the economically large effect of the triple interaction of Impact, Pressure, and
Homebias in columns (4) to (6). Investors subject to pressure are much more likely to invest in
impact funds that are close to home. The double interaction of Pressure and Homebias is also
consistently positive, though the economic magnitude is relatively small; LPs subject to political
pressure prefer local nonimpact investments, but not to the same extent that they prefer local
impact funds. The double interaction of Impact and Pressure is reliably negative in two model
specifications, which suggests that LPs subject to political pressure do not have a general
preference for impact funds (and might actually spurn impact funds when they are not locally
focused).
                    Table A1: Impact Investment Search Phrases
base of the pyramid           greenhouse         social objectives
bottom of the pyramid         impact investing   social responsible
clean air                     impoverished       socially conscious
clean water                   indigenous         socially motivated
community invest              invest ethical     socially responsible
disadvantaged                 investing ethical  socially-motivated
double bottom line            low carbon         SRI
dual bottom-line              low-carbon         sustainable agriculture
environmental impact          lower-carbon       sustainable development
environmental objective       minority community sustainable economic development
environmentally clean         minority-owned     sustainable farming
environmentally conscious     missing middle     sustainable forestry
environmentally motivated     mission driven     sustainable investment
environmentally sustainable mission investing    sustainable property
ethical invest                mission related    sustainable water
ethical objectives            mission-driven     tribe
ethically conscious           mission-related    triple bottom line
ethically motivated           poverty            triple bottom-line
ethically-conscious           S.R.I.             women owned
ethically-motivated           social finance     women-owned
green energy                  social good
green focused                 social impact
            Table A2: Countries with GDP Per Capital less than $1400
                   GDP                    GDP                           GDP
                    per                    per                           per
      Country      capita     Country     capita        Country        capita
  Pakistan         1,343 Haiti             833 Guinea-Bissau            589
  Kyrgyzstan       1,299 Benin             822 North Korea              583
  Chad             1,236 Sierra Leone      808 Ethiopia                 575
  Burma            1,221 Mali              754 Guinea                   573
  Bangladesh       1,172 Uganda            726 Liberia                  484
  Lesotho          1,130 Rwanda            722 Niger                    469
  South Sudan      1,127 Burkina Faso      717 Madagascar               449
  Tajikistan       1,113 Nepal             699 Congo                    437
  Cambodia         1,081 Togo              658 Gambia                   428
  Senegal          1,072 Afghanistan       649 Central African Republic 380
  Zimbabwe         1,031 Mozambique        630 Burundi                  336
  Tanzania         1,006 Eritrea           590 Malawi                   242
  Comoros           923
  Source: IMF World Economic Outlook 2014
Table A3. Distribution of IRR and VM for VC Funds, 2000 to 2012
The table reports the distribution of funds' final (or last reported) internal rate of return (IRR) or value multiple (VM). Excess IRR (or VM) is
the fund's IRR less the median IRR (or VM) for cohort funds. Cohorts are defined by vintage year and geography. Panel A presents percentiles
of the distribution. Panel B translates percentile rank spreads centered on the median performance measure to a performance spread for each of
the performance variable.
                                      Excess                      Excess           Percentile                  Excess                   Excess
     Percentile          IRR            IRR           VM           VM                 Rank          IRR         IRR          VM           VM
Panel A: Percentiles of Performance Measures                                  Panel B: Mapping of Percentile Rank Spread to Performance
       5th                 -14.1      -18.8           0.40         -0.81           1              0.3           0.0        0.02         0.00
      10th                  -7.9      -14.2           0.59         -0.60           2              0.4           0.0        0.03         0.00
      15th                  -4.9      -10.9           0.71         -0.49           3              0.6           0.2        0.05         0.02
      20th                  -2.7        -8.6          0.82         -0.40           4              0.8           0.4        0.06         0.02
      25th                  -0.5        -6.1          0.92         -0.30           5              1.0           0.4        0.07         0.03
      30th                   1.2        -4.8          1.00         -0.23           6              1.5           0.6        0.07         0.03
      35th                   3.0        -3.4          1.06         -0.15           7              1.7           0.9        0.09         0.04
      40th                   4.5        -1.9          1.12         -0.09           8              2.0           1.1        0.09         0.05
      45th                   5.9        -0.7          1.18         -0.04           9              2.2           1.1        0.11         0.05
      50th                   7.2         0.0          1.24          0.00          10              2.5           1.3        0.12         0.07
      55th                   8.4         0.6          1.30          0.03          11              2.6           1.6        0.13         0.07
      60th                   9.5         1.7          1.38          0.09          12              2.9           1.8        0.14         0.09
      65th                  10.8         3.1          1.45          0.15          13              3.2           2.0        0.15         0.09
      70th                  12.4         4.3          1.52          0.22          14              3.5           2.2        0.17         0.11
      75th                  14.4         6.0          1.61          0.32          15              3.7           2.6        0.18         0.12
      80th                  16.8         8.0          1.73          0.42          16              3.9           2.8        0.19         0.14
      85th                  19.9       11.1           1.87          0.56          17              4.2           3.0        0.21         0.14
      90th                  24.7       15.1           2.10          0.80          18              4.5           3.3        0.22         0.17
      95th                  35.0       24.0           2.50          1.25          19              4.8           3.5        0.24         0.18
  Interquartile             14.9       12.1           0.69          0.62          20              5.0           3.6        0.26         0.18
        N                 1,036       1,036          1,177         1,176          21              5.4           3.9        0.26         0.20
                                                                                  22              5.7           4.1        0.28         0.21
                                                                                  23              6.0           4.4        0.29         0.23
                                                                                  24              6.2           4.5        0.31         0.23
                                                                                  25              6.5           4.7        0.31         0.24
                                                                                  26              6.8           5.1        0.33         0.25
                                                                                  27              7.0           5.4        0.35         0.26
                                                                                  28              7.3           5.8        0.35         0.28
                                                                                  29              7.5           6.1        0.37         0.29
                                                                                  30              7.8           6.5        0.39         0.30
                                                                                  31              8.3           6.8        0.40         0.31
                                                                                  32              8.6           7.1        0.41         0.33
                                                                                  33              8.8           7.3        0.43         0.34
                                                                                  34              9.3           7.8        0.46         0.36
                                                                                  35              9.7           8.0        0.46         0.38
                                                                                  36              9.9           8.2        0.48         0.40
                                                                                  37             10.4           8.4        0.49         0.41
                                                                                  38             10.7           8.6        0.51         0.42
                                                                                  39             11.0           8.8        0.51         0.44
                                                                                  40             11.2           9.1        0.52         0.45
Table A4. Interactions of Home Bias, Pressure, and Impact on Willingness to Pay
The dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if an LP invests in a fund. Observations are determined
by crossing all vintage year funds with LPs that make an investment in that year. Impact equals one for impact funds.
Expected Returns are expressed as percentile ranks relative to vintage year cohort funds and are modeled based on
known fund characteristics at the time of investment and adjusted for shrinkage. Homogenous expected return forecast
is used. Heterogeneity in investment rates is modeled using dynamic LP investment group controls. All models
include standard controls (see text and Table 5 for details) plus the double interaction of Impact and Pressure in
models (1) to (3) or the triple interaction of Impact , Pressure , and Homebias in models (4) to (6). The models
introduce controls for the interaction of impact and LP geography (models 1 and 4), impact and LP Type (models 2
and 5), or both (models 3 and 6). In Panel A, robust standard errors are in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                     Logit Model
                                      (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
Panel A: Model Estimates
Expected Returns                   3.341***      3.394***      3.370***      3.379***      3.441***      3.413***
                                    [0.276]       [0.275]       [0.275]        [0.276]       [0.276]       [0.276]
Impact                               -0.333        0.396         -0.129         -0.22        0.500*        0.0333
                                    [0.271]       [0.253]       [0.328]        [0.272]       [0.260]       [0.341]
Pressure                            -0.0265       -0.0302       -0.0374      -0.219***     -0.227***     -0.231***
                                   [0.0491]      [0.0510]      [0.0511]       [0.0743]      [0.0763]      [0.0760]
Impact*Pressure                    0.603***       0.454**      0.808***      -0.921***     -1.054***       -0.741*
                                    [0.125]       [0.227]       [0.272]        [0.286]       [0.377]       [0.409]
Pressure*Homebias                                                            0.280***      0.290***      0.286***
                                                                              [0.0762]      [0.0765]      [0.0764]
Impact*HomeBias                                                                -0.222        -0.151         -0.201
                                                                               [0.136]       [0.128]       [0.130]
Impact*Pressure*Homebias                                                     2.004***      1.939***      1.971***
                                                                               [0.307]       [0.305]       [0.305]
Panel B: Incremental Willingness to Pay (WTP)
Impact*Pressure                     0.18***       0.13***       0.24***       -0.27***      -0.31***       -0.22*
Pressure*Homebias                                                              0.08***       0.08***      0.08***
Impact*HomeBias                                                                 -0.07         -0.04         -0.06
Impact*Pressure*Homebias                                                       0.59***       0.56***      0.58***

Impact*LP Geo                         YES           NO            YES           YES           NO            YES
Impact*LP Type                        NO            YES           YES           NO            YES           YES
Standard Controls                     YES           YES           YES           YES           YES           YES
Pseudo R-Squared                     0.261         0.261         0.261         0.262         0.262         0.262
Observations                       3,047,430     3,047,430     3,047,430     3,047,430     3,047,430     3,047,430
                                           Appendix B
                            Attenuation Bias and Shrinkage Regression

          In the main text, we argue the WTP estimates are reasonable if covR)r# +, Z + cov(, ) = 0. In
the analysis that follows, we outline the bias that would occur if this summation is nonzero.
          The standard slope coefficient from the regression  =  + q )r# +  + , where q )r# + = )r# + + 

yields:
                        R)r# + + ,  + )r# + + Z
            plimR·Z =
                                 2 R)r# + + Z
                                 2
                                À)P         +,        +,   ( )
                                    + + R)r# ZÁ + R)r# Z +  , 
                                          Q                                                         (A1)
                           =                           2           2
                                                       )P        + p   + 2R)r# +, Z
                                                          Q+
                                          R)r# +, Z + (, )
                           =  +         2      2
                                                                                     ,
                                        )P +
                                             + p + 2R)r# +, Z
                                               Q



Taking the classic errors-in-variable framework where R)r# +, Z = cov(, ) = (, ) = 0, the
attenuation bias is measured by :

                                                     Â-±      ²«z¬R)PQ+,pZÃ
                                                       ®¯Q°
                                           = -±                                 .                   (A2)
                                                              ± ²2«z¬R)P +,pZ
                                                            ²-´         Q
                                                    ®¯Q°


The slope parameter (. ) of the shrinkage regression of equation (10) from the main text can be written as:
                                        «z¬Rq )PQ+,yQ Z          «z¬R)PQ+²p,)PQ +²³Z
                               . =             ±             =
                                              -q                       -± R)PQ+²pZ
                                               ®¯Q °

                                   -±     ²«z¬R)PQ+,pZ²«z¬R)PQ+,³Z²«z¬(p,³)
                                                                                                    (A3)
                                   ®¯Q°
                               =                -±           ± ²2«z¬R)P +,pZ
                                                           ²-´
                                                                                         .
                                                                       Q
                                                   ®¯Q °


To sign the bias, we can analyze the difference between the attenuation bias () and the slope coefficient
from the shrinkage regression (. ):
               2                              2
               )P         +,       +,   ( )              +,
                  + + R)r# Z + R)r# Z +  ,  - )P + - R)r# Z
                   Q                                                                         Q
    . -  =                                    2           2
                                              )P        + p      + 2R)r# +, Z
                                                 Q+
                                                                                                    (A4)
                                               «z¬R)PQ+,³Z²«z¬(p,³)
                                         = -±            ± ²2«z¬R)P +,pZ
                                                       ²-´
                                                                            .
                                                                   Q
                                               ®¯Q°


          Consider the effect of the bias, (. - ) , on our estimates of the WTP for impact, which is
estimated as the ratio of coefficient on impact divided by coefficient on expected return. When we shrink
the expected return, we obtain a larger coefficient on expected return and thus a smaller WTP. As a result,
                                                OÅÆÇ
WTP is increasing in the shrinkage parameter,   OÈÉ
                                                       > 0 . This is an appropriate adjustment if the shrinkage

parameter is an unbiased estimate of the attenuation bias (). It will lead to bias in the WTP estimates if the
assumptions in the main text are violated as follows.
    1. The bias, . -  , is increasing in R)r# +, Z. Thus, the bias in WTP is positively related to
        R)r# +, Z.
    2. The bias, . -  , is increasing in (,  ) . Thus, the bias in WTP is positively related to
        (,  ).
    3. The absolute magnitude of the bias, |. -  |, is decreasing in R)r# +, Z . Note that
        R)r# +, Z only appears in the denominator of the bias measure and thus only affects the
        absolute magnitude of the attenuation bias since the denominator is strictly nonnegative. The
        denominator is strictly nonnegative because it represents the variance of forecast expected returns,
        2        2      2
        q )P + = )P + + p + 2R)r# +, Z.
        
            Q        Q
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
       Environment    Minority and      Poverty         Social     SME Funding       Focused
                       Women                        Infrastructure                  Regional
                                                                                   Development

Figure 1. Distribution of Impact Categories that Impact Funds Target
For the sample of 159 impact funds, we identify the impact categories targeted by each impact
fund. The figure presents the percentage of sample funds that target each category. Funds can
have multiple impact categories. The categories are as follows:
Environment - delivers positive environmental impact (e.g., agriculture, energy, water, and
forestry).
Minorities and Women - funds firms run by minorities or women.
Poverty - funds firms in impoverished areas.
Social Infrastructure - develops infrastructure for societal benefit (e.g., microfinance, health
care, schools, and housing).
SME Funding - provides capital to SMEs and undercapitalized markets.
Focused Regional Development - imposes a material geographic constraint on investment.
                North America


           Developed Europe


     Developed Asia-Pacific


      Emerging Asia-Pacific


 Africa, Lat.Amer., E. Euro.

                                  -0.30 -0.20 -0.10 0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50
                                             WTP in Expected Percentile Rank

                    Heterogeneous ER Model           Homogeneous ER Model

Figure 2. Willingness to Pay (WTP) for Impact by Geography
The figure presents estimates of the willingness to pay for impact based on the logit model
including the impact coefficient and the impact coefficient interacted with geography using either
homogeneous or heterogeneous expected return models. (Geography is not mutually exclusive.)
The WTP is the sum of the impact coefficient plus the impact*geography coefficient, all divided
by the expected returns coefficient expressed in percentile ranks. Percentiles are based on
performance relative to cohort funds. Cohorts are defined by fund vintage year and region. Black
bands represent 95% confidence intervals on WTP estimates.
   Development Org

 Financial Institution

       Public Pension

           Foundation

     Wealth Manager

          Institutional

          Corporation

      Private Pension

          Endowment

                        -0.50 -0.40 -0.30 -0.20 -0.10 0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40
                                        WTP in Expected Percentile Rank

                    Heterogeneous ER Model          Homogeneous ER Model

Figure 3. Willingness to Pay (WTP) for Impact by Investor Type
The figure presents estimates of the willingness to pay for impact derived from the logit
estimation of Table 6, column 1 (homogeneous expected return model) and column 3
(heterogeneous expected return model). The WTP magnitude is the ratio of the impact coefficient
for the LP type divided by the expected returns coefficient expressed in percentile ranks.
Percentiles are based on performance relative to cohort funds, where cohorts are defined by fund
vintage year and region. Black bands represent 95% confidence intervals on WTP estimates.
                          Environment


                                Poverty


               Minority and Women


                 Social Infrastructure


   Focused Regional Development


                         SME Funding

                                         -0.10      0.00      0.10       0.20      0.30      0.40
                                                   WTP in Expected Percentile Rank

                      Heterogeneous ER Model           Homogeneous ER Model

Figure 4. Willingness to Pay (WTP) by Impact Category
The figure presents estimates of the willingness to pay for impact by impact category using either
homogeneous or heterogeneous expected return models. Estimates are based on a variation of Table
5, column (1), but include an interaction of impact with the impact type category. The WTP is
calculated as the sum of the coefficient on impact and the coefficient on impact*category, all divided
by the coefficient on expected returns (expressed in percentile ranks). Percentiles are based on
performance relative to cohort funds, defined by fund vintage year and region. Black bands
represent 95% confidence intervals on WTP estimates.
Table 1. Fund Descriptive Statistics, 1995 to 2014
This table presents fund summary statistics for traditional funds (left columns) and impact funds (right columns). Capital
Commitment is the average capital commitment across investors within a fund. IRR is the final or last observed internal rate
of return for the fund. VM is the fund's value multiple. Imputed PME (Public Market Equivalent) is the fund's PME
imputed using regression coefficients in Table IA.IV in Harris et al. (2014) and the fund's available IRR and VM. Percentile
Rank is the fund's percentile rank relative to similar cohort funds (year, region, and fund type). In Panel B, we present the
geography focus of fund investments. In Panel C, we present the industry focus of fund investments. Funds can have
multiple geography and industry focuses.
                                              Traditional VC Funds                             Impact Funds
                                       N         Mean     Median Std. Dev.           N         Mean    Median      Std. Dev.
Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
Vintage Year                           4500       2005.4     2006.0        5.26          159   2006.7     2008.0        4.44
Fund Size ($mil)                       4000        204.6      102.0       300.2          147    129.6      83.00       147.3
Capital Commitment ($mil)              2717        22.21      14.60       33.85          125    27.09      15.00       32.88
IRR (%)                                1207        11.59       7.40       32.06           76     3.70       6.35       15.17
VM - Value Multiple                    1484         1.51       1.22        1.94           91     1.17       1.10        0.56
Imputed PME                            1147         1.29       1.09        1.29           65     1.00       0.97        0.42
Percentile Rank                        1530         0.49       0.50        0.30           94     0.34       0.28        0.30
Fund Sequence Number                   4500         3.95       2.00        5.63          159     3.88       2.00        5.91
Panel B: Geography Focus of Fund Investments
North America                          4500          0.50                                159      0.33
Developed Europe                       4500          0.23                                159      0.18
Emerging Europe                        4500          0.06                                159      0.09
Africa                                 4500          0.02                                159      0.23
Central and South America              4500          0.03                                159      0.12
Developed Asia-Pacific                 4500          0.07                                159      0.01
Emerging Asia-Pacific                  4500          0.17                                159      0.14
Middle East                            4500          0.03                                159      0.00
                    All Regions        4500          1.10                                159      1.09
Panel C: Industry Focus of Fund Investments
Business Services                      4500          0.03                                159      0.03
Energy                                 4500          0.06                                159      0.19
Consumer Discretionary                 4500          0.05                                159      0.03
Diversified                            4500          0.27                                159      0.48
Industrials                            4500          0.04                                159      0.06
Information Technology                 4500          0.45                                159      0.06
Health Care                            4500          0.22                                159      0.06
Infrastructure                         4500          0.01                                159      0.05
Food and Agriculture                   4500          0.01                                159      0.04
Materials                              4500          0.01                                159      0.04
Real Estate                            4500          0.00                                159      0.04
Media and Communications               4500          0.12                                159      0.03
                   All Industries      4500          1.27                                159      1.12
Table 2. Limited Partner (LP) Descriptive Statistics
For each of the LP types and all LPs, we present descriptive statistics by first averaging all observations for a unique LP and then calculating the mean (standard deviation) for
each variable across N LPs. Funds per LP are the total number of unique fund investments by an LP. Vintage Year is the average vintage year of fund investments. Years of
Experience is the number of years since the LPs' first fund commitment (measured at the time of each investment and averaged across all investments for a given LP). The % Prior
Relationship is the percent of capital commitments where the LP and fund's general partner (GP) had a prior investment relationship. The % Home Bias is the percent of capital
commitments by the LP type where the region of the LP and fund are the same (using the eight major global regions of Panel B). In Panel B, we present the regional distribution
of LPs by LP type. For development organizations, we manually coded geographic foci of their missions and used them instead of the actual headquarters location. For example,
Inter-American Development Bank is headquartered in the U.S., but its mission is focused on South and Central America. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

                                                         Found-       Financial     Endow-        Corp. &       Institu-     Wealth        Private        Public
                                          Dev. Org.       ation      Institutions    ment          Gov't         tional      Manager       Pension       Pension         Total
Panel A: LP Descriptive Statistics
# of LPs                                    258        453              572            196          404           591          174            440           372          3,460
  % of Total                                7.5        13.1             16.5           5.7          11.7          17.1         5.0            12.7          10.8         100.0
# of Capital Commitments                   2,147      2,770            2,473          1,287        1,513         3,541         635           3,893         5,727        23,986
  % of Total                                9.0        11.5             10.3           5.4          6.3           14.8         2.6            16.2          23.9         100.0
Funds per LP                                8.32       6.11             4.32           6.57         3.75          5.99         3.65           8.85         15.40          6.93
                                          (16.70)    (13.61)           (8.85)        (15.72)      (16.58)       (14.82)       (6.54)        (19.80)       (30.43)       (17.43)
Vintage Year                              2007.2     2005.8            2005.7        2004.8       2006.6        2005.7        2005.9        2004.7        2005.5        2005.7
                                           (3.79)     (3.66)           (4.33)         (4.15)       (5.09)        (4.48)       (4.36)         (4.09)        (3.67)        (4.28)
Years of Experience                         4.39       4.13             3.77           4.64         2.70          3.54         3.67           5.08          7.76          4.34
                                           (4.47)     (4.69)           (4.38)         (5.39)       (3.46)        (4.30)       (4.58)         (5.23)        (7.52)        (5.11)
% UNPRI Signatories                         5.4        2.2              11.0           1.5          1.0           17.9         14.4           8.4           13.4          9.0
% Prior Relationship                        23.7       41.7             22.7           38.8         23.3          25.0         24.6           38.3          41.1          33.4
% Home Bias                                 59.4       78.2             82.4           82.0         72.1          61.5         68.5           78.3          84.5          75.8
Panel B: Regional Distribution of LPs by LP Type (%)
North America                                19         83               34            82            21            32            34           72            62            48
Developed Europe                             28         15               36            16            28            40            39           20            29            29
Emerging Europe                              5          0                2             0             2             1             2            1             0             1
Africa                                       5          0                3             1             1             2             1            1             2             2
Central and South America                    6          0                1             1             2             1             0            3             2             2
Developed Asia-Pacific                       8          1                10            0             20            9             20           2             3             8
Emerging Asia-Pacific                        25         0                10            1             24            11            4            0             1             9
Middle East                                  4          1                4             0             3             5             2            1             1             3
Table 3. The Performance of Impact Funds, Vintage Year 1995-2012
Fund performance (Panel A, IRR; Panel B, VM; Panel C, percentile rank) is regressed on a dummy variable for impact
funds and controls. Controls include vintage year, log of fund size, log of fund sequence number, fund geography, and
fund industry. Models (1) to (3) step in controls without interactions using 5 geographies and 12 industries. Model (4)
creates fund group dummy variables based on 6 three-year vintage groups (1995-97 through 2010-12) and 5 fund
geographies in place of vintage year and geography FEs of Model (3). Model (5) creates fund group dummy variables
based on 6 three-year vintage groups and 12 fund industries in place of vintage year and industry FEs of Model (3).
Model (6) creates fund group dummy variables based on 6 three-year vintage groups, 5 fund industries, and North
America/Europe v. other funds. The 5 fund industries include (1) Information Technology and Business Services, (2)
Diversified and Consumer Discretionary, (3) Health Care, (4) Media and Communications (5) Others (Energy,
Industrials, Infrastructure, Food and Ag., Materials, Real Estate). Models that include fund size in the regression lose
observations of traditional VC funds with missing fund size. Robust standard errors (in brackets) are calculated by
clustering on vintage years and fund geography. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                            (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
Panel A: IRR
Impact                                  -7.890*** -9.937*** -4.701**             -4.898**      -4.652*      -5.359**
                                         [2.548]   [2.386]   [2.282]              [2.440]      [2.555]       [2.520]

Observations                              1,283         1,252         1,252        1,252         1,252        1,252
R-squared                                 0.004         0.146         0.166        0.288         0.19         0.274
Panel B: Value Multiple
Impact                                  -0.403*** -0.465*** -0.361***             -0.265*      -0.228*       -0.194*
                                         [0.124]   [0.107]   [0.137]              [0.141]      [0.122]       [0.103]
Observations                              1,456         1,417         1,417        1,417         1,417        1,417
R-squared                                 0.002         0.117         0.125        0.184         0.122        0.204
Panel C: Percentile Rank
Impact                                  -0.149*** -0.158*** -0.089**             -0.093**      -0.083**      -0.078*
                                         [0.037]   [0.037]   [0.040]              [0.045]       [0.040]      [0.040]
Controls for all Panels in Column
 Vintage Year FE                            NO           YES          YES           NO           NO            NO
 Log(Fund Size)                             NO           YES          YES           YES          YES           YES
 Log(Fund Sequence)                         NO           YES          YES           YES          YES           YES
 Fund Geography FE                          NO           NO           YES           NO           YES           NO
 Fund Industry FE                           NO           NO           YES           YES          NO            NO
 Vintage Group*Geography                    NO           NO           NO            YES          NO            NO
 Vintage Group*Industry                     NO           NO           NO            NO           YES           NO
 Vintage Grp.*Industry*Geography            NO           NO           NO            NO           NO            YES
Observations                              1,505         1,465         1,465        1,465         1,465        1,465
R-squared                                 0.014         0.027         0.068        0.17          0.121        0.164
Table 4. Summary of Expected Return Regression Models

In each of 20 forecast years, 1995 to 2014, we estimate a regression of realized fund performance (using
percentille ranks) on fund attributes as described in the main text. For example, in the 1995 forecast year
we estimate relations between fund attributes and performance using data on 1983-1990 vintage-year
funds since the performance and attributes of these funds would be observed by an investor looking to
invest in 1995. Panel A summarizes the distribution of the 20 coefficient estimates and associated t-
statistics across the 20 regressions; Panel B summarizes number of observations and R-squareds across
regressions. The interaction terms are only estimated for the last 12 of the 20 year rolling window
regressions because there are a small number of impact funds in the early part of the sample.
                                                % of        % of       25th                      75th
                                  Mean       |t-stats| >   Coef. >   Percentile    Median      Percentile
                                 [t-stat.]      1.96         0        [t-stat]     [t-stat.]    [t-stat]
Panel A: Coefficients
R j prior                        0.217        85.0%        100.0%      0.167        0.222        0.280
                                 [3.12]                                [2.93]       [3.23]       [3.95]
Miss j prior                     -0.052       15.0%        20.0%      -0.079        -0.051       -0.014
                                 [-0.94]                              [-1.49]       [-1.00]      [-0.42]
First j prior                    -0.076       45.0%        10.0%      -0.146        -0.054       -0.019
                                 [-1.97]                              [-3.63]       [-1.67]      [-0.64]
Impact j                         -0.203        0.0%         0.0%      -0.292        -0.186       -0.139
                                 [-1.15]                              [-1.35]       [-1.08]      [-0.88]
Impact j *Miss j prior           -0.033        0.0%        33.3%      -0.160        -0.069       0.067
                                 [-0.38]                              [-0.92]       [-0.31]      [0.24]
Impact j *First j prior          0.068         0.0%        75.0%       0.004        0.062        0.147
                                 [0.31]                                [0.04]       [0.31]       [0.79]
Panel B: Regression Statistics
Observations                     459.4          n.a          n.a       240.0        446.0        649.0
R-squared                        6.50%          n.a.        n.a.       3.00%        4.50%        10.20%
Table 5. The Willingness-to-Pay for Impact
The dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if an LP invests in a fund. Observations are determined by
crossing all vintage year funds with LPs that make an investment in that year. All columns except column (2) are a logit
model with LP investment group controls. LPs are dynamically placed in one of 368 groups according to how many prior
three-year investments they make in VC by LP Type. Column (2) is a conditional logit model (LP fixed effects). Columns
(3) and (4) drop ex ante top-quartile VC fund and Top15 VCs, respectively, investment opportunities for LPs that have no
prior relation with the VC fund families. Column (5) creates an opportunity set assuming that a GP was fundraising in
year t (and thus included in the fund opportunity set for LPs investing in year t) if it closed a fund in year t+1 and its
predecessor fund was raised in t-5 or older. Column (5) creates an opportunity set assuming that an LP considers
investments in year t but does not realize investments until t+1. Impact equals one for impact funds. Expected Returns are
expressed as percentile ranks relative to vintage year cohort funds and are modeled based on known fund characteristics at
the time of investment and adjusted for shrinkage. In Panel A, a fund's expected return forecast is homogenous across all
investors. Panel B allows heterogeneous forecast for each fund by LP type. The WTP estimate is the ratio of the Impact
coefficient divided by the Expected Return coefficient. Standard controls included in all columns are: LP experience (log of
years since first fund investment plus one), LP-GP relationship (we analyze five regions rather than eight by combining
Emerging Europe, Africa, and Central and South America into "Rest of the World", and Emerging Asia-Pacific and Middle
East into "Emerging Asia-Pacific"; however, to establish an LP-fund geography match we continue to employ the eight-
region code first and then combine the eight home-bias dummies into five), fund-LP geography match (five dummy
variables for five regions that equal one if the fund and LP are in the same region), expected fund size, and fixed effects for
fund geography (five regions), industry (12 industries), and vintage year. Standard errors in brackets are clustered at the LP
level, except for the conditional logit. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                               (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
Panel A: Homogeneous Expected Returns Forecast
Expected Returns                           3.354***         3.426***       3.248***      2.833***     3.146***     3.307***
                                             [0.276]          [0.210]        [0.363]       [0.354]      [0.270]      [0.275]
Impact                                     0.591***         0.585***       0.599***      0.567***     0.590***     0.580***
                                            [0.0599]         [0.0443]       [0.0645]      [0.0643]     [0.0599]     [0.0595]
WTP Estimate                                  0.176            0.171          0.184         0.200        0.188        0.175
Pseudo R-Squared                              0.261            0.237          0.264         0.269        0.258        0.263
Observations                               3,047,430        3,047,430      2,780,390     2,944,643    3,301,101    3,873,720
Panel B: Heterogeneous Expected Returns Forecast
Expected Returns                           4.655***         4.725***       5.072***      5.022***     4.622***     4.655***
                                             [0.225]          [0.140]        [0.253]       [0.262]      [0.227]      [0.225]
Impact                                     0.613***         0.602***       0.650***      0.645***     0.618***     0.613***
                                            [0.0577]         [0.0422]       [0.0589]      [0.0588]     [0.0579]     [0.0577]
WTP Estimate                                  0.132            0.127          0.128         0.128        0.134        0.132
Pseudo R-Squared                              0.263            0.240          0.267         0.272        0.259        0.263
Observations                               3,047,430        3,047,430      2,780,390     2,704,939    3,159,087    3,047,430
Model:
  Logit with Dynamic LP Invest. Groups         Yes              --             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  Conditional Logit Model                       --             Yes              --           --           --           --
    # F.E. (LP or Dynamic LP Groups)           368            3,460            368          368          368          368
Sample Restrictions:
  Drop Top Quartile unless Prior Relation       --               --            Yes           --           --           --
  Drop Top15 VCs unless Prior Relation          --               --             --          Yes           --           --
  Expanded Fundraising Years                    --               --             --           --          Yes           --
  Expanded LP Investor Set                      --               --             --           --           --          Yes
Table 6. Willingness-to-Pay for Impact by Investor Type
Presented are coefficients and willingness-to-pay estimates from investment choice logit models. The columns vary in
their estimation or use of the expected return forecast. Column (1) implements a homogenous model to forecast expected
returns, where we estimate a single estimate of the forecast expected returns by fund using all funds in the dataset.
Columns (2) and (3) use LP-type specific expected return forecasts, but forecasting with a smaller set of information in
numbers of fund which are invested by the investor type. Column (3) uses the same forecast as column (2) and also
interacts these forecasts with fund characteristics (industry, geography and size). Column (4) drops the expected return
forecast variable altogether. Note that WTP is reported only for columns (1)-(3). Standard errors clusted at the LP level
are in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                     (1)                           (2)                     (3)                  (4)
        Expected returns        Homogenous ER                                                                   No
                                                           Heterogenous ER Forecast by LP Type
               forecast:           Forecast                                                                   Forecast
    Reported from logit:      Estimates                   Estimates      WTP      Estimates                  Estimates
                                              WTP                                                WTP
Expected Return               3.364***                    4.591***               5.568*** Note: Not comparable to
                               [0.275]                     [0.223]                [1.584] columns (1) and (2).

Impact Estimates by LP Type:
Development Org.        0.906*** 0.27***                  0.738*** 0.16***       0.980*** 0.14***            0.595***
                         [0.180]                           [0.183]                [0.155]                     [0.180]
Foundation                 0.267        --                  0.299*    0.06*      0.469*** 0.07***             0.00261
                         [0.179]                           [0.179]                [0.178]                     [0.178]
Financial Institution   0.765*** 0.23***                  0.710*** 0.15***       0.852*** 0.13***            0.483***
                         [0.144]                           [0.144]                [0.122]                     [0.141]
Endowment                 -0.518        --                  -0.443      --         -0.300     --             -0.802**
                         [0.346]                           [0.346]                [0.360]                     [0.343]
Corporation              -0.0188        --                  0.0655      --          0.238     --               -0.316
                         [0.233]                           [0.224]                [0.194]                     [0.232]
Institutional             0.0872        --                   0.233      --       0.501*** 0.08***              -0.187
                         [0.182]                           [0.182]                [0.157]                     [0.181]
Wealth Manager             0.121        --                   0.23       --          0.449     --               -0.142
                         [0.329]                           [0.332]                [0.335]                     [0.325]
Private Pension           -0.153        --                 -0.0746      --        0.0834      --            -0.440***
                         [0.168]                           [0.168]                [0.174]                     [0.165]
Public Pension          0.730*** 0.22***                  0.832*** 0.18***       1.028*** 0.16***            0.430***
                         [0.121]                           [0.119]                [0.107]                     [0.121]
Region*Impact F.E.               YES                               YES                    YES                   YES
ER interacts with
                                 NO                                NO                     YES                   NO
portfolio choice
Standard Controls                YES                              YES                     YES                  YES
Pseudo R-squared                0.261                            0.264                   0.276                0.260
Observations                  3,047,430                        3,047,430               3,047,430            3,047,430
Table 7. Limited Partner (LP) Types and Attributes related to Impact Motives

The table summarizes investor attributes by LP Type (column (1)) and region. Column (2) indicates whether the primary constituents of the capital are
households (v. organization). Column (3) indicates whether the constituent capital is intermediated as opposed to directly invested by the constituent or an
administrator (e.g., foundations and pensions). Column (4) indicates whether impact is a primary goal of the constituent. Column (5) identifies legal and
political pressure to invest with impact. The last two columns identify laws (e.g., ERISA) and charters (e.g., corporate charters) that restrict impact investment.

                                                                                                      Pressure                  Laws               Charters
           Limited Partner             Household       Intermediated         Mission
                                                                                                   toward Impact         Restricting Impact   Restricting Impact

Development Organizations                   --               --                 yes                      --                      --                    --

                                                                                                                              yes
Foundations                                 --               --                 yes                      --              UPMIFA and PRI                --
                                                                                                                             (U.S.)
                                                                                                       yes
                                                                                            Community Reinvestment
Financial Institutions                      --               --                  --                                              --                   yes
                                                                                             Act & State regulation
                                                                                            modeled after CRA (U.S.)
                                                                                                                              yes
Endowments                                  --               --                  --                      --                                            --
                                                                                                                          UPMIFA (U.S.)

Corporate & Government Portfolios           --               --                  --                      --                      --                   yes


Institutional Asset Managers                --              yes                  --                      --                      --                   yes


Wealth Managers                            yes              yes                  --                      --                      --                    --

                                                                                                                               yes                    yes
Private Pensions                           yes               --                  --                      --
                                                                                                                           ERISA (U.S.)            (non-US)

                                                                                                                                yes
                                                                                                        yes
Public Pensions                            yes               --                  --                                      State & National              --
                                                                                                 Political pressure
                                                                                                                               Laws
Table 8. The Willingness-to-Pay for Impact by Investor Attribute
This table presents logit model estimates (Panel A) and willingness-to-pay estimates (Panel B) including variable to
test the incremental willingness-to-pay for investor attributes. In columns (1) to (3), a fund's expected return forecast is
homogenous across all investors. Columns (4) to (6) allows heterogeneous forecast for each fund by LP type. All
columns include the interaction of the impact variable with the six LP attribute dummies, a UNPRI Signatory dummy
variable (that is one for LPs who signed the UNPRI), and a UNPRI Post-Signing dummy variable. Columns (2) and
(5) add in the interaction of the impact variable with the LP geography. Columns (3) and (6) further add the ten LP
types - impact interactions. All models include standard controls (see text and Table 5 for details). Standard errors
clustered at the LP level are in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)                   (4)             (5)            (6)
                                       Homogenous ER Forecast                             Heterogenous ER Forecast
Panel A: Model Estimates
Expected Returns             3.393***      3.381***          3.386***            4.609***         4.607***      4.608***
                              [0.276]       [0.276]           [0.276]             [0.223]          [0.223]       [0.222]
Impact Estimates by Investor Attribute
  UNPRI Signatory            0.411***      0.317**           0.357***            0.377***         0.284**       0.328**
                              [0.132]       [0.140]           [0.134]             [0.135]          [0.142]       [0.136]
  UNPRI Post-Signing         0.737***      0.702***          0.754***            0.791***         0.764***      0.802***
                              [0.211]       [0.211]           [0.211]             [0.219]          [0.219]       [0.218]
  Mission                    0.916***      0.884***                              0.866***         0.764**
                              [0.322]       [0.313]                               [0.332]          [0.318]
  Household                    0.370         0.319                                 0.422*           0.277
                              [0.234]       [0.219]                               [0.240]          [0.228]
  Intermediated                -0.206        -0.224                               -0.0528           -0.052
                              [0.178]       [0.178]                               [0.180]          [0.179]
  Pressure                   0.987***      1.005***          0.553**             0.957***         0.996***      0.569**
                              [0.138]       [0.145]           [0.229]             [0.139]          [0.147]       [0.234]
  Charter                       0.14         0.196             0.404               0.238            0.203         0.382
                              [0.305]       [0.293]           [0.515]             [0.315]          [0.305]       [0.517]
  Laws                      -0.835***     -0.711***         -0.942***           -0.652***         -0.526**     -0.935***
                              [0.211]       [0.222]           [0.353]             [0.216]          [0.226]       [0.353]
Impact                        0.0668                                              -0.0472
                                               n/a              n/a                                  n/a           n/a
                              [0.336]                                             [0.347]
Panel B: Incremental Willingness to Pay (WTP)
UNPRI Signatory              0.12***        0.09**            0.11***            0.08***           0.06**        0.07**
UNPRI Post-Signing           0.22***       0.21***            0.22***            0.17***          0.17***       0.17***
Mission                      0.27***       0.26***                               0.19***           0.17**
Household                         --            --                                 0.09*              --
Intermediated                     --            --                                   --               --
Pressure                     0.29***       0.30***            0.16**             0.21***          0.22***        0.12**
Restrictions by Charter           --            --               --                  --               --            --
Restictions by Laws          -0.24***      -0.21***          -0.28***            -0.14***         -0.11**       -0.2 ***
Standard Controls               YES              YES           YES                 YES              YES           YES
LP Attributes                   YES              YES           YES                 YES              YES           YES
Impact*LP Geo                   NO               YES           NO                  NO               YES           NO
Impact*LP Type                  NO               NO            YES                 NO               NO            YES
Pseudo R-Squared               0.262            0.262         0.262               0.264            0.264         0.264
Observations                 3,047,430        3,047,430     3,047,430           3,047,430        3,047,430     3,047,430
