                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE U.S. PUBLIC DEBT VALUATION PUZZLE

                                        Zhengyang Jiang
                                          Hanno Lustig
                                    Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
                                        Mindy Z. Xiaolan

                                      Working Paper 26583
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26583


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The authors would like to thank Jules van Binsbergen (discussant), Philip Bond, Markus
Brunnermeier (discussant), John Cochrane, Max Croce (discussant), Tetiana Davydiuk
(discussant), Peter DeMarzo, John Donaldson, Ben Hebert, Chris Hrdlicka, Nobu Kyotaki, Ralph
Koijen, Yang Liu, Ian Martin, John Moore, Christian Moser, Carolin Pflueger (discussant), Jean-
Paul Renne, Lukas Schmid (discussant), Jesse Schreger, Pierre Yared, Steven Zeldes, and
seminar and conference participants at the Joint Stanford-U.C. Berkeley finance seminar,
Columbia University macro-economics, Kellogg finance, LSE, Chicago Booth finance, UT
Austin finance, the Federal Reserve Board, the University of Washington, Stanford economics,
Stanford finance, USC, UCLA Anderson, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, the virtual
finance workshop, the 2019 Society for Economic Dynamics meetings in St Louis, the Advances
in Macro-Finance Tepper-LAEF Conference, NBER SI AP/MEFM, the Western Finance
Association, the Midwest Finance Association, and the Vienna Symposium on Foreign Exchange
Markets for insightful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Zhengyang Jiang, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The U.S. Public Debt Valuation Puzzle
Zhengyang Jiang, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan
NBER Working Paper No. 26583
December 2019, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. E43,E62,G12,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

The government budget constraint ties the market value of government debt to the expected
present discounted value of fiscal surpluses. Bond investors fail to impose this no-arbitrage
restriction in the U.S., resulting in a government debt valuation puzzle. Both cyclical and long-
run dynamics of tax revenues and government spending make the surplus claim risky. Under a
realistic asset pricing model, this risk in surpluses creates a wedge of 299% of GDP between the
value of debt and that the surplus claim, and implies an expected return on the debt portfolio that
far exceeds the observed yield on Treasuries.

Zhengyang Jiang                                  Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Kellogg School of Management                     Columbia University
Northwestern University                          Graduate school of Business
2211 Campus Drive                                Uris Hall, office 809
Evanston, IL 60610                               3022 Broadway
zhengyang.jiang@kellogg.northwestern.edu         New York, NY 10027
                                                 and NBER
Hanno Lustig                                     svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way                                   Mindy Z. Xiaolan
Stanford, CA 94305                               University of Texas at Austin
and NBER                                         2110 Speedway B6600
hlustig@stanford.edu                             Austin, TX 78703
                                                 mindy.xiaolan@mccombs.utexas.edu
1   Introduction

The U.S. Treasury is the largest borrower in the world. At the end of 2019, outstanding federal
government debt held by the public was valued at $17 trillion. It doubled after the Great Recession
to 78.4% of the U.S. annual GDP. Before the financial crisis, there was widespread concern that the
U.S. had embarked on an unsustainable fiscal path (see, e.g., Rubin, Orszag, and Sinai, 2004). Yet,
recently, some economists have argued that the U.S. has ample debt capacity to fund additional
spending by rolling over its debt because interest rates are below GDP growth rates (Blanchard,
2019). As a case in point, the massive spending increase in response to the covid pandemic is
forecast to generate a deficit of 19% of GDP in 2020 ($3.8 trillion) and to increase the debt to 100%
of GDP. The debt increase met with little resistance from bond markets so far.
    The central idea in this paper is to price the entire portfolio of outstanding Treasury debt,
rather than individual bond securities. By the government's dynamic budget constraint and in
the absence of bubbles, the market value of outstanding debt must equal the present discounted
value of current and future primary surpluses. By the same logic, the expected return on the debt
portfolio has to reflect the risk profile of primary surpluses. However, we find that the value of the
bond portfolio exceeds the value of the surplus claim, a gap we label the government debt valuation
puzzle, and that yields on the Treasury bond portfolio are lower than the relevant "interest rate"
bond investors ought to be earning, the government risk premium puzzle.
    To see why, note that the price of a stock is the expected present discount value of future
dividends. Risk-free interest rates are below dividend growth rates, yet the price of the stock is
finite. Since the stock's dividend growth is pro-cyclical, its cash flows are low when the investor's
marginal utility is high. The relevant "interest rate" for the stock contains a risk premium because
of the risk exposure of its cash flow. Analogously, a portfolio strategy that buys all new Treasury
issues and receives all Treasury coupon and principal payments has as its cash flow the primary
surplus of the federal government. Primary surpluses are strongly pro-cyclical just like stock div-
idends, as shown in Figure 1. Spending by the federal government increases in recessions, while
the progressive nature of the tax system produces sharply pro-cyclical revenue. In recessions,
when marginal utility is high, surpluses are negative and net bond issuance is high. The Treasury
portfolio cash flows have substantial business cycle risk. As explained below, tax revenue and
spending also have substantial long-run risk due to cointegration with GDP. Taken together, the
relevant "interest rate" for surpluses contains a substantial risk premium reflecting both short-
and long-run risk exposures.
    The value of the surplus claim is obtained as the difference between the value of a claim to
future federal tax revenues, PtT , and the value of a claim to future federal spending excluding debt
service, PtG . The pro-cyclicality of tax revenues makes the tax revenue claim risky; PtT is low. The


                                                  1
                                           Figure 1: Government Cash Flows




The figure plots the U.S. federal government primary surplus as a fraction of GDP. The construction of the primary surplus is detailed
in Appendix C.1. The data source is NIPA Table 3.2. The sample period is from 1947 to 2019.



counter-cyclicality makes the spending claim safer; PtG is high. Quantitatively, we find that the
value of the surplus claim, PtS = PtT - PtG , has averaged -260.37 percentage of GDP. The market
value of outstanding debt has averaged 0.38 times GDP over the same period. The gap is 3.0 times
GDP on average over our sample, and has widened dramatically in the last twenty years.
    The above argument relies on a realistic model of quantities and prices of risk. When mod-
eling the quantity of risk in fiscal cash flows, adequately capturing the dynamics of government
spending and tax revenue is crucial. We model the growth rates of tax revenues-to-GDP and
government spending-to-GDP in a VAR alongside macro-economic and financial variables. This
structure allows us to capture the cyclical properties of fiscal cash-flows. A second important fea-
ture of fiscal cash flows is that tax revenues and spending are co-integrated with GDP, so that
revenues, spending, and GDP adjust when revenue-to-GDP or spending-to-GDP are away from
their long-run relationship. This imposes a form of long-run automatic stabilization, as discussed
by Bohn (1998). With cointegration, GDP innovations permanently alter all future surpluses. A
deep recession not only raises current government spending and lowers current tax revenue as a
fraction of GDP, it also lowers future spending and raises future revenue as a fraction of future
GDP. Both the spending and the revenue claims are exposed to the same long-run risk as GDP.
    When modeling the price of risk, we posit a state-of-the-art stochastic discount factor (SDF)
model. Rather than committing to a specific utility function, we use a flexible SDF that accu-
rately prices the nominal and real term structure of Treasury bond yields. The model also closely
matches stock prices and generates an equity risk premium. The SDF contains a large permanent

                                                                  2
component (Alvarez and Jermann, 2005). The SDF model's rich implications for the term structure
of risk allow it to adequately price short- and long-run risk to spending and tax revenue.
   Combining features from both quantities and prices of risk, the long-run discount rates on
claims to tax revenues, spending, and GDP must all be equal. A claim to GDP is akin to an
unlevered equity claim. In any reasonable asset pricing model with a large permanent component
in the SDF, the unlevered equity risk premium exceeds the yield on a long-term government bond
(Alvarez and Jermann, 2005; Hansen and Scheinkman, 2009; Borovicka, Hansen, and Scheinkman,
2016; Backus, Boyarchenko, and Chernov, 2018). The discount rate for revenues and spending is
high. Because of the dynamic government budget constraint, the relevant "interest rate" on the
portfolio of government debt must also be high. Treasury investors seem willing to purchase
government debt at low yields. The historical return on the U.S. government debt portfolio is
only 1.11% in excess of the T-bill rate.
   An important consequence is that the risk-free rate cannot be the right discount rate for future
surpluses and hence for government debt. While one can roll over a constant dollar amount at the
risk-free rate, one cannot roll over a cash flow stream that is pro-cyclical and co-integrated with
GDP at the risk-free rate. The latter cash flow stream carries a substantial risk premium. Yet, it is
commonplace in the literature to discount government surpluses at the one-period risk-free rate.
   Furthermore, if the debt were truly risk-free, then the present value of surpluses would also be
risk-free and hence not respond to fiscal shocks. Hansen, Roberds, and Sargent (1991) refer to this
as the fiscal measurability condition. This condition imposes that any current increase in spending
or decrease in revenue during recessions is fully offset (in present value terms) by future decreases
in spending and/or increases in revenue. We find no evidence for such offsets in the data. This
should not be surprising. There are no built-in offsets in non-discretionary spending or in the tax
system. And politicians have displayed little fiscal discipline on discretionary spending. Instead,
we find that the surplus claim responds strongly to economic shocks, much more so than the
value of debt. This amounts to a severe violation of the measurability constraints. Put differently,
the valuation of the outstanding debt is not responsive enough to news about the fundamentals.
U.S. Treasury investors seem largely oblivious to fiscal news, except during the "bond market
vigilante" episode of 1993-94. The "excess smoothness" in the Treasury market stands in contrast
to the excess volatility in stock markets.
   In the last part of the paper, we study several potential resolutions of the government bond
valuation and risk premium puzzles. First, the valuation gap can be interpreted as a violation of
the transversality condition in the Treasury market, due to a rational bubble. Rational bubbles are
unlikely in the presence of long-lived investors unless there are severe limits to arbitrage. Second,
the U.S. Treasury may earn a convenience yield on the debt it issues, making Treasury yields



                                                 3
lower than the risk-free rate. Convenience yields generate an additional source of revenue which
increase the surplus. Furthermore, convenience yields are counter-cyclical and hence reduce the
riskiness of the surplus stream. Despite their theoretical appeal, we find that convenience yields
do not help much to explain the puzzle. Higher surpluses due to convenience are discounted at a
higher rate to result in a similar valuation for the surplus claim. Third, we explore the possibility
of a future large fiscal correction that is absent from our sample, but in the minds of investors who
value the surplus claim. We back out from the market value of debt what probability investor
assign to such an austerity event. The high probability we infer belies the nature of a peso event,
and is not consistent with rational expectations. Fourth, missing government assets are too small
to resolve the puzzle. Fifth, market segmentation between U.S. bond and equity markets--maybe
because of the large Treasury holdings of foreign investors and the Federal Reserve--does not
help because the puzzle is as large in a model that only prices bonds. In the absence of arbitrage
opportunities, all bond investors must agree on the valuation of bonds.


Related Literature   Our paper connects with a long literature which tests the government's inter-
temporal budget constraint. Hamilton and Flavin (1986); Trehan and Walsh (1988, 1991); Hansen,
Roberds, and Sargent (1991); Bohn (2007) derive general time-series restrictions on the government
revenue and spending processes that enforce the government's inter-temporal budget constraint.
These authors use the risk-free rate as the discount rate for surpluses. This literature suffers from
a joint hypothesis problem. It tests the null hypothesis that the budget constraint holds and that
the debt is risk-free so that surpluses can be priced off the risk-free yield curve. Our paper argues
that risk premia on the surplus claim and hence on the government bond portfolio are not zero,
where risk premia are inferred from no-arbitrage restrictions on bond and stock markets.
   There is a parallel literature in asset pricing which tests the present value equation for stocks
and other long-lived assets, starting with the seminal work by Shiller (1981); LeRoy and Porter
(1981); Campbell and Shiller (1988). The prices of these long-lived assets seem excessively volatile
relative to their fundamentals. Government debt is fundamentally different: its valuation does
not seem volatile enough relative to the fundamentals.
   We contribute to a recent literature at the intersection of asset pricing and public finance. Cher-
nov, Schmid, and Schneider (2016); Pallara and Renne (2019) argue that higher CDS premia for
U.S. Treasuries since the financial crisis are related to the underlying fiscal fundamentals. Our
puzzle holds even when accounting for default: the market value of defaultable sovereign debt is
still be backed by future surpluses. Liu, Schmid, and Yaron (2020) argue that increasing safe as-
set supply can be risky as more government debt increases corporate default risk premia despite
providing more convenience. Croce, Nguyen, Raymond, and Schmid (2019) study cross-sectional



                                                  4
differences in firms' exposure to government debt. Corhay, Kind, Kung, and Morales (2018) study
how quantitative easing affects inflation by changing the maturity structure of government debt.
   The asset pricing model combines a vector auto-regression model for the state variables as in
Campbell (1991, 1993, 1996) with a no-arbitrage model for the (SDF) as in Duffie and Kan (1996);
Dai and Singleton (2000); Ang and Piazzesi (2003). Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan
(2013) study the properties of the price-dividend ratio of a claim to aggregate consumption, the
wealth-consumption ratio, and Gupta and Van Nieuwerburgh (2018) evaluate the performance
of private equity funds in similar settings. This paper focuses on pricing a claim to government
surpluses. Our paper adds novel no-arbitrage restrictions on the aggregate Treasury portfolio, in
addition to the no-arbitrage restrictions on individual bonds.
   There is a large literature on rational bubbles in asset markets, starting with the seminal work
by Samuelson (1958); Diamond (1965); Blanchard and Watson (1982). One interpretation of our
results is as a violation of the transversality condition in Treasury markets, consistent with the
existence of a rational bubble. We show that a rational patient investor who pursues an investment
strategy that buys all corporate equities and shorts the portfolio of all U.S. Treasuries earns a risk
premium similar to the equity premium but receives cash flows that hedge the business cycle. This
casts doubt on the rational bubble hypothesis, unless there are severe limits to arbitrage (Shleifer
and Vishny, 1997). Giglio, Maggiori, and Stroebel (2016) devise a model-free test for bubbles in
housing markets. Our test is not model-free, but the results hold in a large class of models in
which permanent shocks to the pricing kernel are an important driver of risk premia.
   Our work connects to the large literature on the specialness of U.S. government bonds, which
finds that U.S. government bonds trade at a premium relative to other risk-free bonds (Longstaff,
2004; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig, 2014; Kr-
ishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2015; Nagel, 2016; Bai and Collin-Dufresne, 2019). Green-
wood, Hanson, and Stein (2015) study the government debt's optimal maturity in the presence of
such premium, and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2018) study this premium in international
finance. We tackle the question of how expensive a portfolio of all Treasuries is relative to the
underlying collateral, a claim to surpluses. Using the standard convenience yield estimates of Kr-
ishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), we find that our puzzle remains. This leaves open the
possibility that convenience yields are much larger, as suggested by Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and
Lustig (2018).
   Our approach is to estimate processes for government spending and revenue growth from the
data, and to study its implications for the riskiness of the government debt portfolio in a model
with realistic asset prices. A large literature, following Barro (1979) and Lucas and Stokey (1983)
estimates optimal fiscal policy. Recently, Karantounias (2018) and Bhandari, Evans, Golosov, and



                                                  5
Sargent (2017) bring a richer asset pricing model to this literature and study the optimal maturity
structure of government debt.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents theoretical results. Section
3 describes the data. Section 4 sets up and solves the quantitative model. Section 5 documents
the government risk premium puzzle in that model. Section 6 discusses potential resolutions of
the puzzle. Section 7 concludes. The appendix presents proofs of the propositions, and details of
model derivation and estimation.


2     Two Equivalence Results

We derive two theoretical results which are general in that they rely on the absence of arbitrage
opportunities and two weak assumptions on government cash flows. The first assumption con-
cerns the long run: tax revenues and government spending are cointegrated with GDP; they share
a stochastic trend. The second assumption concerns the short-run: spending is counter-cyclical
spending and tax revenues are pro-cyclical.


2.1     Value Equivalence

Let Gt denote nominal government spending before interest expenses on the debt, Tt denote nom-
inal government tax revenue, and St = Tt - Gt denote the nominal primary surplus. Let Pt$ (h)
denote the price at time t of a nominal zero-coupon bond that pays $1 at time t + h, where h is
                                                                            $        h     $
the maturity. There exists a multi-period stochastic discount factor (SDF) Mt ,t+h = k =0 Mt+k is
                                              $                                            $
the product of the adjacent one-period SDFs, Mt +k . By no arbitrage, bond prices satisfy Pt ( h ) =
     $            $    $                             $        $      $          $        $
E t Mt ,t+h = Et Mt+1 Pt+1 ( h - 1) . By convention Pt (0) = Mt,t = Mt = 1 and Mt,t+1 = Mt+1 .
The government bond portfolio is stripped into zero-coupon bond positions Q$            $
                                                                           t,h , where Qt,h de-
notes the outstanding face value at time t of the government bond payments due at time t + h.
Q$
 t-1,1 is the total amount of debt payments that is due today. The outstanding debt reflects all
past bond issuance decisions, i.e., all past primary deficits. Let Dt denote the market value of the
outstanding government debt portfolio.

Proposition 1 (Value Equivalence). In the absence of arbitrage opportunities and subject to a
transversality condition, the market value of the outstanding government debt portfolio equals
the expected present discounted value of current and future primary surpluses:

                       H                          
                Dt     Pt$ (h)Q$
                               t-1,h+1   = Et      Mt$,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )    PtT - PtG ,      (1)
                      h =0                        j =0




                                                  6
where the cum-dividend value of the tax claim and value of the spending claim are defined as:

                                                                     
                         PtT = Et    Mt$,t+ j Tt+ j   ,   PtG = Et    Mt$,t+ j Gt+ j   .
                                    j =0                             j =0


   The proof is given in Appendix A. The proof relies only on the existence of a SDF, i.e., the
absence of arbitrage opportunities, not on the uniqueness of the SDF, i.e., complete markets. It im-
poses a transversality condition (TVC) that rules out a government debt bubble: Et [ Mt,t+T Dt+T ] 
0 as T  . The market value of debt is the difference between the value of a claim to tax revenue
and the value of a claim to government spending. Imposing the TVC rules out rational bubbles.
We return to possible violations of the TVC in Section 6.1.
   When the government runs a deficit in a future date and state, it will need to issue new bonds
to the investing public. If those dates and states are associated with a high value of the SDF for the
representative bond investor, that debt issuance occurs at the "wrong" time. The representative
investors who buys all debt issues and participates in all redemptions need to be induced by low
prices (high yields) to absorb that new debt. To see this, we can rewrite (1) as:

                                                                            
           Dt =    Pt$ ( j)Et St+ j +  Covt Mt$,t+ j , Tt+ j -  Covt Mt$,t+ j , Gt+ j                (2)
                  j =0                     j =0                             j =0


The first term on the right-hand side is the present discounted value of all expected future sur-
pluses, using the term structure of risk-free bond prices. It is the PDV for a risk-neutral investor. If
the SDF is constant, this is the only term on the right-hand side. Then, the government's capacity
to issue debt is constrained by its ability to generate current and future surpluses. The second
and third terms encode the riskiness of the government debt portfolio, and arise in the presence of
time-varying discount rates. If tax revenues tend to be high when times are good ( Mt,t+ j is low),
then the second term is negative. If government spending tends to be high when times are bad
( Mt,t+ j is high), then the third term is positive. If both are true, then the difference between the
two covariance terms is negative. Then the covariance terms lower the government's debt capac-
ity. Put differently, the risk-neutral present-value of future surpluses will need to be higher by an
amount equal to the absolute value of the covariance terms to support a given, positive amount
of government debt Dt . The covariance terms are new to the literature, and this paper quantifies
them. Its key finding is that, in a realistic model of risk and return, they have the hypothesized
sign and are large in absolute value.




                                                          7
2.2     Risk Premium Equivalence

Define the holding period returns on the bond portfolio, the tax claim, and the spending claim as:

                         
                                $                    $
                D        h=1 Pt+1 ( h - 1) Qt,h               T             PtT
                                                                              +1        G            PtG
                                                                                                       +1
               Rt +1 =                                   ,   Rt +1 =               ,   Rt +1 =              .
                                                                       PtT - Tt                  PtG - Gt
                                     $           $
                            h=1 Pt ( h ) Qt,h


The following proposition proves the relationship between the expected returns on these three
assets:

Proposition 2 (Risk Premium Equivalence). Under the same assumptions of Proposition 1, we
have:

                                                 PtT - Tt             PtG - Gt
                         Et R t
                              D
                                +1       =                Et R t
                                                               T
                                                                 +1 -          Et R t
                                                                                    G
                                                                                      +1 .                      (3)
                                                 Dt - S t             Dt - S t

where Dt - St = ( PtT - Tt ) - ( PtG - Gt ).

      The proof is given in Appendix A. The average discount rate on government liabilities is equal
to the average discount rate on government assets, which are a claim to primary surpluses. Since
the primary surpluses are tax revenues minus government spending, the discount rate on gov-
ernment debt equals the difference between the discount rates of tax revenues and government
spending, appropriately weighted.
      By subtracting the risk-free rate on both sides, we can express the relationship in terms of
expected excess returns, or risk premia. To develop intuition, we consider a two simple scenar-
ios. First, if the expected returns on tax revenue and spending claims are identical, then the risk
premium on government debt is given by:

                                             f                          f                        f
                          Et R t
                               D
                                 +1 - R t = Et R t +1 - R t = Et R t +1 - R t .
                                                 T                 G



Second, if the revenue claim is riskier than the spending claim and earns a higher higher risk pre-
mium, then the risk premium on government debt exceeds that on the revenue and the spending
claims:
                                             f                          f                        f
                          Et R t
                               D
                                 +1 - R t > Et R t +1 - R t > Et R t +1 - R t .
                                                 T                 G


      We show below that the revenue claim is indeed riskier than the spending claim. The risk
premium equivalence then implies that the portfolio of government debt ought to carry a positive
risk premium. The right discount rate for government debt, given by (3), cannot be the risk-free
rate.
      To understand the riskiness of the debt claim, we study the short-run and long-run risk prop-


                                                                8
erties of the T - and G-claim. To do so, we study spending and revenue strips. A spending strip
that pays off Gt+ j at time t + j and nothing at other times. A revenue strip similarly pays off Tt+ j .
      G, j           T,j
Let Rt,t+ j and Rt,t+ j be the holding period returns on these strips.
    At the short end of the maturity spectrum (business cycle frequencies j of 1-3 years), the
risk premium on the revenue strip exceeds that on the corresponding-maturity spending strip:
       T,j       f            G, j          f
Et R t,t + j - R t    > Et Rt,t+ j - Rt . The reason is that tax revenue is highly pro-cyclical while
government spending is counter-cyclical. Since government debt investors have a long position
in a riskier claim and a short position in a safer claim, the short end contributes to a positive risk
premium on the government debt portfolio.
    Next, we turn to long-end of the strip curve. We analyze the limit of the log returns on these
strips as j  , denoted by lowercase letters. We distinguish two cases in terms of the time series
properties of government spending and tax revenues.

Proposition 3 (Long-run Discount Rates). If the log of government spending G and of tax revenue
T is stationary in levels (after removing a deterministic time trend), then the long-run expected log
return on spending and revenue strips equals the yield on a long-term government bond as the
payoff date approaches maturity.

                                     G, j                       T,j
                           lim Et rt,t+ j = y$
                                             t (  ),   lim Et rt,t+ j = y$
                                                                         t (  ),
                           j                           j


where y$
       t (  ) is the yield at time t on a nominal government bond of maturity + .

    The proof is given in Appendix A. The result builds on work by Alvarez and Jermann (2005);
Hansen and Scheinkman (2009); Borovicka, Hansen, and Scheinkman (2016); Backus, Boyarchenko,
and Chernov (2018), among others.
    Under this assumption on cash flows, the proposition implies that long-run T - and G-strips can
be discounted off the term-structure for zero coupon bonds. In this case, the long-run discount
rate on government debt is the yield on a long-term risk-free bond. However, the underlying
assumption on cash flows is highly problematic. If there are no permanent shocks to T or G, then
it is imperative to assume that GDP and aggregate consumption are not subject to permanent
shocks either. But if there are no permanent shocks to marginal utility, then the long bond is the
riskiest asset in economy. That clearly seems counterfactual (Alvarez and Jermann, 2005). The
gap between the long-run discount rates on strips and the long bond yield is governed by the
entropy of the permanent component of the pricing kernel. Explaining the high returns on risky
assets such as stocks requires that entropy to be large, not zero (e.g., Borovicka, Hansen, and
Scheinkman, 2016). Next we consider a more realistic case.

Corollary 1. If the log of government spending/GDP ratio G / GDP (revenue/GDP T / GDP) is

                                                       9
stationary in levels, then the long-run expected log excess return on long-dated spending (rev-
enue) strips equals that on GDP strips:

                             G, j                T,j     GDP,
                   lim Et rt,t+ j = lim Et rt,t+ j = Et rt ,t + n      y$
                                                                        t (  ).
                   j                     j


   We show below that government spending and tax revenue are cointegrated with GDP in the
data; their ratio is stationary in levels. Under this realistic assumption on cash flows, expected
returns on long-dated spending and tax revenue strips tend to the expected return on a long-
dated GDP strip. A claim to GDP can be thought of as an unlevered equity claim. In the presence
of permanent shocks to marginal utility, the long-run discount rate on GDP (unlevered equity) is
much higher than the yield on long-term risk-free bonds. This corollary implies that government
bond investors have a net long position in a claim that is exposed to the same long-run risk as the
GDP claim. It follows immediately from this discount rate argument that the value of the long-run
spending minus revenue strips will be smaller than what is predicted by the yields at the long end
of the term structure.
   Combining the properties of short-run and long-run discount rates, theory predicts that
             f                      f                       f
Et R t
     D -R
       +1 t      > Et R t
                        T -R
                          +1 t          > Et R t
                                               G - R . To summarize, a model of asset prices will
                                                 +1 t
have to confront two forces that push up the equilibrium returns on government debt. First, there
is short-run cash flow risk that pushes the expected return on the revenue claim above the ex-
pected return on the spending claim. Second, the long-run discount rates are higher than the yield
on a long-maturity bond, because of the long-run cash flow risk in the spending and revenue
claims equals that of long-run GDP risk. Government debt investors have a net long position in a
claim that is exposed to the same long-run cash flow risk as GDP. The excess returns on govern-
ment debt will tend to be much higher than those on long-maturity bonds. As a result of these two
forces, government debt investors earn a larger risk premium on the long end than what they pay
on the short end, which increases the fair expected return on the debt claim. Discounting future
surpluses using the term structure of risk-free interest rates, as typically done in the literature, is
inappropriate. The low observed interest rate, or equivalently the high value, of the government
debt portfolio represents a puzzle in light of the fundamental risk of the cash flows backing that
debt.
   An important implication of (3) is that, if the government wants to reduce the riskiness and
hence expected return on government debt, it would need to make the tax claim safer. This would
require counter-cyclical tax revenues and hence tax rates. The latter is strongly at odds with the
behavior of observed fiscal policy.




                                                       10
2.3     Inflation and Default

Inflation cannot resolve the puzzle. The value and risk premium equivalences are ex-ante relation-
ships. They hold both in nominal and in real terms. Judged by the low break-even inflation rates
(below 2%), bond markets do not seem to anticipate that the U.S. government will erode the real
value of debt through inflation. Ex-post, the government can erode the real value of outstanding
debt by creating surprise inflation. But given the short duration of outstanding debt of around
four years in the U.S., that channel has limited potency to reduce debt burdens.1
      Sovereign default risk cannot not resolve the puzzle. The same inter-temporal budget con-
straint holds when we allow for sovereign default: the valuation of government debt is still backed
by the value of future surpluses. Bond prices adjust to reflect the possibility of default. The proof
is given in Appendix A.2


2.4     Fiscal Measurability Constraint

The value equivalence in Proposition 1 implies a measurability constraint (Hansen, Roberds, and
Sargent, 1991; Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent, and Sepp¨
                                                  al¨
                                                    a, 2002):

Proposition 4 (Measurability Constraint). Denote a generic state variable by zt . The value of the
surplus claim responds in the same way as the bond portfolio to changes in every state variable:

                                    Dt       H
                                                               Pt$ (h)   PT  PG
                                   zt
                                       =           Q$
                                                    t-1,h+1     zt
                                                                       = t - t
                                                                        zt  zt
                                                                                                                     (4)
                                            h =0


      If a negative economic shock lowers the present value of future surpluses, bond prices must
adjust to restore (4). The proof follows readily from that of proposition 1.

Corollary 2. If the government only issues one-period risk-free debt (h = 0), then the value of the
previous period's bond portfolio at the start of the next period cannot depend on any shocks. The
measurability conditions become:
                                                     PtT   PG
                                                         - t =0                                                      (5)
                                                    zt    zt
      The reason is that the price of one-period debt issues last period is constant: Pt$ (0) = 1. Only
if condition (5) is satisfied is it appropriate to discount future surpluses at the one-period risk-free
   1 Forexample, a 5 percentage point increase in inflation that lasts as long as the maturity of the longest outstanding
debt reduces the real value of debt by 5% × 4 = 20%. See Hall and Sargent (2011); Berndt, Lustig, and Yeltekin (2012)
for a decomposition of the forces driving the U.S. debt/GDP ratio including inflation. Cochrane (2019a,b) explores the
connection between inflation and the value of government debt without imposing no arbitrage restrictions.
   2 Bond  prices satisfy Pt$ (h) = Et Mt
                                        $
                                          ,t+h (1 - t,t+h ) , where t,t+h is an indicator variable that is one when the
government defaults between t and t + h. We assume full default to keep the proof simple, but this is without loss of
generality. Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2016) and Pallara and Renne (2019) study the response of CDS spreads to
news about the fiscal surplus.


                                                              11
bond rate. We show below that this condition is severely violated in the data.


3    Data

We conduct our analysis at annual frequency, which is a better frequency to study cash flow risk
in fiscal revenues and outlays, but all of our results are robust to working at quarterly frequency.
We focus on the period from 1947 until 2019.
    Nominal federal tax revenue and government spending before interest expense are from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, as is nominal GDP. Constant-maturity Treasury yields are from
Fred. Stock price and dividend data are from CRSP; we use the CRSP value-weighted total market
to represent the U.S. stock market. Dividends are seasonally adjusted. Details are provided in
Appendix C.
    As was shown in Figure 1, the surpluses expressed as a fraction of GDP are strongly pro-
cyclical. Non-discretionary spending accounts for at least 2/3 of the government's spending. This
includes Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, as well as food stamps and unemployment bene-
fits. Many of these transfer payments rise automatically in recessions. In addition, the government
often temporarily increases transfer spending in recessions (e.g., the extension of unemployment
benefits in 2009 or 2020). On the tax revenue side, the progressive nature of the tax code generates
strongly pro-cyclical variation in revenue as a fraction of GDP.
    We construct the market value and the total returns of the marketable government bond portfo-
lio using cusip-level data from the CRSP Treasuries Monthly Series. At the end of each period, we
multiply the nominal price of each cusip by its total amount outstanding (normalized by the face
value), and sum across all issuances (cusips). We exclude non-marketable debt which is mostly
held in intra-governmental accounts.3 Marketable debt includes the Treasury holdings of the Fed-
eral Reserve Bank. Hence, we choose not to consolidate the Fed and the Treasury, which would
add reserves and subtract the Fed's Treasury holdings on the left hand side of (1). Doing so would
mainly tilt the duration of the bond portfolio.
    Following Hall and Sargent (2011) and extending their sample, we construct zero coupon bond
(strip) positions from all coupon-bearing Treasury bonds (all cusips) issued in the past and out-
standing in the current period. This is done separately for nominal and real bonds. Since zero-
coupon bond prices are also observable, we can construct the left-hand side of eq. (1) as the market
   3 The largest holders of non-marketable debt are the Social Security Administration (SSA) and the federal govern-

ment's defined benefit pension plan. Consolidating the SSA and the government DB plans with the Treasury depart-
ment leads one to include the revenues and spending from the SSA/govt DB plan in the consolidated government
revenue and spending numbers, and leads one to net out the SSA holdings of Treasuries since they are an asset of one
part of the consolidated government and a liability of the other part. Hence our treatments of debt and cash flows are
mutually consistent.



                                                         12
value of outstanding marketable U.S. government debt.4 Figure 2 plots its evolution over time,
scaled by the U.S. GDP. It shows a large and persistent increase in the outstanding debt starting in
2008.
                               Figure 2: The Market Value of Outstanding Debt to GDP

                  0.8


                  0.7


                  0.6


                  0.5


                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1
                        1950        1960       1970         1980        1990         2000        2010         2020


The figure plots the ratio of the nominal market value of outstanding government debt divided by nominal GDP. GDP Data are from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The market value of debt is constructed as follows. We multiply the nominal price (bid/ask average)
of each cusip by its total amount outstanding (normalized by the face value), and then sum across all issuance (cusip). The series is
annual from 1947 until 2019. Data Source: CRSP U.S. Treasury Database, BEA, authors' calculations.



     Turning to returns, Table 1 reports summary statistics for the overall Treasury bond portfolio
in Panel A and for individual bonds in Panel B. The excess returns on the entire Treasury portfolio
realized by an investor who buys all of the new issuances and collects all of the coupon and
principal payments is 1.11% per annum, on average. The portfolio has an average duration of 3.62
years. Given the secular decline in interest rates over the past forty years, the observed average
return on the bond portfolio is, if anything, an over-estimate of investors' expected return.


4     Quantitative Model

In order to quantify the value of the claims to tax revenue and government spending in (1), we
need to (i) take a stance on the time-series properties of revenue and spending, and (ii) a stochastic
discount factor Mt,t+ j to discount these cash flows.
    4 Since
          the model fits nominal bond prices very well, as shown below, we can equivalently use model-implied bond
prices. Similarly, we can use model-implied prices for real zero-coupon bonds.




                                                                   13
                          Table 1: Summary Statistics for Government Bond Portfolio


                                                   Panel A                                       Panel B
                                   RD       RD   - Rf    Rf          Duration        1 Yr     5 Yr 10 Yr          20 Yr
              Mean                  5.21        1.11     4.10          3.62           4.69     4.72    5.52         5.67
              Std.                 3.06         2.99     3.14          1.06           1.03     1.70    4.76         6.73
              Sharpe Ratio         0.37                                              0.42     0.30    0.23         0.23

Panel A reports summary statistics for the holding period return on the aggregate government bond portfolio: the mean and the
standard deviation of the holding period return, R D , the excess return, R D - R f , the three-month Tbill rate, R f , and the weighted
average Macaulay duration. Panel B reports the mean and the standard deviation of the holding period returns of three-month T-
bill and T-bonds with time-to-maturity of one year, five years and ten years. All returns are expressed as annual percentage points.
Duration is expressed in years. Data source: CRSP Treasuries Monthly Series. The sample period is from 1947 to 2019.



4.1     Cash Flow Dynamics

4.1.1    State Variables

We assume that the N × 1 vector of state variables z follows a Gaussian first-order VAR:

                                                                                      1
                                              z t =  z t -1 + u t =  z t -1 +  2  t ,                                               (6)


with N × N companion matrix  and homoscedastic innovations ut  i.i.d. N (0, ). The Cholesky
                                                                       1    1
decomposition of the covariance matrix,  =  2  2                                , has non-zero elements on and below
the diagonal. In this way, shocks to each state variable ut are linear combinations of its own
structural shock t , and the structural shocks to the state variables that precede it in the VAR, with
t  i.i.d. N (0, I ). Table 2 summarizes the variables we include in the state vector, in order of
appearance of the VAR. The vector z contains the state variables demeaned by their respective
sample averages.

                                                    Table 2: State Variables

                      Position     Variable      Mean                       Description
                      1                t           0                       Log Inflation
                      2                xt          x0                  Log Real GDP Growth
                      3             y$t (1)      y0$
                                                     (1)             Log 1-Year Nominal Yield
                                          $            $
                      4             ysprt        yspr0     Log 5-Year Minus 1-Year Nominal Yield Spread
                      5              pdt           pd            Log Stock Price-to-Dividend Ratio
                      6              dt            µd               Log Stock Dividend Growth
                      7             log t          µ             Log Tax Revenue-to-GDP Growth
                      8             log gt         µg              Log Spending-to-GDP Growth
                      9             log t        log 0            Log Tax Revenue-to-GDP Level
                      10            log gt       log g0             Log Spending-to-GDP Level




                                                                  14
4.1.2   Fiscal Policy

Our approach takes spending and tax policy as given, rather than being optimally determined.
However, both policies are allowed to depend on a rich set of state variables and are estimated
from the data. To capture the government's cash flows, the VAR includes  log t and  log gt ,
the log change in tax revenue-to-GDP and the log change in government spending-to-GDP in its
seventh and eight rows. It also includes the log level of revenue-to-GDP, t , and spending-to-GDP,
gt , in its ninth and tenth rows. This fiscal cash flow structure has two important features.
   First, it allows spending and revenue growth to depend not only on its own lag, but also on a
rich set of macroeconomic and financial variables. Lagged inflation, GDP growth, interest rates,
the slope of the term structure, the stock price-dividend ratio, and dividend growth all predict
future revenue and spending growth. And innovations in the fiscal variables are correlated with
innovations in these macro-finance variables.
   Second, it is crucial to include the level variables t and gt . When there is a positive shock to
spending, spending tends to revert back to its long-run trend with GDP. Similarly, after a negative
shock to tax revenue, future revenues tend to increase back to their long-run level relative to GDP.
This mean reversion captures the presence of automatic stabilizers and of corrective fiscal action,
as pointed out by Bohn (1998). By having spending-to-GDP growth  log gt (revenue-to-GDP
 log t ) depend on lagged spending gt (lagged revenue-to-GDP t ) with a negative coefficient,
the VAR captures this mean reversion. Mean reversion is further amplified when  log gt ( log t )
depends on lagged revenue-to-GDP t ( gt ) with a positive sign.
   Formally, the inclusion of the levels of spending and tax revenue relative to GDP in the VAR
is motivated by a cointegration analysis; the system becomes a vector error correction model.
Appendix D.2 performs Johansen and Phillips-Ouliaris cointegration tests. The results support
two cointegration relationships, one between log tax revenue and log GDP and one between log
spending and log GDP. The coefficients estimates of the cointegration relationships tend to vary
across sample periods. As a result, we take an a priori stance that the tax-to-GDP ratio log  and
the spending-to-GDP ratio log g are stationary. That is, we assume cointegration coefficients of
(1, -1) for both relationships. Put differently, without cointegration all shocks to spending and
tax revenues are permanent rather than mean-reverting.
   As a technical aside, the in-sample average of  log t is µ = -0.7% and the in-sample aver-
age of  log gt is µ g = 0.2%. Because we impose cointegration on the log tax-to-GDP ratio and the
log spending-to-GDP ratio, the true unconditional growth rates of the tax-to-GDP ratio and the
                                                  g
                                         = µ = 0). In order to be consistent with the cointe-
spending-to-GDP ratio have to be zero (µ0   0
gration assumption, we remove the in-sample averages of the growth rates, and construct the log




                                                 15
                                                    Table 3: VAR Estimates 

                t -1         x t -1   y$t -1 (1 )   ysprt$
                                                          -1   pdt-1      d t -1     log t-1         log gt-1      log t-1       log gt-1
 t            0.541          0.004      0.214        -0.405     0.008     0.030       0.044           0.001         -0.036         0.026
 xt           -0.280         0.162     0.132          0.235     0.000     0.078      -0.015           0.053         -0.050         0.022
 y$
  t (1)       0.064          0.077      0.896        -0.039     0.005     0.042      -0.007          -0.001         -0.030         0.022
      $
 ysprt        -0.041        -0.099      0.007         0.539    -0.004    -0.028       0.013           0.009          0.012        -0.012
 pdt          -2.557        -1.100      0.375         2.302     0.774    -0.245      -0.036           0.118          0.240        -0.252
 dt           0.186         -0.053     -0.446        -0.675     0.052     0.329      -0.144          -0.166         -0.239         0.104
  log t       -1.092         0.100     0.310         -3.105     0.075     0.152       0.307           0.107         -0.567         0.182
  log gt      0.517          0.389     -0.938        -1.283    -0.069    -0.233       0.067           0.348          0.099        -0.266
 log t        -1.092         0.100     0.310         -3.105     0.075     0.152       0.307           0.107          0.433         0.182
 log gt       0.517          0.389     -0.938        -1.283    -0.069    -0.233       0.067           0.348          0.099         0.734
Numbers in bold have t-statistics in excess of 1.96 in absolute value. Numbers in italics have t-statistics in excess of 1.645 but below
1.96.


tax-to-GDP and log spending-to-GDP ratios that enter in the VAR as follows:

                                         t                                                  t
              log t = log 1 +           ( log k - µ ),            log gt = log g1 +        ( log gk - µg ),
                                       k =1                                               k =1


where the initial level log g1 is the the actual log spending-to-GDP ratio at the start of our sample
in 1947, while log 1 is chosen so that the resulting average log surplus-to-GDP ratio is the same as
in the unadjusted data. This requires a minor adjustment to the actual 1947 revenue-to-GDP ratio.


4.1.3      VAR Estimates

We estimate the first eight equations of (6) using OLS. We do not zero out any of the elements in
 even if they are statistically indistinguishable from zero.5 Since gt =  log gt + gt-1 = e g [ +
                  1
I ]zt-1 + e g  2  t , where e g selects the eighth row, and similar for tax revenue-to-GDP, the last two
                        1
rows of  and  2 are implied by the first eight. The last two elements of the VAR do not have
independent shocks for the same reason.
        The point estimates of  are reported in Table 3. Lagged macro-finance variables affect fiscal
variables and vice versa. Consistent with the long-run mean reversion dynamics imposed by
cointegration, we find that [7,9] = -0.567 < 0 and [8,10] = -0.266 < 0. Both coefficients
are estimated precisely. The cross-terms also have the expected sign: [7,10] = 0.182 > 0 and
[8,9] = 0.099 > 0, but only the first one is estimated precisely.
                               1
        The estimate of  2 is reported in Appendix D.1. The innovation in tax revenue-to-GDP growth
is positively correlated with the GDP growth rate innovation, while the spending-to-GDP growth
shock is negatively correlated with the GDP growth shock. In other words, tax revenues are
   5 None of our main conclusions are sensitive to recursively zeroing out insignificant elements in . We also find

similar results at quarterly frequency.



                                                                  16
                                               Figure 3: Fiscal Impulse-Responses

                                                                           x shock
             0.01                                              0.01                                                 0.01
                                        With CI                                              With CI
                                        Without CI                                           Without CI
            0.005                                             0.005                                                0.005

                0                                                 0                                                    0




                                                          g




                                                                                                               s
            -0.005                                            -0.005                                               -0.005            With CI
                                                                                                                                     Without CI
             -0.01                                             -0.01                                                -0.01
                     0    10       20                30                0   10           20                30                0   10   20                30
                                                                                shock
             0.01                                              0.01                                                 0.01
                                                                                             With CI
                                                                                             Without CI
            0.005                                             0.005                                                0.005

                0                                         g       0                                                    0




                                                                                                               s
            -0.005                   With CI                  -0.005                                               -0.005             With CI
                                     Without CI                                                                                       Without CI
             -0.01                                             -0.01                                                -0.01
                     0    10       20                30                0   10           20                30                0   10   20                30
                                                                            g shock
             0.01                                              0.01                                                 0.01
                                        With CI                                                                                           With CI
                                        Without CI                                                                                        Without CI
            0.005                                             0.005                                                0.005

                0                                                 0                                                    0
                                                          g




                                                                                                               s
            -0.005                                            -0.005                     With CI                   -0.005
                                                                                         Without CI
             -0.01                                             -0.01                                                -0.01
                     0    10       20                30                0   10           20                30                0   10   20                30



Solid line shows impulse-response functions for the benchmark VAR with cointegration; dashed line is for the VAR without cointe-
gration. The impulse in the top row is a shock to GDP. The xt shock is defined as the shock that increases xt by one standard deviation
of its VAR residual. The impulse in the middle row is a shock to tax revenues. The impulse in the bottom row is a shock to spending
growth.



strongly pro-cyclical and government spending is strongly counter-cyclical.


4.1.4     Spending and Revenue Dynamics

Figure 3 plots the impulse-response functions of the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio (t , left panels),
government spending-to-GDP ratio ( gt , middle panels), and surplus-to-GDP (st , right panels) to
a GDP shock (top row), a revenue shock (middle row), and a spending shock (bottom row). All
shocks are one-standard deviation in size. The solid lines, which are for the benchmark VAR
system, show mean reversion in spending and revenues in response to the own shock. They
also shows the pro-cyclicality of revenues-to-GDP and counter-cyclicality of spending-to-GDP in
response to the GDP shock. For comparison, the dashed red lines represent the results under a
restricted VAR, in which the first 8 state variables do not load on the cointegration variables log t
and log gt . When cointegration is not imposed, the impact of fiscal shocks is permanent.
    The impulse-responses show that the VAR system with and without cointegration variables
imply very different dynamics in government cash flows. Which one is more consistent with the


                                                                            17
                        Table 4: The Predictability of Government Cash Flow Growth

                                                Dependent variable:  log t+k
horizon k (years)            1                       2                       3                      4                  5
log t ­ data              -0.33    (0.07)         -0.42    (0.09)         -0.28    (0.05)        -0.11 (0.08)        0.05 (0.12)
log t ­ model             -0.57                   -0.42                   -0.07                   0.11               0.09
log gt ­ data              0.06 (0.06)             0.06 (0.07)             0.05 (0.05)            0.03 (0.04)       -0.03 (0.04)
log gt ­ model             0.18                    0.07                   -0.07                  -0.12              -0.09
                                                Dependent variable:  log gt+k
horizon k (years)            1                       2                       3                      4                  5
log t ­ data               0.09 (0.06)             0.08 (0.11)             0.003 (0.15)           0.03 (0.09)  0.05 (0.08)
log t ­ model              0.10                    0.03                   -0.09                  -0.11        -0.05
log gt ­ data             -0.10 (0.06)            -0.15 (0.06)            -0.13 (0.05)           -0.09 (0.04) -0.06 (0.05)
log gt ­ model            -0.27                   -0.25                   -0.16                  -0.09        -0.07
This table reports how the levels of log t and log gt predict the future tax revenue-to-GDP growth and the future government
spending-to-GDP growth. The rows labeled by data report the coefficients from the univariate regression of the annual  log t+k
and  log gt+k in the following year 1 through 5 on the current log t and log gt . Data are 1947--2019. Standard errors in parentheses
are Newey-West with 5 lags. The rows labeled by model report the coefficients implied from the VAR system with cointegration
variables.


data? Table 4 reports results from predictive regressions of  log t+k and  log gt+k in future years
k = 1, · · · , 5 on the current-year log t and log gt levels. In the data, a higher level of log t predicts
a significantly lower tax revenue-to-GDP growth in the next 1--3 years, and a higher level of
log gt predicts a lower government spending-to-GDP growth in the next 1--4 years. This mean
reversion is the signature of cointegration. Table 4 also reports the model-implied counterparts for
the VAR with cointegration. The regression coefficients from the data are quantitatively similar to
the conditional expectations implied by the VAR model.
     Figure 4 adds further credibility to the cash-flow projections by plotting expected cumula-
tive spending and revenue growth over the next one, five, and ten years against realized future
spending and revenue growth. To assess predictive accuracy, we compare the prediction of the
benchmark annual VAR to that of the best linear forecaster at that horizon. By design, the VAR
prediction is the best linear forecaster at the one-year horizon, but not at the five- and ten-year
horizons. Prediction accuracy (RMSE) of the VAR is similar to that of the best linear forecaster.
The graph shows that the VAR implies reasonable behavior of long-run fiscal cash flows.


4.1.5    Debt in the VAR

Cochrane (2019a,b) includes debt/GDP in the VAR and argues that this affects the dynamics of
the surplus in important ways. In particular, a negative shock to GDP or a negative shock to
surpluses lowers the surplus on impact. The surplus not only mean reverts in subsequent periods
but overshoots. It is this overshooting of the surplus, he argues, that makes government debt


                                                                18
                                                               Figure 4: Cash Flow Forecasts

                                                                           1 Yr Forecast
  0.3
                  log data                                                                                 log g data
                predicted by VAR, rmse=35.1189                                                           predicted by VAR, rmse=31.1782
  0.2           predicted by OLS, rmse=35.1189                                             0.2           predicted by OLS, rmse=31.1782



  0.1                                                                                      0.1


    0                                                                                        0


  -0.1                                                                                     -0.1


  -0.2                                                                                     -0.2


  -0.3                                                                                     -0.3
         1950    1960       1970        1980     1990   2000     2010   2020                      1950    1960       1970        1980      1990   2000   2010   2020
                                                                           5 Yr Forecast

                  log data                                                                                 log g data
  0.5                                                                                      0.5
                predicted by VAR, rmse=69.7692                                                           predicted by VAR, rmse=151.9876
                predicted by OLS, rmse=51.0078                                                           predicted by OLS, rmse=93.0006
  0.4                                                                                      0.4

  0.3                                                                                      0.3

  0.2                                                                                      0.2

  0.1                                                                                      0.1

    0                                                                                        0

  -0.1                                                                                     -0.1

  -0.2                                                                                     -0.2

  -0.3                                                                                     -0.3

  -0.4                                                                                     -0.4

  -0.5                                                                                     -0.5
         1950    1960       1970        1980     1990   2000     2010   2020                      1950    1960       1970        1980      1990   2000   2010   2020
                                                                          10 Yr Forecast

  0.6             log data                                                                 0.6             log g data
                predicted by VAR, rmse=88.1718                                                           predicted by VAR, rmse=221.9357
                predicted by OLS, rmse=74.2263                                                           predicted by OLS, rmse=96.7895

  0.4                                                                                      0.4



  0.2                                                                                      0.2



    0                                                                                        0



  -0.2                                                                                     -0.2



  -0.4                                                                                     -0.4

         1950    1960       1970        1980     1990   2000     2010   2020                      1950    1960       1970        1980      1990   2000   2010   2020




We plot the actual log tax and spending growth rates over 1-year, 5-year and 10-year rolling windows in solid blue lines. The value at
each year represents the k-year growth rates that end at that year. We also plot these rates as forecasted by our VAR model in dashed
red lines and these rates as forecasted by the OLS model in dash-dotted yellow lines. The value at each year represents the k-year
growth rates condition on the information k years ago.



risk-free. Appendix G estimates a VAR that adds the log change in debt-to-GDP and the log level
in debt-to-GDP. That is, it adds a third cointegration relationship between debt and GDP. It shows
that (i) this specification does not improve the forecast accuracy of spending and revenue growth,
(ii) does not generate meaningful overshooting in the surplus, and (iii) results in very similar
results for our main exercise that is to follow. For these reasons, we do not include debt in the
benchmark VAR.


                                                                                  19
4.2     Asset Pricing

We take a pragmatic approach and choose a flexible SDF model that only assumes no arbitrage,
and prices the term structure of interest rates as well as stocks well. In particular, this approach
guarantees that our debt valuation is consistent with observed Treasury bond prices. Motivated
by the no-arbitrage term structure literature (Ang and Piazzesi, 2003), we specify an exponentially
                                                          $            $
affine stochastic discount factor (SDF). The nominal SDF Mt +1 = exp( mt+1 ) is conditionally log-
normal:

                                                      1
                                 m$          $
                                  t +1 = - y t (1 ) - 2  t  t -  t  t +1 ,                         (7)


The real SDF is Mt+1 = exp(mt+1 ) = exp(m$
                                         t+1 + t+1 ); it is also conditionally Gaussian. The
priced sources of risk are the structural innovations in the state vector  t+1 from equation (6).
These aggregate shocks are associated with a N × 1 market price of risk vector t of the affine
form:
                                             t = 0 + 1 z t ,

The N × 1 vector 0 collects the average prices of risk while the N × N matrix 1 governs the
time variation in risk premia. Asset pricing in this model amounts to estimating the market prices
of risk in 0 and 1 . All asset pricing results are proven in Appendix B.


4.2.1    Bond Pricing

Nominal bond yields of maturity h are affine in the state vector:

                                                  A$ ( h) B$ ( h)
                                     y$
                                      t (h) = -          -        zt ,
                                                    h        h

the scalar A$ (h) and the vector B$ (h) follow ordinary difference equations that depend on the
properties of the state vector and of the market prices of risk. There is a similar formula for real
bonds. We use this pricing equation to calculate the real interest rate, real bond risk premia, and
inflation risk premia on bonds of various maturities.
      Since both the nominal short rate (y$                                            $        $
                                          t (1)) and the slope of the term structure (yt (5) - yt (1))
are included in the VAR, internal consistency requires the SDF model to price these bonds closely.
The nominal short rate is matched automatically; it does not identify any market price of risk
parameters. Matching the slope of the yield curve generates N + 1 parameter restrictions:

                                              $           $    $
                              - A$ (20)/20 = y0 (1) + yspr0 = y0 (20)                              (8)
                               - B$ (20)/20 = ey1 + eyspr                                          (9)


                                                    20
They pin down the fourth element of 0 and the fourth row of 1 . We also allow for a non-
zero third element of 0 and two non-zero elements in the third row of 1 . We pin down these
elements by matching bond yields of maturities 2, 10, 20, and 30 years in each year t  1, · · · , T .
Since they represent T × 4 moments for only 3 parameters, there are T × 4 - 3 over-identifying
restrictions. Since the behavior of very long-term interest rates is of great importance for our
valuation results--recall the discussion on very long-term bond yields in Section 2,--we impose
extra weight on matching the 30-year bond yields.
   We also price the yields on real bonds (Treasury inflation-index securities) for maturities 5,
7, 10, 20, and 30 years. They are available over a shorter sample of T2 years. This adds T2 × 5
over-identifying restrictions. Again, we overweight the 30-year maturity.


4.2.2   Equity Pricing

The VAR includes both log dividend growth and the log price-dividend ratio. The two time-series
imply a time series for returns. We impose that the expected excess return implied by the VAR
matches the equity risk premium in the model, which depends on the covariance of the SDF with
stock returns. Expressions are provided in the appendix. The equity risk premium conditions pin
down the sixth element of 0 and the sixth row of 1 .
         m ( h ) denote the price-dividend ratio of the dividend strip with maturity h (Wachter,
   Let PDt
2005; van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen, 2012). Then, the aggregate price-to-dividend ratio can
be expressed as
                                                     
                                           m
                                         PDt =      PDtm (h).                                      (10)
                                                   h =0

In this SDF model, log price-dividend ratios on dividend strips are affine in the state vector:


                           pdm                 m           m         m
                             t ( h ) = log ( PDt ( h )) = A ( h ) + B ( h ) zt .


Since the log price-dividend ratio on the stock market in part of the state vector, it is affine in the
state vector by assumption; see the left-hand side of (11):

                                                  
                          exp pd + e pd zt =      exp      Am ( h) + Bm ( h)zt ,                  (11)
                                                h =0


Equation (11) rewrites the present-value relationship (10), and articulates that it implies a restric-
tion on the coefficients Am (h) and Bm (h). We impose this restriction in the estimation; it provides
T × 1 additional over-identifying restrictions.




                                                     21
4.2.3    Good Deal Bounds and Regularity Conditions

We impose good deal bounds on the standard deviation of the log SDF in the spirit of Cochrane
and Saa-Requejo (2000). Specifically, we impose a penalty for annual Sharpe ratios in excess of 3.
      Second, we impose regularity conditions on (unobserved) nominal and real bond yields of
maturities of 50 to 1000 years. Specifically, we impose that yields stabilize and that nominal yields
remain above real yields by at least long-run expected inflation. This is tantamount to a weak
positivity restriction on the inflation risk premium.
      Third, we impose that the valuation ratios of the long-run G-claim (T-claims) increase in re-
sponse to a positive shock to spending (tax revenues). This sign restriction helps identify how
spending and tax revenues affect the dynamics of the equity risk premium.


4.3     Estimation Results

Appendix D reports the point estimates for the market price of risk parameters. Appendix E shows
that the model matches the time series of nominal bond yields in the data closely. It also shows a
reasonable fit for real bond yields. Furthermore, the model closely matches the dynamics of the
nominal bond risk premium, and generates reasonable behavior on nominal and real yields at very
long horizons. Finally, the model produces reasonable equity risk premium level and dynamics,
and provides a close fit to the time-series of the price-dividend ratio. Because it is able to generate
an expected equity return that fits the data well, and is large compared to the long-term real rate,
the SDF has a large permanent component. Having formulated and estimated a realistic SDF, we
now turn to our main exercise.


5     Government Debt Valuation and Risk Premium Puzzles

5.1     Surplus Pricing Model

With the VAR dynamics and the SDF in hand, we can calculate the expected present discounted
value of the primary surplus:

                                                              
             Et    Mt$,t+ j St+ j   =    Et Mt$,t+ j Tt+ j -  Et Mt$,t+ j Gt+ j = PtT - PtG ,      (12)
                  j =0                  j =0                 j =0


where PtT is the cum-dividend value of a claim to future nominal tax revenues and PtG is the cum-
dividend value of a claim to future nominal government spending. The following proposition
shows how to price the government cash flows.




                                                    22
Proposition 5 (Pricing Government Cash Flows). (Part a) The price-dividend ratios on the tax
claim and the spending claim are the sum of the price-dividend ratios of their strips, whose logs
are affine in the state vector zt :

                                                 
                                        PtT
                                 T
                               PDt =
                                        Tt
                                            =    exp( A (h) + B (h)zt ),                          (13)
                                                h =0
                                                  
                                        PtG
                                 G
                               PDt =
                                        Gt
                                            =    exp( Ag (h) + Bg (h)zt ).                        (14)
                                                h =0


(Part b) The log risk premia on the tax and spending claims are given by:

                            $                                      1
               Et r t
                    T
                      +1 - yt (1) + Jensen = ( e + e x + e + 1 B )  ( 0 + 1 zt ) ,
                                                              ¯    2                              (15)
                            $                                     g¯     1
               Et r t
                    G
                      +1 - yt (1) + Jensen =      e g + e x + e + 1 B g  2 ( 0 + 1 z t ) .        (16)


      The proof is in Appendix B.4. The right-hand side of (15) and (16) denotes the covariance of
the claims' returns with the SDF. These covariances are crucially driven by the exposure vectors
B¯ g and B
         ¯  . The latter capture the risk exposures of all revenue and spending strips to the state
variables, captured by the Bg (h) and B (h).


5.2     Main Results

5.2.1    The Valuation Puzzle

                                                                                              T =
The left panel of Figure 5 plots the price-dividend ratio on a claim to future tax revenue, PDt
PtT / Tt . The time-series average of this ratio is 142.22. In other words, the representative agent
would be willing to pay 142.22 times annual tax revenues for the right to receive all current and
future tax revenues. In addition, the price-dividend ratio of the tax claim displays substantial time-
variation. A pronounced V-shape arises from the inverse V-shape of the long-term real interest
rate, which is high in the mid-1970s to mid-1980s and low at the beginning and end of the sample.
Intuitively, discounting future tax revenues by a low (high) long-term real rate results in a high
(low) valuation ratio.
      The time-series average of the price-dividend ratio on a claim to future government spending,
  G = P G / G is 164.74. The spending claim is more valuable than the revenue claim, a reflection
PDt    t     t

of its lower riskiness. The price-dividend ratio shows the same inverse V-shape dynamics of the
price-dividend ratio on the revenue claim, as shown in the right panel of Figure 5.
      Now we are in a position to evaluate the claim to future government surpluses as the tax claim
minus the spending claim, the right-hand side of equation (12). Figure 6 plots the present value
of government surpluses scaled by GDP as the dashed line. The market value of the US govern-


                                                       23
                                       Figure 5: Government Cash Flows and Prices

                                 PD ratio of T claim                                                PD ratio of G claim
            220                                                                350


            200
                                                                               300

            180

                                                                               250
            160


            140                                                                200


            120
                                                                               150

            100

                                                                               100
             80


             60                                                                 50
                  1950   1960   1970   1980   1990     2000   2010                   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


The left panels plot the (cum-dividend) price-dividend ratio on the claim to current and future tax revenues. The right panel plots the
(cum-dividend) price-dividend ratio of a claim to current and future government spending. The sample is 1947 until 2019.



ment debt is plotted as the solid line. We refer to the difference between these two lines as the
government debt valuation puzzle. The unconditional average present value of the government
surplus is -260.37% of GDP, far below the average market value of outstanding government debt,
0.38 times GDP. The gap is 299% of GDP on average. In the time series, the present value of

     Figure 6: Present Value of Government Surpluses and Market Value of Government Debt


       5


       0


      -5
                                                                     Price of S claim
                                                                     Govt Debt Outstanding
    -10
            1950                1960             1970                  1980           1990                2000            2010
The solid line is the market value of government debt. The dashed line is the market value of the surplus claim. Both time series are
scaled by the US GDP.




                                                                          24
the government surplus does not match the dynamics of government debt value, either. The gap
widens dramatically in the last 10 years of the sample, as the level of government debt doubles
to 69.4% of the GDP, while the valuation of the surplus claim quadruples in absolute value to
about 847% of the GDP. In other words, the U.S. government has been issuing government debt
while simultaneously decreasing the expected surpluses to back up the debt. The result has been
a widening of the valuation gap to ten times GDP at the end of the sample. The puzzle will further
deepen with the large deficits caused by the coronavirus crisis of 2020.
    Equation (2) lets us interpret the puzzle further. The first term on the right-hand side, the
risk-neutrally discounted present value of surpluses, is just about zero since the average primary
surplus is about zero in our sample. Therefore, the entire wedge of 299% of GDP stems from
the differential riskiness of the revenue and the spending claims. Put differently, without the
covariance terms, the government would need to generate about 75% of GDP in PDV of future
surpluses to support 75% in debt relative to GDP. With the covariance terms present, 335% of
GDP (75%+260%) in future surpluses are needed to back the same debt.


5.2.2     The Risk Premium Puzzle

Figure 7 plots the risk premia on revenue and spending strips. For comparison, it also plots the
risk premia on GDP strips and stock market dividend strips. The strip maturities run from 1 to 100
years. At the short end of the maturity spectrum (1-5 years), risk premia on spending strips are
very low, at -2%. Because spending is counter-cyclical these strips are a hedge. In sharp contrast,
short-maturity revenue strips have high risk premia (+2%) because their cash flows are low in
high marginal utility times. The average risk premium of tax claim over the five-year horizon is
1.02%, much larger than that of the spending claim, -1.03%.
    As we move to long maturities, risk premia on revenue and spending strips converge towards
each other. They also converge towards the risk premium on a GDP strip, as noted in Corollary
1. Because of cointegration, revenue and spending claims are as risky as GDP. Claims to GDP are
like unlevered equity claims. They have risk premia well in excess of real bond risk premia but
below (levered) equity risk premia, as shown in the graph.
                                                                  $
    In our sample, the average one-year nominal interest rate is y0 (1)= 4.5% whereas the uncon-
ditional average one-year nominal GDP growth rate is x0 + 0 = 6.2%. The risk-free interest rate
is on average below the growth rate, as emphasized by Blanchard (2019). However, government
tax and spending processes are sufficiently risky. Hence, their average nominal discount rates,
                    g
  = 6.93% and r = 6.84%, are above the average nominal GDP growth rate.6 We generate these
r0             0
   6 As                           g                g            g
       derived in Appendix B.4, r0 = x0 + 0 + 0 - pg(1 - 1 ), where pg is the long-run mean of the log price-
                                   g     g
dividend ratio on the G-claim, and 0 and 1 are linearization constants, and similar for the T-claim. Note that using



                                                        25
                               Figure 7: Term Structure of Risk Premia on the T-Claim and the G-Claim

                                    Term Structure of Risk Premia                             Term Structure of Risk Premia (No Cointegration)
                 10                                                                      12
                                                                                         10
                  8
                                                                                          8
                  6                                                                       6
Risk Premium %




                                                                                          4
                  4
                                                                                          2

                  2                                                                       0
                                                                                         -2
                  0                                                                                                                               G Claim
                                                                         G Claim         -4                                                       T Claim
                                                                         T Claim
                                                                         Equity          -6                                                       Equity
                 -2                                                      GDP                                                                      GDP
                                                                                         -8
                      0        20           40         60           80             100        0       20          40               60        80             100
                                            Period (Year)                                                         Period (Year)

The left panel plots the term structures of risk premia on the G (spending) claim, T (tax claim), equity and GDP claim under our
benchmark model. The right panel plots these term structures under an alternative VAR that does not contain the tax-to-GDP ratio
and the spending-to-GDP ratio.



discount rates while maintaining an excellent fit for the term structure of Treasury yields. The
claim to surpluses reflects the risk of the government's future debt issuance strategy. Future net
debt issuances at inopportune (high SDF) times make the overall bond portfolio riskier than in-
dividual Treasury bonds. Therefore, even if risk-free interest rates are often below growth rates,
the risk premia on government tax and spending processes are large enough to generate a finite
valuation for the surplus claim. We recall that when the unconditional expected returns on T- and
G-claims are similar, the unconditional expected return on the government debt portfolio is equal
to the expected return on the G- and T-claims. That is, the debt portfolio is highly risky.


5.3                       Results Without Cointegration

We argued that imposing cointegration between tax revenues and GDP and spending and GDP
is imperative to accurately describe fiscal dynamics. To help understand the role cointegration
plays, it is useful to contrast the main results with those obtained in a model that does not im-
pose cointegration. Intuitively, the lack of the cointegration dynamics implies that an increase
in government spending-to-GDP is not offset by future reductions in spending-to-GDP or future
increases in revenue-to-GDP. The increase in the future government spending, which tends to hap-
pen during recessions, becomes permanent. This feature makes the spending claim much safer.
                                                                                                                     1
this average nominal discount rate in a simple Gordon growth model PD G =                                     g
                                                                                                             r0 - ( x0 + 0 )
                                                                                                                             ,   delivers an average valuation
ratio for the G-claim very close to the one reported in section 5.2.1.


                                                                                    26
For similar reasons, the lack of the cointegration makes the tax revenue claim much riskier, be-
cause a decline in the tax revenue during recessions also becomes permanent. As a result, the
long-run discount rates for the revenue claim are much higher than those for the spending claim.
This is illustrated in the right panel of Figure 7. The average risk premium on the tax revenue
claim is 4.87%, substantially higher than the 4.42% risk premium on the spending claim. A com-
parison of the left and right panels of Figure 7 also shows that the assumption of cointegration
is necessary for the convergence of the long-run risk premium of T- and G-claims to each other
and to the risk premium on a GDP claim. In sum, cointegration helps reduce the riskiness of the
aggregate debt portfolio.


5.4     Fiscal Measurability Constraint Revisited

The value equivalence in Proposition 1 implies the measurability constraint in (4). If the gov-
ernment can only issues one-period risk-free debt, the condition specializes to (5). Appendix F
restates the measurability conditions in our exponentially affine framework. It shows that con-
dition (5) is severely violated in the data; deviations are of the same order of magnitude as GDP.
First, surpluses are trending with GDP; recall Figure 1 which shows that the surplus-to-GDP ratio
is stationary. Therefore, every innovation to GDP permanently alters the cash flows that accrue to
investors in the surplus claim. But with one-period risk-free debt, the value of government debt
cannot move with that same GDP growth shock. The long-run GDP risk in the surplus cash flows
cannot be replicated with a position in risk-free debt. Second, a positive (negative) innovation to
spending (revenues) would need to be offset by future decreases in spending in present value. As
discussed in Section 2 and Appendix G, we do not detect any evidence in the data to support this
hypothesis. Cointegration imposes mean-reversion but not overshooting of surpluses.
      If the yield curve spans all the innovations, as is the case in our affine framework, then there
exists a dynamic portfolio in government debt Q$
                                               t-1,h+1 of various maturities that replicates the
state-contingency of the surplus claim and satisfies (4). Similar spanning arguments were explored
by Angeletos (2002) and Buera and Nicolini (2004). This portfolio looks very different from the
government's actual bond portfolio.7 This is not surprising. We need to construct a Treasury
portfolio with long-run risk exposure equivalent to that of a claim to GDP.
   7 Anexception is Bhandari, Evans, Golosov, and Sargent (2017) which implies a realistic optimal maturity structure
in a Ramsey model with Epstein-Zin preferences. Karantounias (2018) shows such problem behaves very differently
from one with standard CRRA preferences.




                                                         27
6     Alternative Explanations

We discuss five alternative explanations for the government valuation and risk premium puzzles
but find that, ultimately, all of them fall short.


6.1     Bubbles and Limits to Arbitrage

The valuation gap can be interpreted as violation of the transversality condition (TVC) in Trea-
sury markets, consistent with the presence of a rational bubble in the spirit of Samuelson (1958);
Diamond (1965); Blanchard and Watson (1982).
      Several pieces of evidence speak against this explanation. First, Brock (1982); Tirole (1982);
Milgrom and Stokey (1982); Santos and Woodford (1997) argue that rational bubbles are hard to
sustain in the presence of long-lived investors absent other frictions. In Appendix I, we show that
a rational patient investor who pursues an investment strategy that buys all corporate equities and
shorts the portfolio of all U.S. Treasuries earns a risk premium higher than the equity premium
but receives cash flows that hedge the business cycle. While this is not an arbitrage in the strict
sense, it is a high-Sharpe ratio strategy with an attractive cash-flow profile. The strategy harvests
mostly positive cash flows in anticipation of a correction in Treasury markets. Limits to arbitrage
(Shleifer and Vishny, 1997) would be needed to explain why rational investors may choose not
to pursue such strategy. Possibly investors would suffer margin calls at inopportune since the
market value of the portfolio would be marked down in recessions. Differences in investment
horizon of investor and their delegated asset manager may also interfere.
      Second, models that violate the TVC typically produce violations of TVCs in all long-lived
assets. If the Treasury could run a Ponzi scheme, then why could a AAA-rated corporation not do
the same?
      Third, as Figure 6 shows, the valuation gap is growing faster than GDP, which is inconsistent
with rational bubbles. In rational bubble models, the debt/GDP ratio declines over time.
      Fourth, the rise in the sovereign CDS spread after the Great Financial Crisis, documented by
Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2016); Pallara and Renne (2019), seems inconsistent with a ra-
tional bubble in Treasury debt.
      Fifth, the TVC is unlikely to be violated because the risk-adjusted discount rate on the portfolio
of Treasury debt is higher than the growth rate of GDP.


6.2     Convenience Yield

U.S. government bonds carry a convenience yield which makes Treasury yields lower than the safe
rate of interest. Put differently, the convenience yield produces an additional source of revenue,


                                                     28
because the U.S. Treasury can sell its bonds for more than their fundamental value. The question
is how far this explanations can go towards accounting for the bond valuation puzzle.
   The convenience yield, t , is the government bonds' expected returns that investors are will-
ing to forgo under the risk-neutral measure. Assuming a uniform convenience yield across the
maturity spectrum, the Euler equation for a Treasury bond with maturity h + 1 is:

                                                                         Pt$
                                                                           +1 ( h )
                                        e -t    = E t Mt + 1                              .
                                                                       Pt$ (h + 1)

Proposition 6. If the TVC holds, the value of the government debt portfolio equals the value of
future surpluses plus the value of future seigniorage revenue:

                                                              H                                         H
      Et    Mt$,t+ j      Tt+ j - Gt+ j + (1 - e-t+ j )             Q$       $
                                                                     t+ j,h Pt+ j ( h )            =    Q$        $
                                                                                                         t-1,h+1 Pt ( h ),   (17)
           j =0                                              h =1                                      h =0


      H     $        $
where h =0 Qt-1,h+1 Pt ( h ) on the right-hand side denotes the cum-dividend value of the govern-
                                                    H     $       $
ment's debt portfolio at the start of period t, and h =1 Qt+ j,h Pt+ j ( h ) on the left-hand side denotes
the ex-dividend value of the government's debt portfolio at the end of period t + j.

   When there is no convenience yield, we end up back in the standard case of Proposition 1.
If the quantity of current and future outstanding government debt is positive, then a positive
convenience yield will always increase the value of government debt, acting as an additional
source of revenue. This additional income is akin to seigniorage revenue and could potentially
turn government deficits into surpluses.
   As an empirical strategy, we measure the convenience yield following Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). To proxy for t , we use the weighted average of the Aaa-Treasury yield
spread and the high-grade commercial papers-bills yield spread where the time series of weights
are computed to match the duration of the government bond portfolio period by period. The left
panel of Figure 8 shows the time series of the convenience yield. Over the sample period from
1947 to 2019, the average convenience yield is 0.60% per year, which implies average seigniorage
revenue of $11.53 billions per year, or 0.20% of U.S. GDP as shown in the right panel of Figure 8.
The figure also illustrates the counter-cyclical nature of the convenience yield and seigniorage rev-
enue. Appendix C shows that this convenience yield measure is close to other measures proposed
in the literature.
   We rewrite equation (17) as:

                                                                                               K
                  Et    Mt$,t+ j Tt+ j Kt+ j   - Et    Mt$,t+ j Gt+ j              =           Q$        $
                                                                                                t-1,h+1 Pt ( h ),
                       j =0                           j =0                                    h =0



                                                              29
                             Figure 8: Convenience Yield and Seigniorage Revenue




The left panel reports the annual convenience yield time series time series for t , computed as the weighted average of Aaa-Treasury
and high-grade commercial papers-bills yield spreads. The right panel reports time series of the seigniorage revenue from convenience
scaled by GDP, (1 - e-t ) Dt / GDP. The sample period is from 1947 until 2019.



where:

                                                       (1 - e -  t+ j )  h
                                                                         H     $       $
                                                                           =1 Qt+ j,h Pt+ j ( h )
                                   Kt+ j = 1 +                                                      .
                                                                         Tt+ j

We introduce the log growth rate  log Kt as an additional state variable in the VAR. The aug-
                       ~t = [zt ,  log Kt ]. The seigniorage term log Kt follows the process:  log Kt+1 =
mented state vector is z
   ~t+1 , with an unconditional mean of zero because log Kt is stationary.
ek z
    We use the same method as in Proposition 5 to price the modified tax claim. The new pricing
formula for the revenue claim is:

                                             
                                       Et     Mt$,t+ j Tt+ j Kt+ j                   k
                                                                         = Tt Kt · PDt ,
                                             j =0


        k is a function of the state variables z
where PDt                                      ~t .
    The left panel of Figure 9 reports the present value of the surplus in the red solid line for the
model with convenience and in dashed green line for the benchmark model without convenience.
The convenience yield increases the present value of the government surplus. On average, the
present value of surplus with the seigniorage revenue is -103.72%, compared to the average sur-
plus present value without the seigniorage revenue (-260.37%). Although the effect is sizable, the
gap between the market value of public debt and the present value of government surplus re-
mains. This may be a surprising result given the large perceived convenience yield on Treasuries.
There are two offsetting effects at work. On the one hand, there is positive seigniorage revenue

                                                                30
which increases the surplus and its present value. On the other hand, the higher the convenience
yield the higher the true risk-free rate given observed bond yields. Higher safe rates increase the
discount rate of future revenues and spending, lowering the present value of surpluses. The pos-
itive cash flow effect is offset by the negative discount rate effect, leaving the present value of the
surplus nearly unaltered.
    How large does the seigniorage revenue need to be to resolve the puzzle? To answer this
question, we fix the VAR and market price of risk parameters and change the seigniorage revenue
term from log Kt to log Kt so that:

                                                                      H
                                                      k
                                           Tt Kt PD t - Gt PtG =      Q$        $
                                                                       t-1,h+1 Pt ( h )
                                                                     h =0

                                                                                                                                  k
                          ~t is  log Kt , log Kt enters this equation through both Kt and PD t . We
Since the last element of z
solve for variable log Kt in this equation, taking other variables as given. The right panel of Figure
9 reports the resulting Kt process in the dashed line alongside the actual Kt process in the solid
line. Seigniorage revenue would need to be 20.57% of tax revenue on average to match the present
value of the government surplus claim to the actual debt value, and more than 41.35% in the last
twenty years of the sample. Actual seigniorage revenue only averages 1.90% of tax revenue. In
sum, the convenience yield would have to be an order of magnitude larger to bridge the gap.
    Some have argued that the convenience yields are larger than implied by the AAA-Treasury

                   Figure 9: Present Value of Government Surpluses and Seigniorage Revenue

       4                                                               0.6
                                                                                     Actual log K
                                                                                     Counterfactual log K
       2                                                               0.5

       0                                                               0.4

       -2                                                              0.3

       -4                                                              0.2

       -6                                                              0.1
                           Price of S claim
       -8                  Price of S claim + Seigniorage Value           0
                           Govt Debt Outstanding
     -10                                                              -0.1
            1950    1960   1970     1980     1990    2000     2010            1950   1960    1970     1980   1990   2000   2010




The left panel plots the present value of government surpluses with and without seigniorage revenue, scaled by GDP. The right panel
plots the actual and the counterfactual seigniorage revenue process Kt and Kt .



                                                                     31
spread. For example, (Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig, 2018) argue that foreigners earn con-
venience form dollar assets, including investment-grade corporate bonds. Subtracting Treasury
from U.S. AAA corporate yields removes that dollar safety premium. It remains an open question
whether the convenience yields needed to close the gap are consistent with the data. As the supply
of safe assets increases, convenience yields may decline (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,
2012) or disappear altogether if the U.S. dollar were to lose its privileged role in the world finan-
cial system (Farhi, Gourinchas, and Rey, 2011; Farhi and Maggiori, 2017; He, Krishnamurthy, and
Milbradt, 2019).


6.3       Austerity as a Peso Event

Next, we consider a model in which bond investors price in the possibility of a major government
spending cut.8 However, such radical austerity never occurs in our 70-year sample. How large
should the spending cut probability be in order to match the market valuation of the government
debt to the present value of government surpluses?
      We fix the spending cut at 2 times the standard deviation of the log spending-to-GDP shock.
When it happens, the spending-to-GDP ratio decreases by 2 × 3.90% = 8% of U.S. GDP. Moreover,
we assume that the spending cut is permanent. Specifically, we assume that the long-run mean of
spending-to-GDP, g0 , falls from its full-sample average of 11.0% of GDP to 3% of GDP. When the
peso event happens, log spending gt shifts down by                    = log(.08/.11) as does the long-run mean
g0 . The dynamics of the demeaned state variables from that point forward are still given by the
benchmark VAR, including the processes of tax and spending. As a result, the price of the G-claim
                             G when the peso event happens. The peso event itself is not priced;
scaled by GDP is simply gt PDt
we do not change the market prices of risk t .9
      Let t be the probability of this peso event. We back out t by equalizing the market value of
the debt to the present value of surpluses:

                                           T                 G          G
                           Dt / GDPt = t PDt - (1 - t ) gt PDt - t gt PDt ,                   t.

This equation can easily be solved for {t }, and the resulting time series is shown in Figure 10.
The average gap between the market value of debt and the present value of surpluses under
the benchmark model exceeds two hundred percent of GDP and grows in magnitude in the last
several decades of the sample. To match such a large gap, the probability of the spending cut has
to be large and growing. The spending cut probability is 21.0% on average and rises to 55% at the
   8 Increasing  tax revenue would be an alternative way to engineer a fiscal correction; the results would be similar.
   9 If
      the fiscal correction took place in high marginal utility states, as in a rare disaster model, the implied probability
of these fiscal corrections would likely be smaller. But that strikes us as implausible. Governments do not suddenly
switch to running large primary surpluses in bad states of the world.


                                                            32
end of the sample. Such a large probability is at odds with the notion of a peso event that never
happens in a 70-year sample. We interpret this result as a restatement rather than a resolution of
the puzzle.

                  Figure 10: Probabilities of Spending Cut Implied by Debt-to-GDP Ratio

                                    0.6


                                    0.5


                                    0.4


                                    0.3


                                    0.2


                                    0.1


                                     0


                                   -0.1


                                   -0.2
                                          1950   1960   1970    1980     1990    2000    2010     2020


This figure reports the time series of probabilities of spending cuts implied by the debt to GDP ratio, t .




6.4    Other Government Assets and Liabilities

The government owns various assets, including outstanding student loans and other credit trans-
actions, cash balances, and various financial instruments. Based on Congressional Budget Office
data, the total value of these government assets is 8.8% of the GDP as of 2018. While these assets
bring the net government debt held by the public from 77.8% to 69.1% of GDP, the bulk of the
government debt valuation puzzle remains.
      Other significant sources of government revenues and outlays are those associated with the
Social Security Administration (SSA). Based on the CBO data, net flows from the SSA are close to
0 as of 2018, but will turn into a deficit of 0.7% of GDP per annum from 2020 to 2029. As the SSA
turns from a net contributor of primary surpluses into a net contributor to the deficit in 2019 and
beyond, the government will need to issue additional debt to the public. Absent new spending
cuts or tax increases, this will deepen the puzzle.


6.5    Market Segmentation

One could argue that marginal investors in Treasury bonds do not necessarily overlap with in-
vestors in the U.S. equity market. For example, foreign ownership of Treasuries has increased
dramatically since the mid 1990s (see Favilukis, Kohn, Ludvigson, and Nieuwerburgh, 2013) to


                                                                   33
                        Table 5: Inelastic Demand: Returns on U.S. Treasury Purchases


                                                  dollar-weighted            time-weighted            gap
                            Fed                        2.58%                     4.87%               2.29%
                            Foreign                    3.24%                     4.87%               1.63%
                            Fed+Foreign                3.06%                     4.87%               1.81%

Source: Federal Flow of Funds data. Cash flows invested in Bloomberg Treasury Index. The dollar-weighted return is the nominal IRR
on all the cash flows invested by foreign investors (the Fed) in the Bloomberg Treasury Index. Flow of Funds Table F106: Monetary
authority; other Treasury securities, excluding Treasury bills; asset, and Rest of the world; other Treasury securities, excluding Treasury
bills and certificates; asset. The sample is 2000-2019.



about 40% of holdings at the peak in 2008, or as much as holdings of domestic investors excluding
the Federal Reserve system (mutual funds, pension funds, banks, and insurance companies). Can
market segmentation resolve the government debt risk premium puzzle?
     Whatever SDFs foreign investors use, the projections of their SDFs on the state space must
agree with those of the domestic investors as far as bond pricing is concerned in the absence of
arbitrage. To investigate this possibility, we estimate a model that only focuses on matching bond
yields. It is worth noting that zeroing out the stock market risk factors presents an extreme case
of segmentation since government bond investors are almost certainly exposed to some U.S. stock
market risks. We find that estimates of ^ 0 and ^ 1 remain similar to those in our benchmark
estimation. We also find that the debt valuation and risk premium puzzles remain. This type of
market segmentation does not resolve the puzzle.
     In addition to the rise in foreign holdings, the Fed has substantially increased its holdings
of Treasuries in the aftermath of the 2008-09 financial crisis. Table 5 reports the dollar-weighted
returns earned by foreign investors and the Fed. The dollar-weighted returns are 181 bps per
annum lower than the time-weighted returns (geometric mean return). Foreign investors and the
Fed display poor timing skill when investing in U.S. Treasuries. Put differently, they have inelastic
demand (Krishnamurthy and Lustig, 2019).
     If we take the view that foreign and Fed demand are completely inelastic, it is natural to adjust
the net payouts to bond holders by excluding payouts to the Fed and foreign investors. Figure 11
plots the net payouts to bondholders excluding the Fed and foreign investors as a fraction of the
face value of the Treasuries outstanding. Especially in the last 2 recessions, the cash flows paid
out to bondholders seem just about as pro-cyclical when we exclude the Fed and foreign investors
than when we do not. Hence, inelastic demand by the Fed and foreign investors does not mitigate
the pro-cyclicality of the cash flows absorbed by U.S. investors.
     Finally, if the marginal investor in U.S. Treasuries faces pro-cyclical marginal tax rates, as sug-
gested by Longstaff (2011), then the after-tax cash flows on the entire Treasury portfolio would
become less pro-cyclical. This would reduce the riskiness of the Treasury portfolio. Given the

                                                                   34
           Figure 11: Net Payouts to Bondholders Excluding the Fed and Foreign Investors

                                                                            20
                                                                                  Payouts Excluding Foreign+Fed
                                                                                  Payouts Excluding Fed




                           net payouts to bondholders as % of outstanding
                                                                            15    Payouts Including Foreign +Fed


                                                                            10


                                                                             5


                                                                             0


                                                                             -5


                                                                            -10


                                                                            -15


                                                                            -20
                                                                                  1957            1971             1984   1998   2012


The figure plots annual net payouts to bondholders as a fraction of the lagged face value. The red line includes the payouts to the
Fed and to foreign investors and includes Fed and foreign holdings in the denominator. The blue excludes the payouts to the Fed
and Fed holdings in the denominator. The black line excludes payouts to the Fed and foreign investors. To compute the payouts to
bondholders excluding the Fed and foreigners, we start with the Federal government; interest paid (IMA) (FA316130001.A) from Table
F106 in the Flow of Funds. The interest paid is scaled down by the fraction of debt held by the Fed (LM713061103.A) and Foreigners
(LM713061103.A) from Table L210. To compute net issuance, we take the Federal government; net lending (+) or borrowing (-) (finan-
cial account) (FA315000005.A) from Table F106. Then we subtract purchases by the Fed (Monetary authority; Treasury securities; asset;
Monetary authority; Treasury securities; asset) and purchases by foreigners (the Rest of the world; Treasury securities; FA263061105.A)
from Table F210. Finally, we add the new interest paid series to the new payout series. We divide these payouts by the face value of
outstanding bonds excluding Foreign and Fed holdings. Annual data from the Flow of Funds.



large size of foreign, Fed, and tax-exempt domestic institutional holdings of U.S. Treasuries, it is
unlikely that this argument has much bite.


7     Conclusion

Because government deficits tend to occur in recessions, times when bond investors face high
marginal utility, governments must tap debt markets at inopportune times. This consideration
imposes novel no-arbitrage restrictions which affect inference on the riskiness of the overall gov-
ernment debt portfolio. The government debt portfolio is a risky claim whose expected return
far exceeds risk-free bond yields. We quantify that the increase in riskiness lowers the govern-
ment's debt capacity by 299% of GDP. The negative effects of the 2020 covid pandemic on current
and future primary surpluses will add to this number. The pricing of U.S. Treasury debt violates
the no-arbitrage restrictions implied by the government budget constraint, a violation we call
the government debt valuation puzzle. We show that the valuation of debt cannot be reconciled
with rational expectations, provided that a no-bubble condition holds. Conventional estimates
of convenience yields cannot explain it either. Perhaps investors expect an unprecedented fiscal
correction. If so, we show that they have been expecting a correction for a long time, and have


                                                                                                          35
been assigning ever-increasing probability to the event, in violation of rational expectations. More
work is needed to compare the U.S. to other countries using our approach.




                                                36
References
Aiyagari, S. R., A. Marcet, T. J. Sargent, and J. Sepp¨
                                                      al¨
                                                        a, 2002, "Optimal Taxation without State-
  Contingent Debt," Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), 1220­1254.

Alvarez, F., and U. Jermann, 2005, "Using Asset Prices to Measure the Measure the Persistence of
  the Marginal Utility of Wealth.," Econometrica, (4), 1977­2016.

Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi, 2003, "A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Structure Dynam-
 ics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 745­787.

Angeletos, G.-M., 2002, "Fiscal Policy with Noncontingent Debt and the Optimal Maturity Struc-
 ture*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), 1105­1131.

Backus, D., N. Boyarchenko, and M. Chernov, 2018, "Term structures of asset prices and returns,"
  J. financ. econ., 129(1), 1­23.

Bai, J., and P. Collin-Dufresne, 2019, "The CDS-bond basis," Financial Management, 48(2), 417­439.

Barro, R., 1979, "On the determination of Public Debt," Journal of Political Economy, 87(5), 940­971.

Berndt, A., H. Lustig, and S
                           ¸ . Yeltekin, 2012, "How Does the US Government Finance Fiscal
  Shocks?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), 69­104.

Bhandari, A., D. Evans, M. Golosov, and T. Sargent, 2017, "The Optimal Maturity of Government
  Debt," .

Blanchard, O., 2019, "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 109(4),
  1197­1229.

Blanchard, O. J., and M. Watson, 1982, "Bubbles, rational expectations, and financial markets," in
  Crises in the Economic and Financial Structure, ed. by P. Wachtel. Lexington Books.

Bohn, H., 1998, "The behavior of US public debt and deficits," the Quarterly Journal of economics,
  113(3), 949­963.

       , 2007, "Are stationarity and cointegration restrictions really necessary for the intertempo-
  ral budget constraint?," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(7), 1837 ­ 1847.

Borovicka, J., L. P. Hansen, and J. A. Scheinkman, 2016, "Misspecified recovery," J. Finance, 71(6),
  2493­2544.

Brock, W. A., 1982, "Asset prices in a production economy," in The economics of information and
  uncertainty. University of Chicago Press, pp. 1­46.

Buera, F., and J. P. Nicolini, 2004, "Optimal maturity of government debt without state contingent
  bonds," Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(3), 531 ­ 554.

Campbell, J. Y., 1991, "A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns," Economic Journal, 101, 157­
  179.

        , 1993, "Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data," American Economic Re-
  view, 83(3), 487­511.


                                                 37
       , 1996, "Understanding Risk and Return," The Journal of Political Economy, 104(2), 298­345.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1988, "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
  Dividends and Discount Factors," Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195­227.

Chernov, M., L. Schmid, and A. Schneider, 2016, "A Macrofinance View of U.S. Sovereign CDS
  Premiums," .

Cochrane, J. H., 2019a, "The Fiscal Roots of Inflation," working paper, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

       , 2019b, "The Value of Government Debt," working paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Cochrane, J. H., and J. Saa-Requejo, 2000, "Beyond Arbitrage: 'Good deal' asset price bounds in
  incomplete markets," Journal of Political Economy, 108, 79­119.

Corhay, A., T. Kind, H. Kung, and G. Morales, 2018, "Discount Rates, Debt Maturity, and the Fiscal
  Theory," Working Paper London Business School.

Croce, M. M., T. T. Nguyen, S. Raymond, and L. Schmid, 2019, "Government debt and the returns
  to innovation," Journal of Financial Economics, 132, 205­225.

Dai, Q., and K. J. Singleton, 2000, "Specification Analysis of Affine Term Structure Models," Journal
 of Finance, 55, 1943­1978.

Diamond, P. A., 1965, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," Am. Econ. Rev., 55(5),
  1126­1150.

Duffie, D., and R. Kan, 1996, "A Yield Factor Model of Interest Rates," Mathematical Finance, 6,
 379­406.

Farhi, E., P.-O. Gourinchas, and H. Rey, 2011, Reforming the International Monetary System. CEPR.

Farhi, E., and M. Maggiori, 2017, "A Model of the International Monetary System," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 133(1), 295­355.

Favilukis, J., D. Kohn, S. Ludvigson, and S. V. Nieuwerburgh, 2013, International Capital Flows and
  House Prices: Theory and EvidenceNBER Cambridge, MA, chap. 8.

Fleckenstein, M., F. A. Longstaff, and H. Lustig, 2014, "The TIPS-treasury bond puzzle," J. Finance,
  69(5), 2151­2197.

Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, and J. Stroebel, 2016, "No-Bubble Condition: Model-Free Tests in Housing
  Markets," Econometrica, 84(3), 1047­1091.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and J. C. Stein, 2015, "A Comparative-Advantage Approach to
  Government Debt Maturity," The Journal of Finance, 70(4), 1683­1722.

Gupta, A., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2018, "Valuing Private Equity Strip by Strip," Working
 Paper Columbia Business School and NYU Stern.

Hall, G., and T. Sargent, 2011, "Interest Rate Risk and Other Determinants of Post WW-II U.S.
 Government Debt/GDP Dynamics," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 192­214.

                                                 38
Hamilton, J. D., and M. A. Flavin, 1986, "On the Limitations of Government Borrowing: A Frame-
 work for Empirical Testing," The American Economic Review, 76(4), 808­819.

Hansen, L. P., W. Roberds, and T. J. Sargent, 1991, Time Series Implications of Present Value Budget
 BalanceWestview Press, vol. Rational Expectations Econometrics, chap. 5.

Hansen, L. P., and J. A. Scheinkman, 2009, "Long-term risk: An operator approach," Econometrica,
 77(1), 177­234.

He, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and K. Milbradt, 2019, "A model of safe asset determination," American
 Economic Review, 109(4), 1230­62.

Jiang, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and H. Lustig, 2018, "Foreign Safe Asset Demand and the Dollar
   Exchange Rate," .

Jiang, Z., H. Lustig, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and M. Xiaolan, 2020, "Testing the Government Budget
   Constraint," Working Paper London Business School.

Karantounias, A. G., 2018, "Optimal fiscal policy with recursive preferences," Review of Economic
  Studies, 85, 2283­ 2317.

Krishnamurthy, A., and H. N. Lustig, 2019, "Mind the Gap in Sovereign Debt Markets: The U.S.
  Treasury basis and the Dollar Risk Factor," .

Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, "The aggregate demand for treasury debt,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 233­267.

       , 2015, "The impact of Treasury supply on financial sector lending and stability," Journal of
  Financial Economics, 118(3), 571­600.

LeRoy, S., and R. Porter, 1981, "The Present Value Relation: Tests Based on Variance Bounds,"
  Econometrica, 49, 555­557.

Lettau, M., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008, "Reconciling the Return Predictability Evidence,"
  Review of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1607­1652.

Liu, Y., L. Schmid, and A. Yaron, 2020, "The Risks of Safe Assets," Working Paper Duke University.

Longstaff, F. A., 2004, "The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in US Treasury Bond Prices," Journal of
  Business, 77(3).

        , 2011, "Municipal Debt and Marginal Tax Rates: Is There a Tax Premium in Asset Prices?,"
  J. Finance, 66(3), 721­751.

Lucas, R. E., and N. L. Stokey, 1983, "Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy without
  capital," Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), 55 ­ 93.

Lustig, H., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and A. Verdelhan, 2013, "The Wealth-Consumption Ratio," Re-
  view of Asset Pricing Studies, 3(1), 38­94., Review of Asset Pricing Studies.

Milgrom, P., and N. Stokey, 1982, "Information, trade and common knowledge," J. Econ. Theory,
 26(1), 17­27.

Nagel, S., 2016, "The liquidity premium of near-money assets," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 131(4), 1927­1971.

                                                39
Pallara, K., and J.-P. Renne, 2019, "Fiscal Limits and Sovereign Credit Spreads," .

Rubin, R. E., P. R. Orszag, and A. Sinai, 2004, "Sustained budget deficits: the risk of financial and
  fiscal disarray," in AEA-NAEFA Joint Session, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meetings.
  zfacts.com.

Samuelson, P. A., 1958, "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the Social
  Contrivance of Money," J. Polit. Econ., 66(6), 467­482.

Santos, M. S., and M. Woodford, 1997, "Rational Asset Pricing Bubbles," Econometrica, 65(1), 19­57.

Shiller, R. J., 1981, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
  Dividends?," American Economic Review, 71, 421­436.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1997, "The Limits of Arbitrage," J. Finance, 52(1), 35­55.

Tirole, J., 1982, "On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational Expectations," Econometrica,
  50(5), 1163­1181.

Trehan, B., and C. E. Walsh, 1988, "Common trends, the government's budget constraint, and
  revenue smoothing," J. Econ. Dyn. Control, 12(2), 425­444.

        , 1991, "Testing Intertemporal Budget Constraints: Theory and Applications to U. S. Fed-
  eral Budget and Current Account Deficits," J. Money Credit Bank., 23(2), 206­223.

van Binsbergen, J., M. Brandt, and R. Koijen, 2012, "On the Timing and Pricing of Dividends,"
  American Economic Review, 102(4), 1596­1618.

van Binsbergen, J. H., W. Diamond, and M. Grotteria, 2019, "Risk Free Interest Rates," SSRN
  Working Paper 3242836.

Wachter, J., 2005, "Solving Models with External Habit," Finance Research Letters, 2, 210­226.




                                                 40
     Online Appendix for The U.S. Public Debt Valuation Puzzle

A       Proofs of Propositions
Proposition 1
Proof. All objects in this appendix are in nominal terms but we drop the superscript $ for ease of notation. The government faces the
following one-period budget constraint:
                                                                               H
                                                          Gt - Tt + Q1
                                                                     t -1 =    (Qth - Qth-
                                                                                         +1 h
                                                                                           1 ) Pt ,
                                                                              h =1

where Gt is total nominal government spending, Tt is total nominal government revenue, Qt     h is the number of nominal zero-coupon

bonds of maturity h outstanding in period t each promising to pay back $1 at time t + h, and Pth is today's price for a h-period zero-
coupon bond with $1 face value. A unit of h + 1-period bonds issued at t - 1 becomes a unit of h-period bonds in period t. That
is, the stock of bonds evolves of each maturity evolves according to Qt  h = Q h+1 +  Q h . Note that this notation can easily handle
                                                                                 t -1     t
coupon-bearing bonds. For any bond with deterministic cash-flow sequence, we can write the price (present value) of the bond as the
sum of the present values of each of its coupons.
      The left-hand side of the budget constraint denotes new financing needs in the current period, due to primary deficit G - T and
one-period debt from last period that is now maturing. The right hand side shows that the money is raised by issuing new bonds of
various maturities. Alternatively, we can write the budget constraint as total expenses equalling total income:

                                                                      H                        H
                                                     Gt + Q1
                                                           t -1 +      Qth- 1 Pt = Tt +  Qt Pt ,
                                                                          +1 h            h h

                                                                     h =1                     h =1


     We can now iterate the budget constraint forward. The period t constraint is given by:

                                       Tt - Gt       =     Q1      1 1     2    1    2 2     3    2    3 3
                                                            t-1 - Qt Pt + Qt-1 Pt - Qt Pt + Qt-1 Pt - Qt Pt
                                                                      H H     H +1 H
                                                           + · · · - Qt Pt + Qt -1 Pt .

Consider the period-t + 1 constraint,

                               Tt+1 - Gt+1       =       Q1    1    1      2 1       2    2      3 2       3    3
                                                          t - Qt+1 Pt+1 + Qt Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1 + Qt Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1
                                                                    H     H      H +1 H
                                                         + · · · - Qt +1 Pt+1 + Qt   Pt+1 .

multiply both sides by Mt+1 , and take expectations conditional on time t:

                      Et [ Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )]     =       t Pt - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt Pt - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt Pt
                                                            Q1  1         1         1        2 2          2         2        3 3

                                                                                               H H
                                                            -Et [ Q 3         3
                                                                    t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + · · · + Qt Pt
                                                                    H          H        H +1 H +1
                                                            -Et [ Q t +1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt   Pt    ,

                                                                                                             -1
where we use the asset pricing equations Et [ Mt+1 ] = Pt1 , Et [ Mt+1 Pt1+1 ] = Pt2 , · · · , Et [ Mt+1 PtH
                                                                                                           +1 ] = Pt , and Et [ Mt+1 Pt+1 ] = Pt
                                                                                                                    H                 H         H +1
                                                                                                                                                     .
    Consider the period t + 2 constraint, multiplied by Mt+1 Mt+2 and take time-t expectations:

               Et [ Mt+1 Mt+2 ( Tt+2 - Gt+2 )]       =            t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] + Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ]
                                                           Et [ Q 1         1             1              1             2         2

                                                           -Et [ Q 2
                                                                   t+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] + Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - · · ·
                                                                                  2             3         3

                                                                   H          H             H              H             H +1      H +1
                                                           +Et [ Q t +1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] + Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ],


where we used the law of iterated expectations and Et+1 [ Mt+2 ] = Pt1+1 , Et+1 [ Mt+2 Pt1+2 ] = Pt2+1 , etc.
     Note how identical terms with opposite signs appear on the right-hand side of the last two equations. Adding up the expected
discounted surpluses at t, t + 1, and t + 2 we get:

                                                                                                     H
                            Tt - Gt + Et [ Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )] + Et [ Mt+1 Mt+2 ( Tt+2 - Gt+2 )] = h     h +1 h
                                                                                                       =0 Qt-1 Pt +
                          -Et [ Q 1
                                  t+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] - Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] - · · · - -Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ].
                                                 1             2              2                      H              H


    Similarly consider the one-period government budget constraints at times t + 3, t + 4, etc. Then add up all one-period budget
constraints. Again, the identical terms appear with opposite signs in adjacent budget constraints. These terms cancel out upon adding




                                                                             41
up the budget constraints. Adding up all the one-period budget constraints until horizon t + J , we get:

                                   H                                       J                                                     H
                                  Qth-
                                     +1 h
                                       1 Pt        =           Et          Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )          + E t Mt , t + J    Qth+ J Pth+ J
                                 h =0                                 j =0                                                      h =1


                                                                               j
where we used the cumulate SDF notation Mt,t+ j = i=0 Mt+i and by convention Mt,t = Mt = 1 and Pt0 = 1. The market value of
the outstanding government bond portfolio equals the expected present discount value of the surpluses over the next J years plus the
present value of the government bond portfolio that will be outstanding at time t + J . The latter is the cost the government will face
at time t + J to finance its debt, seen from today's vantage point.
     We can now take the limit as J  :

                             H                                                                                                       H
                             Qth-
                                +1 h
                                  1 Pt         =       Et           Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )             + lim Et Mt,t+ J
                                                                                                           J 
                                                                                                                                   Qth+ J Pth+ J   .
                            h =0                                   j =0                                                           h =1


We obtain that the market value of the outstanding debt inherited from the previous period equals the expected present-discounted
value of the primary surplus stream { Tt+ j - Gt+ j } plus the discounted market value of the debt outstanding in the infinite future.
    Consider the transversality condition:
                                                                                            H

                                                                J 
                                                                   lim Et Mt,t+ J           Qth+ J Pth+ J       = 0.
                                                                                           h =1

which says that while the market value of the outstanding debt may be growing as time goes on, it cannot be growing faster than the
stochastic discount factor. Otherwise there is a government debt bubble.
     If the transversality condition is satisfied, the outstanding debt today, Dt , reflects the expected present-discounted value of the
current and all future primary surpluses:

                                                           H                                         
                                              Dt =      Qth-
                                                           +1 h
                                                             1 Pt                    =     Et      Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )          .
                                                       h =0                                       j =0


This is equation (1) in the main text.

Case with Default
Proof. We consider only full default, without loss of generality. Alternatively, we can write the budget constraint that obtains in case
of no default at t:
                                                                                     H                         H
                                                       Gt + Q1
                                                             t -1 +                   Qth- 1 Pt = Tt +  Qt Pt ,
                                                                                         +1 h            h h

                                                                                    h =1                      h =1

and, in case of default at t, the one-period budget constraint is given by:

                                                                                                 H
                                                                                   Gt = Tt +     Qth Pth .
                                                                                                h =1


We can now iterate the budget constraint forward. In case of no default, the period t constraint is given by:

                                         Tt - Gt       =       Q1      1 1     2    1    2 2     3    2    3 3
                                                                t-1 - Qt Pt + Qt-1 Pt - Qt Pt + Qt-1 Pt - Qt Pt
                                                                          H H     H +1 H
                                                               + · · · - Qt Pt + Qt -1 Pt .

In case of default, the period t constraint is given by:

                                                                                                              H H
                                                   Tt - Gt                =        - Q1  1    2 2     3 3
                                                                                      t Pt - Qt Pt - Qt Pt - Qt Pt


     First, consider the period-t + 1 constraint in case of no default,

                             Tt+1 - Gt+1           =       Q1    1    1      2 1       2    2      3 2       3    3
                                                            t - Qt+1 Pt+1 + Qt Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1 + Qt Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1
                                                                      H     H      H +1 H
                                                           + · · · - Qt +1 Pt+1 + Qt   Pt+1 .

Second, consider the period-t + 1 constraint in case of default,

                                                                                                                 H    H
                                        Tt+1 - Gt+1            =          - Q1    1      2    2      3    3
                                                                             t+1 Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1 - Qt+1 Pt+1 .




                                                                                           42
We use t as an indicator variable for default. To simplify, we consider only full default with zero recovery. This is without loss of
generality. Next, multiply both sides of the no default constraint by (1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 , and take expectations conditional on time t:

Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )]         =     t Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )] - Et [ Qt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Et [(1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 Pt+1 ] Qt
                                                  Q1                               1                    1                            1      2


                                                          t+1 (1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Pt+1 ] Qt - Et [ Qt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 Pt+1 ] +
                                                  -Et [ Q 2                    2                             2      3         3                    3

                                                           H                      -1
                                                  · · · + Qt Et [ Mt+1 (1 - ) PtH            H                    H        H +1
                                                                                +1 ] - Et [ Qt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt    Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) PtH
                                                                                                                                                       +1 ] ,

and multiply both sides of the default constraint by Mt+1 t+1

                       Et [ Mt+1 t+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )]               =                   t+1 t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - Et [ Qt+1 t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ]
                                                                                -Et [ Q 1             1             2             2

                                                                                                                            H             H
                                                                                -Et [ Q 3
                                                                                        t+1 t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + · · · - Et [ Qt+1 t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ].
                                                                                                      3


By adding these 2 constraints, we obtain the following expression:

Et [ Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )]      =       t Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )] - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Et [(1 - t+1 ) Mt+1 Pt+1 ] Qt
                                       Q1                               1         1                            1      2

                                       -Et [ Q 2         2                             2      3
                                               t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Pt+1 ] Qt
                                                                          H                    H -1          H         H        H +1
                                               t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + · · · + Qt Et [ Mt+1 (1 -  ) Pt+1 ] - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt
                                       -Et [ Q 3         3
                                                                                                                                     Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) PtH
                                                                                                                                                            +1 ] .

This can be restated as:

                 Et [ Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )]        =        t Pt - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt Pt - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt Pt
                                                           Q1  1         1         1        2 2          2         2        3 3

                                                                                             H H          H         H        H +1 H +1
                                                          -Et [ Q 3
                                                                  t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + · · · + Qt Pt - Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] + Qt
                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                 Pt    ,

                                                                                                                                             -1
where we use the asset pricing equations Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )] = Pt1 , Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Pt1+1 ] = Pt2 , · · · , Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) PtH        H
                                                                                                                                           +1 ] = Pt ,
and Et [ Mt+1 (1 - t+1 ) Pt+1 ] = Pt
                          H         H +1
                                         .
    The rest of the proof is essentially unchanged. Consider the period t + 2 constraint, multiplied by Mt+1 Mt+2 (1 - t+2 ) in the
no-default case, and Mt+1 Mt+2 (t+2 ) for the default case, and take time-t expectations (after adding default and no-default states):

               Et [ Mt+1 Mt+2 ( Tt+2 - Gt+2 )]         =               t+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] + Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ]
                                                                Et [ Q 1         1             1              1             2         2

                                                                -Et [ Q 2
                                                                        t+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] + Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - · · ·
                                                                                       2             3         3

                                                                        H          H             H              H             H +1      H +1
                                                                +Et [ Q t +1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ] - Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] + Et [ Qt+1 Mt+1 Pt+1 ],


where we used the law of iterated expectations and Et+1 [ Mt+2 (1 - t+2 )] = Pt1+1 , Et+1 [ Mt+2 (1 - t+2 ) Pt1+2 ] = Pt2+1 , etc.
     Note how identical terms with opposite signs appear on the right-hand side of the last two equations. Adding up the expected
discounted surpluses at t, t + 1, and t + 2 we get:

                                                                                                       H
                              Tt - Gt + Et [ Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )] + Et [ Mt+1 Mt+2 ( Tt+2 - Gt+2 )] = h     h +1 h
                                                                                                         =0 Qt-1 Pt +
                             -Et [ Q 1
                                     t+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] - Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ] - · · · - -Et [ Qt+2 Mt+1 Mt+2 Pt+2 ].
                                                    1             2              2                      H              H


     Similarly consider the one-period government budget constraints at times t + 3, t + 4, etc. Then add up all one-period budget
constraints. Again, the identical terms appear with opposite signs in adjacent budget constraints. These terms cancel out upon adding
up the budget constraints. Adding up all the one-period budget constraints until horizon t + J , we get:

                                       H                                J                                                  H
                                      Qth-
                                         +1 h
                                           1 Pt       =        Et       Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )       + E t Mt , t + J    Qth+ J Pth+ J
                                     h =0                           j =0                                                  h =1


                                                                            j
where we used the cumulate SDF notation Mt,t+ j = i=0 Mt+i and by convention Mt,t = Mt = 1 and Pt0 = 1. The market value of
the outstanding government bond portfolio equals the expected present discount value of the surpluses over the next J years plus the
present value of the government bond portfolio that will be outstanding at time t + J . The latter is the cost the government will face
at time t + J to finance its debt, seen from today's vantage point.
     We can now take the limit as J  :

                                 H                                                                                             H
                                  Qth-
                                     +1 h
                                       1 Pt       =       Et     Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )           + lim Et Mt,t+ J
                                                                                                       J 
                                                                                                                             Qth+ J Pth+ J   .
                                h =0                            j =0                                                        h =1


We obtain that the market value of the outstanding debt inherited from the previous period equals the expected present-discounted
value of the primary surplus stream { Tt+ j - Gt+ j } plus the discounted market value of the debt outstanding in the infinite future.




                                                                                          43
     Consider the transversality condition:
                                                                                        H
                                                                  lim Et Mt,t+ J
                                                                  J 
                                                                                        Qth+ J Pth+ J         = 0.
                                                                                      h =1

which says that while the market value of the outstanding debt may be growing as time goes on, it cannot be growing faster than the
stochastic discount factor. Otherwise there is a government debt bubble.
     If the transversality condition is satisfied, the outstanding debt today, Dt , reflects the expected present-discounted value of the
current and all future primary surpluses:

                                                          H                                   
                                                 Dt =     Qth-
                                                             +1 h
                                                               1 Pt              =   Et        Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )         .
                                                         h =0                                 j =0


This is equation (1) in the main text.


Proposition 2            From the time-t budget constraint, we get that the primary surplus


                                                                                         H
                                                                - St = - Q1
                                                                          t -1 +         (Qth - Qth-
                                                                                                   +1 h
                                                                                                     1 ) Pt .
                                                                                       h =1

It follows that
                                                          H                                  H                            H
                                          Dt - S t =      Qth- 1 Pt - Qt-1 +  ( Qt - Qt-1 ) Pt =  Qt Pt .
                                                             +1 h      1         h    h +1   h     h h

                                                         h =0                               h =1                         h =1

We obtain equation (3) in the main text.

                                                                              
                                             D
                                            rt + 1 ( Dt - S t )     =      Pt$+1 (h)Q$               T      G
                                                                                     t,h+1 = Dt+1 = Pt+1 - Pt+1
                                                                          h =0
                                                                                                                     g
                                                                    =     ( PtT - Tt )rt
                                                                                                 G
                                                                                         +1 - ( Pt+1 - Gt )rt+1 .




Proposition 3
Proof. We follow the proof in the working paper version of Backus, Boyarchenko, and Chernov (2018) on page 16 (Example 5). Hansen
and Scheinkman (2009) consider the following equation:

                                                                        E t [ Mt , t + 1 v t + 1 ] =  v t ,                                                 (A.1)

where  is the dominant eigenvalue and vt is the eigenfunction. Claims to stationary cash flows earn a return equal to the yield on the
long bond. We consider the following decomposition of the pricing kernel:

                                                                    1
                                                                   Mt ,t +1      =     Mt , t +1 v t + 1 /  v t ,                                           (A.2)
                                                                    2
                                                                   Mt ,t +1      =      v t / v t +1 .                                                      (A.3)

By construction, Et [ Mt
                       1                                                                                             n
                         ,t+1 ] = 1. The long yields converge to - log . The long-run bond return converges to limn Rt,t+1 =                             2
                                                                                                                                                        Mt
                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                   =
                                                                                                                                                           ,t +1
vt+1 /vt . This implies that E[log Rt,t+1 ] = - log .
      To value claims to uncertain cash flows with one-period growth rate gt,t+1 , we define pn                         t to denote the price of a strip that pays
off dt,t+n , n periods from now.
                                                                                   n -1                       n -1
                                               pnt = E t [ Mt , t +1 g t , t + 1 p t +1 ] = E t [ Mt , t +1 p t + 1 ] ,

where Mt,t+1 = Mt,t+1 gt,t+1 . Consider the problem of finding the dominant eigenvalue:

                                                                        E t [ Mt , t + 1 v t + 1 ] =  v t .                                                 (A.4)

If the cash flows are stationary, then the same  that solves this equation for Mt,t+1 in eqn. A.1 solves the one for Mt,t+1 . Hence, if
(, vt ) solves eqn. A.1, then (, vt /dt ) solves the hat equation eqn. A.4.




                                                                                      44
Proposition 6
Proof. Start from government budget constraint:

                                                                                     K -1                     K
                                                Tt - Gt           =        Q1
                                                                            t -1 +      t-1 Pt -  Qt Pt
                                                                                       Qk +1 k     k k

                                                                                     k =1                   k =1


We assume these bond prices contain the same convenience yield t :

                                                                    Et [ Mt+1 ]       =         Pt1 e-t ,
                                                              Et [ Mt+1 Pt1+1 ]       =         Pt2 e-t ,
                                                              Et [ Mt+1 PtK
                                                                          +1 ]        =         PtK +1 e-t .

Consider the period-t + 1 constraint, multiplied by Mt+1 , and take expectations conditional at time t:

                                               Et [ Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 )]
                                                                      K -1                              K
                                          =    Et [ Mt+1 Q1
                                                          t +                Mt +1 Q k
                                                                                     t
                                                                                       +1 k
                                                                                         Pt+1 -         Mt +1 Q k    k
                                                                                                                t+1 Pt+1 ]
                                                                      k =1                             k =1
                                                                    K -1                                            K
                                          =    Pt1 e-t Q1
                                                        t       +          Ptk+1 e-t Qk
                                                                                      t
                                                                                        +1
                                                                                                 - Et [ Mt+1        Qk    k
                                                                                                                     t+1 Pt+1 ].
                                                                    k =1                                           k =1


Consider the period-t + 2 constraint, multiplied by Mt,t+2 :

                               Et [ Mt,t+2 ( Tt+2 - Gt+2 )]
                                                      K -1                                  K
                          =    Et [ Mt,t+2 Q1
                                            t +1 +           Mt , t + 2 Q k +1 k
                                                                          t+1 Pt+2 -      Mt , t + 2 Q k    k
                                                                                                       t+2 Pt+2 ]
                                                      k =1                               k =1
                                                                                  K -1                                             K
                          =    Et [ Mt+1 Pt1+1 e-t+1 Q1
                                                      t+1 ] + Et [ Mt+1                     +1 -  t +1 k +1
                                                                                         Ptk+ 1e      Qt+1 ] - Et [ Mt,t+2      Qk    k
                                                                                                                                 t+2 Pt+2 ],
                                                                                  k =1                                         k =1


where we have used that

                                                                                                          -  t +1 1
                               Et [ Mt,t+2 Q1                    1                                  1
                                            t+1 ] = Et [ Mt,t+1 Qt+1 Et+1 Mt+1,t+2 ] = Et [ Mt,t+1 Qt+1 e        Pt+1 ],

and, similarly, that:
                                                                                                               -  t +1 k +1
                          Et [ Mt,t+2 Qk    k                    k                  k                    k
                                       t+1 Pt+2 ] = Et [ Mt,t+1 Qt+1 Et+1 Mt+1,t+2 Pt+2 ] = Et [ Mt,t+1 Qt+1 e        Pt+1 ].
By adding up the t, t + 1 and t + 2 constraint, we get that Et [ Tt - Gt + Mt+1 ( Tt+1 - Gt+1 ) + Mt,t+2 ( Tt+2 - Gt+2 )] equals:

                                   K -1
                    =    Q1
                          t -1 +    Qk +1 k
                                     t-1 Pt
                                   k =1
                                              K -1
                    +    Pt1 (e-t - 1) Q1
                                        t +          Ptk+1 (e-t - 1) Qk
                                                                      t
                                                                        +1
                                              k =1
                                                                                  K -1                                                     K
                    +    Et [ Mt+1 Pt1+1 (e-t+1 - 1) Q1
                                                      t+1 ] + Et [ Mt+1                     +1 -  t +1
                                                                                         Ptk+ 1 (e     - 1) Q k +1
                                                                                                              t+1 ] - Et [ Mt,t+2          Qk    k
                                                                                                                                            t+2 Pt+2 ].
                                                                                  k =1                                                    k =1


Next, consider the period-t + 3 constraint, multiplied by Mt,t+3

                              Et [ Mt,t+3 ( Tt+3 - Gt+3 )]
                                                     K -1                                K
                         =    Et [ Mt,t+3 Q1
                                           t +2 +           Mt , t + 3 Q k +1 k
                                                                         t+2 Pt+2 -     Mt , t + 3 Q k    k
                                                                                                     t+2 Pt+2 ]
                                                     k =1                             k =1
                                                                                   K -1                                             K
                         =    Et [ Mt,t+2 Pt1+2 e-t+2 Q1
                                                       t+2 ] + Et [ Mt,t+2                      +1 -  t +2 k +1
                                                                                             Ptk+ 2e      Qt+2 ] - Et [ Mt,t+3      Qk    k
                                                                                                                                     t+3 Pt+3 ],
                                                                                     k =1                                          k =1


where we use:
                                                                                                          -  t +2 1
                               Et [ Mt,t+3 Q1                    1                                  1
                                            t+2 ] = Et [ Mt,t+2 Qt+2 Et+2 Mt+2,t+3 ] = Et [ Mt,t+2 Qt+2 e        Pt+2 ],




                                                                                  45
and, similarly, that:
                                                                                                                       -  t +2 k +1
                                  Et [ Mt,t+3 Qk    k                    k                  k                    k
                                               t+2 Pt+3 ] = Et [ Mt,t+2 Qt+2 Et+1 Mt+2,t+3 Pt+3 ] = Et [ Mt,t+2 Qt+2 e        Pt+2 ].
Iterating forward, and aggregating the discounted surpluses ( Tt+ j - Gt+ j ), we obtain:

                                                                                        K                             K                              K
         Et     Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )         + Et    Mt , t + j ( 1 - e -  t + j )  Q k     k
                                                                                          t+ j Pt+ j          =       Qk +1 k
                                                                                                                       t-1 Pt - lim Et [ Mt,t+  Qk
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                 t+ Pt+ ].
               j =0                                     j =0                          k =1                           k =0                           k =1


      t+ j
Let Dt       denote the time-t value of the government's debt portfolio at t + j. We can restate the previous equation as follows:

                                                                                                                                              K
                            Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )               Mt , t + j ( 1 - e -  t + j ) Dt + j                                       Qk
                                                                                                   t+ j             t -1                           k
                      Et                                 + Et                                               =      Dt    - lim Et [ Mt,t+      t+ Pt+ ].
                                                                                                                                  
                           j =0                                   j =0                                                                       k =1


If the discounted value of distant future bond portfolio is 0,

                                                                                       K
                                                                  lim Et [ Mt,t+
                                                                   
                                                                                       Qk   k
                                                                                        t+ Pt+ ]             =      0,
                                                                                      k =1


then debt value is the present value of future surpluses and future seignorage revenue from issuing bonds that earn convenience
yields:

                                                                                        
                                              Mt,t+ j (Tt+ j - Gt+ j )                  Mt , t + j ( 1 - e -  t + j ) Dt + j
                                                                                                                          t+ j      t -1
                                      Et                                      + Et                                               = Dt    .
                                             j =0                                      j =0




B        Asset Pricing Model
B.1       Risk-free rate
The real short yield yt (1), or risk-free rate, satisfies Et [exp{mt+1 + yt (1)}] = 1. Solving out this Euler equation, we get:

                                                                                                      1           1
                                                        y t (1)    =       y$
                                                                            t (1) - Et [ t+1 ] -        e  e + e  2 t
                                                                                                      2 
                                                                                                               1
                                                                   =       y0 (1) + eyn - e  + e  2 1 zt .                                                   (A.5)

                                                                            $          1             1
                                                        y0 (1)             y0 (1) - 0 - e   e  + e   2 0 .                                                   (A.6)
                                                                                       2

where we used the expression for the real SDF

                                           m t +1   =     m$
                                                           t +1 +  t +1
                                                                      1                                     1
                                                    =     -y$ t (1 ) -  t  t -  t  t +1 +  0 + e   z t + e    t +1
                                                                                                            2
                                                                      2
                                                                      1               1     1                    1
                                                    =     - y t (1 ) - e   e  + e   2  t -  t  t -  t - e   2  t +1
                                                                      2                     2

The real short yield is the nominal short yield minus expected inflation minus a Jensen adjustment minus the inflation risk premium.


B.2       Nominal and real term structure
Proposition 7. Nominal bond yields are affine in the state vector:

                                                                                      A$ ( h)   B$ ( h)
                                                                         y$
                                                                          t (h) = -           -         zt ,
                                                                                        h          h




                                                                                            46
where the coefficients A$ (h) and B$ (h) satisfy the following recursions:

                                                             $                     1                                                  1
                                 A $ ( h + 1)       =     - y0 (1) + A $ ( h ) +     B$ ( h)          B$ ( h) - B$ ( h)               2 0 ,     (A.7)
                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     1
                              B $ ( h + 1)          =       B$ ( h)    - eyn - B$ (h)             1 ,2                                          (A.8)


initialized at A$ (0) = 0 and B$ (0) = 0.

Proof. We conjecture that the t + 1-price of a  -period bond is exponentially affine in the state:


                                                           log( Pt$            $         $
                                                                  +1 ( h )) = A ( h ) + B ( h )             z t +1


and solve for the coefficients A$ (h + 1) and B$ (h + 1) in the process of verifying this conjecture using the Euler equation:

                              Pt$ (h + 1)       =       Et [exp{m$          $
                                                                 t+1 + log Pt+1 ( h ) } ]

                                                                          1
                                                =       Et [exp{-y$
                                                                  t (1) -     t -  t  t +1 + A $ ( h ) + B $ ( h ) z t +1 } ]
                                                                          2 t
                                                              $               1
                                                =       exp{-y0 (1) - eyn zt - t t + A$ (h) + B$ (h) zt } ×
                                                                              2
                                                                                                 1
                                                        Et exp{-t  t+1 + B$ (h)               2  t +1 } .


We use the log-normality of  t+1 and substitute for the affine expression for t to get:

                                                                                                                     1
                       Pt$ (h + 1)     =              $
                                                exp -y0 (1) - eyn zt + A$ (h) + B$ (h)                     zt +        B$ ( h)       B$ ( h)
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                  1
                                                - B$ ( h)        2 ( 0 + 1 z t ) .


Taking logs and collecting terms, we obtain a linear equation for log( pt (h + 1)):


                                                 log Pt$ (h + 1)         =     A $ ( h + 1) + B $ ( h + 1)                zt ,


where A$ (h + 1) satisfies (A.7) and B$ (h + 1) satisfies (A.8). The relationship between log bond prices and bond yields is given by
- log Pt$ (h) / = y$
                   t ( h ).


     Define the one-period return on a nominal zero-coupon bond as:

                                                         b,$               $                $
                                                        rt +1 ( h ) = log Pt+1 ( h ) - log Pt ( h + 1)


    The nominal bond risk premium on a bond of maturity  is the expected excess return corrected for a Jensen term, and equals
negative the conditional covariance between that bond return and the nominal SDF:

                                          b,$            $            1     b,$                                   b,$
                                      Et rt +1 ( h ) - y t (1 ) +       Vt rt +1 ( h )       =       -Covt m$
                                                                                                            t+1, rt+1 ( h )
                                                                      2
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                             =           B$ ( h)      2 t

     Real bond yields, yt (h), denoted without the $ superscript, are affine as well with coefficients that follow similar recursions:

                                                                           1                             1                            1
                              A ( h + 1)     =      - y0 (1) + A ( h ) +     ( B(h))  ( B(h)) - ( B(h))  2                       0 -  2 e  ,    (A.9)
                                                                           2
                                                                                         1
                         ( B(h + 1))         =      -eyn + (e + B(h))            -  1 .  2                                                     (A.10)

For  = 1, we recover the expression for the risk-free rate in (A.5)-(A.6).




                                                                                47
B.3      Stocks
B.3.1     Aggregate Stock Market
                                                                                     Ptm     m
                                                                                       +1 + Dt +1
We define the real return on the aggregate stock market as Rm
                                                            t +1 =                       Ptm
                                                                                                  ,   where Ptm is the ex-dividend price on the equity market.
A log-linearization delivers:
                                                              m      m     m     m   m       m
                                                             rt +1 = 0 +  dt+1 + 1 pdt+1 - pdt .                                                           (A.11)

The unconditional mean log real stock return is     =         m
                                                             r0          m ],
                                                                    E [r t
                                                             the unconditional mean real dividend growth rate is      =           and         µm   E[dm
                                                                                                                                                      t +1 ] ,
pdm = E[ pdm
           t ] is the unconditional average log price-dividend ratio on equity. The linearization constants  m and  m are defined as:
                                                                                                             0     1

                                                         m                                                            m
                                        m         e pd                    m                      m             e pd
                                        1 =          m
                                                                  < 1 and 0 = log e pd + 1 -                      m
                                                                                                                           pdm .                           (A.12)
                                                e pd     +1                                                  e pd     +1

     Our state vector z contains the (demeaned) log real dividend growth rate on the stock market, dm      m
                                                                                                    t+1 - µ , and the (demeaned)
log price-dividend ratio pdm - pdm .

                                                                    pdm
                                                                      t (h)     =     pdm + e pd zt ,
                                                                       dm
                                                                        t       =     µm + edivm zt ,

where e pd (edivm ) is a selector vector that has a one in the fifth (sixth) entry, since the log pd ratio (log dividend growth rate) is the fifth
(sixth) element of the VAR.
     We define the log return on the stock market so that the log return equation holds exactly, given the time series for {dm                 m
                                                                                                                                        t , pdt }.
Rewriting (A.11):

                                   m        m                         m                             m                         1
                                  rt +1 - r 0    =           (edivm + 1 e pd )  - e pd zt + edivm + 1 e pd  2  t+1 .
                                           m
                                          r0     =       µm + 0
                                                              m            m
                                                                - pdm (1 - 1 ).

    The equity risk premium is the expected excess return on the stock market corrected for a Jensen term. By the Euler equation, it
equals minus the conditional covariance between the log SDF and the log return:

                                         Ptm      m
                                           + 1 + Dt +1
                    1     =   Et Mt+1           m                 = Et exp{m$                m
                                                                            t +1 +  t +1 + r t +1 }
                                               Pt
                                                     1
                          =   Et exp -y$
                                       t,1 -
                                                                                           m
                                                         t -  t  t +1 +  0 + e  z t +1 + r 0            m
                                                                                             + (edivm + 1 e pd ) zt+1 - e pd zt
                                                     2 t
                                    $             1            m            m
                          =   exp -y0 (1) -           t + 0 + r0 + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt
                                                  2 t
                                                         m                                   1
                              × Et exp{-t  t+1 + edivm + 1 e pd + e                        2  t +1
                                   m        $                m
                          =   exp r0 + 0 - y0 (1) + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt
                                        1        m                                   m                    m                           1
                              × exp       e    + 1 e pd + e                  edivm + 1 e pd + e - edivm + 1 e pd + e                  2 t
                                        2 divm

Taking logs on both sides delivers:

                         m        $                m
                        r0 + 0 - y0 (1) + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt                                                                           (A.13)
                                     1        m                                m                                        m                 1
                                 +     e    + 1 e pd + e               edivm + 1 e pd + e                =      edivm + 1 e pd + e    2 t
                                     2 divm
                                                                  m,$     $           1     m,$                            m,$
                                                              Et rt +1 - yt,1 +         Vt rt +1         =    -Covt m$
                                                                                                                     t+1, rt+1
                                                                                      2

The left-hand side is the expected excess return on the stock market, corrected for a Jensen term, while the right-hand side is the
negative of the conditional covariance between the (nominal) log stock return and the nominal log SDF. We refer to the left-hand
side as the equity risk premium in the data, since it is implied directly by the VAR. We refer to the right-hand side as the equity risk
premium in the model, since it requires knowledge of the market prices of risk.
     Note that we can obtain the same expression using the log real SDF and log real stock return:

                                   m                 1     m                                 m
                               Et rt +1 - yt,1 +       Vt rt +1           =     -Covt mt+1, rt +1
                                                     2
                                                      m                                   m
                                                     r0 - y0 (1)          +      (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn - e 1/2 1 zt


                                                                                    48
                     1         m                 m                                       m
                    + (edivm + 1 e pd ) (edivm + 1 e pd )              =         edivm + 1 e pd          1/2 (t - 1/2   e )
                     2

We combine the terms in 0 and 1 on the right-hand side and plug in for y0 (1) from (A.6) to get:

                                                   m        $         1
                                                  r0 + 0 - y0,1 +       e  e
                                                                      2 
                                                   1         m                 m                     m
                                                  + (edivm + 1 e pd ) (edivm + 1 e pd ) + e  edivm + 1 e pd
                                                   2
                                                             m
                                                  + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt
                                                            m                                1
                                                  = edivm + 1 e pd 1/2 t + e  2 0 + e 1/2 1 zt

This recovers equation (A.13).


B.3.2     Dividend Strips
Proposition 8. Log price-dividend ratios on dividend strips are affine in the state vector:

                                                         pd              d          m         m
                                                          t ( h ) = log Pt ( h ) = A ( h ) + B ( h ) zt ,


where the coefficients Am (h) and Bm (h) follow recursions:

                                                                                          1
                                A m ( h + 1)       =     A m ( h ) + µ m - y0 (1) +         (e   + Bm (h))  (edivm + Bm (h))
                                                                                          2 divm
                                                                                     1               1
                                                         - (edivm + Bm (h))  2 0 -  2 e ,                                           (A.14)
                                 m                                         m                                       m      1
                                B ( h + 1)         =     (edivm + e + B (h))  - eyn - (edivm + e + B (h))  1 ,            2         (A.15)

                m = 0 and Bm = 0.
initialized at A0          0

Proof. We conjecture the affine structure and solve for the coefficients Am (h + 1) and Bm (h + 1) in the process of verifying this conjec-
ture using the Euler equation:

                                                           m
                                                          Dt +1
             Ptd (h + 1)    =     Et Mt+1 Ptd
                                            +1 ( h )         m    = Et exp{m$                 m        d
                                                                            t +1 +  t +1 +  d t +1 + p t +1 ( h ) }
                                                          Dt
                                                   1
                            =     Et exp{-y$
                                           t,1 -      t - t  t+1 + 0 + e zt+1 + µm + edivm zt+1 + Am (h) + B(h)m zt+1 }
                                                   2 t
                                        $               1
                            =     exp{-y0 (1) - eyn zt - t t + 0 + e zt + µm + edivm zt + Am (h) + B(h)m zt }
                                                        2
                                                                                                 1
                                  ×Et exp{-t  t+1 + (edivm + e + Bm (h))  2  t+1 .

We use the log-normality of  t+1 and substitute for the affine expression for t to get:

                                                         $
                           Ptd (h + 1)       =     exp{-y0 (1) + 0 + µm + Am (h) + (edivm + e + Bm (h))  - eyn zt
                                                    1
                                                   + (edivm + e + Bm (h))  (edivm + e + Bm (h))
                                                    2
                                                                                      1
                                                   - (edivm + e + Bm (h))  2 (0 + 1 zt )}

Taking logs and collecting terms, we obtain a log-linear expression for pd
                                                                         t ( h + 1):


                                                        pd
                                                         t ( h + 1)   =        A m ( h + 1) + B m ( h + 1) z t ,

where:

                                                                    $                 1
                     A m ( h + 1)        =       A m ( h ) + µ m - y0 (1) + 0 +         (e   + e + Bm (h))  (edivm + e + Bm (h))
                                                                                      2 divm
                                                                                 1
                                                 - (edivm + e + Bm (h))  2 0 ,
                                                                                                                   1
                     B m ( h + 1)        =       (edivm + e + Bm (h))  - eyn - (edivm + e + Bm (h))  2 1 .

We recover the recursions in (A.14) and (A.15) after using equation (A.6).


                                                                                     49
    We define the dividend strip risk premium as:

                                              d,$           $          1     d,$                                          d,$
                                         Et r t +1 ( h ) - yt,1 +        Vt rt +1 ( h )        =          -Covt m$
                                                                                                                 t +1 , r t +1 ( h )
                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                               =          (edivm + e + Bm (h))  2 t


B.4     Government Spending and Tax Revenue Claims
This appendix computes PtT , the value of a claim to future tax revenues, and PtG , the value of a claim to future government spending.
It contains the proof for Proposition 5.


B.4.1     Spending Claim
Nominal government spending growth equals

                                                                                                                  g
                                    log Gt+1 =  log gt+1 + xt+1 + t+1 = x0 + 0 + µ0 + e g + ex + e                                               z t +1 .             (A.16)

    We conjecture the log price-dividend ratios on spending strips are affine in the state vector:

                                                          PtG (h) = log PtG (h) = A g (h) + B g (h)zt .

    We solve for the coefficients A g (h + 1) and B g (h + 1) in the process of verifying this conjecture using the Euler equation:

                                                                Gt+1
               PtG (h + 1)         =     Et Mt+1 PtG
                                                   +1 ( h )                  = Et exp{m$                               G
                                                                                       t+1 +  log gt+1 + xt+1 + t+1 + Pt+1 ( h ) }
                                                                 Gt
                                               $                         1
                                   =     exp{-y0 (1) - eyn zt -             t + µ g + x0 + 0 + (e g + ex + e + B g (h)) zt + A g (h)}
                                                                         2 t
                                                                                                                      1
                                          ×Et exp{-t  t+1 + e g + ex + e + B g (h)  2  t+1 .

We use the log-normality of  t+1 and substitute for the affine expression for t to get:

                                                       $
                      PtG (h + 1)         =      exp{-y0 (1) + µ g + x0 + 0 + ((e g + ex + e + B g (h))  - eyn )zt + A g (h)
                                                     1
                                                 +     e g + e x + e + B g ( h )  e g + e x + e + B g ( h )
                                                     2
                                                                                          1
                                                 - e  g + e x + e  + B g ( h )  2 ( 0 + 1 z t ) }

Taking logs and collecting terms, we obtain

                                            $                                             1
              A g ( h + 1)        =      - y0 (1) + µ g + x0 + 0 + A g ( h ) +              e g + e x + e + B g ( h )  e g + e x + e + B g ( h )
                                                                                          2
                                                                                 1
                                         - e  g + e x + e  + B g ( h )  2 0 ,
                                                                                                                                     1
              B g ( h + 1)        =      (e g + ex + e + B g (h))  - eyn - e g + ex + e + B g (h)  2 1 ,

and the price-dividend ratio of the cum-dividend spending claim is

                                                                 
                                                                 exp( Ag (h + 1) + Bg (h + 1) zt )
                                                                h =0

                                                                                                                 g,ex
                                                                                 g             PtG
                                                                                                 +1            Pt+1 + Gt+1                   g
    Next, we define the (nominal) return on the claim as Rt+1 =                                            =              g,ex   , where Pt is the cum-dividend price on the
                                                                                              PtG - Gt             Pt
                          g,ex
spending claim and Pt            is the ex-dividend price. We log-linearize the return around zt = 0:

                                                            g            g                            g
                                                           rt+1 = 0 +  log Gt+1 + 1 pgt+1 - pgt .                                                                     (A.17)

                     g,ex
                    Pt                    PtG                                                                                            g            g
where pgt  log       Gt          = log    Gt    - 1 . The unconditional mean log return of the G claim is r0 = E[rt ].




                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                g     g
      We obtain pg from the precise valuation formula (14) at zt = 0. We define linearization constants 0 and 1 as:

                                              g           e pg          g                   e pg
                                            1 =                 < 1 and 0 = log e pg + 1 - pg    pg.                                      (A.18)
                                                       e pg + 1                           e +1

      Then, the unconditional expected return is:

                                                                  g                  g                 g
                                                              r0 = x0 + 0 + 0 - pg(1 - 1 ).                                               (A.19)

     We conjecture that the log ex-dividend price-dividend ratio on the spending claim is affine in the state vector and verify the
conjecture by solving the Euler equation for the claim.

                                                                                       ¯ g zt
                                                                            pgt = pg + B                                                  (A.20)

This allows us to write the return as:
                                                   g          g                       ¯g      g             ¯ g zt .
                                                  r t +1 = r 0 + e  g + e x + e  +  1 B            z t +1 - B                             (A.21)

Proof. Starting from the Euler equation:

                                                                  g
                           1    =       Et exp{m$
                                                t +1 + r t +1 }

                                              $            1         g                       g ¯
                                =       exp{-y0                t + r0 + [ e  g + e x + e  +  1 B
                                                (1) - eyn zt -                                   g                       -B
                                                                                                                          ¯ g ]zt }
                                                           2 t
                                                                            g ¯      1
                                        × Et exp{-t  t+1 + e g + ex + e + 1 B   g  2  t +1 .


We use the log-normality of  t+1 and substitute for the affine expression for t to get:

                                                          g $                                      g
                                    1     =       exp{r0 - y0                              ¯g
                                                              (1) + [ e  g + e x + e  +  1 B               -B
                                                                                                            ¯ g - eyn ]zt
                                                    1                 g ¯                                  g ¯
                                                  +   e g + e x + e + 1 B g                e g + e x + e + 1 B g
                                                    2
                                                                                     Jensen
                                                                       g ¯                1
                                                  -    e g + e x + e + 1 B g             2 ( 0 + 1 z t ) }

Taking logs and collecting terms, we obtain the following system of equations:

                                               g    $                               g ¯                          1
                                              r0 - y0 (1) + Jensen = e g + ex + e + 1 B g                      2 0                        (A.22)

and                                                                                                                       1
                                                              g                                                      g
                                                      ¯g
                                    e g + e x + e + 1 B                   -B
                                                                           ¯ g - eyn = e g + ex + e +  B
                                                                                                       ¯
                                                                                                      1 g                 2 1             (A.23)
     The left-hand side of this equation is the unconditional expected excess log return with Jensen adjustment. The right hand side is
the unconditional covariance of the log SDF with the log return. This equation describes the unconditional risk premium on the claim
to government spending. Equation (A.23) describes the time-varying component of the government spending risk premium. Given
1 , the system of N equations (A.23) can be solved for the vector B¯g:

                                                                              -1
                                                   g                  1                       1
                                 ¯g =
                                 B          I -  1  -  2 1                          -  2 1             e g + ex + e - eyn .               (A.24)




B.4.2      Revenue Claim
Nominal government revenue growth equals

                                log Tt+1 =  log t+1 + xt+1 + t+1 = x0 + 0 + µ0
                                                                             
                                                                               + ( e   + e x + e  ) z t +1 .                              (A.25)

where t = Tt / GDPt is the ratio of government revenue to GDP. Note that this ratio is assumed to have a long-run growth rate of
zero. This imposes cointegration between government revenue and GDP. The growth ratio in this ratio can only temporarily deviate
from zero.




                                                                                   51
      The remaining proof exactly mirrors the proof for government spending, with

                                                       Pt,ex           PtT
                                           pt  log             = log       -1   = p + B zt                                       (A.26)
                                                        Tt             Tt

                                                                          g
                                            
                                           rt       
                                              +1 = r0 + e + e x + e + 1 B       zt+1 - B zt ,                                    (A.27)

and
                                                    
                                                   r0             
                                                      = x0 + 0 +  0 - p  (1 -  1
                                                                               
                                                                                 ).
                                               $                                          1
                                          
                                         r0 - y0                              
                                                 (1) + Jensen = (e + ex + e + 1 B )  2 0 .                                       (A.28)


C       Data Sources
C.1      Primary Surpluses
The primary surpluses are constructed using NIPA Table 3.2 Federal Government Current Receipts and Expenditures from 1947 to
2019. All variables are seasonally adjusted.
     The government revenue is the sum of the corporate and personal tax revenue, the net income from the rest of the world, and
the federal government dividends income receipts on assets. The personal tax revenue is the total of the current personal tax receipts,
the tax revenue from production and imports, the net income from the rest of the world, and surpluses from government-sponsored
enterprise net of subsidies. The net income from the rest of the world includes the tax income from the rest of the world, the contribu-
tions from government social insurance from the rest of the world, the current transfer receipts from the rest of the world, net of the
government transfer payments to the rest of the world and the interest payments to the rest of the world.
     The government spending is the domestic net transfer payments before interest payments plus discretionary spending (i.e. con-
sumption expenditures). The domestic net transfer is the domestic current transfer receipts net of the domestic contribution from
government social insurances and the domestic current transfer receipts.
     The primary surpluses are the government revenue minus the government spending before interest payments.


C.2      State Variables
We obtain the time series of GDP from NIPA Table 1.1.5, and inflation is the change in the GDP price index from NIPA Table 1.1.4.
The real GDP growth xt is nominal GDP growth minus inflation. The Treasury yields for all maturities are constant maturity yields
from Fred. There are some periods where the 20-year bond was not issued and some periods where the 30 year bond was not issued.
The log-price-dividend ratio and the log real dividend growth are computed using CRSP database. Dividends are seasonally adjusted
and quarterly. We include the growth of both the government revenue to GDP ratio and the government spending to GDP ratio in the
state vector. The government revenue and government spending are defined in Section 1.


C.3      Other Measures of the Convenience Yield
In this section, we compare our measure of the convenience yield with the implied convenience yields from van Binsbergen, Diamond,
and Grotteria (2019). Figure A.1 shows the 6-month, 12-month, and 18-month convenience yields from van Binsbergen, Diamond, and
Grotteria (2019), which are spreads between the SPX option implied interest rates and government bond rates with corresponding
maturities. All measures of the convenience yield exhibit similar time-series patterns over the sample period from 2004-01 to 2017-04.




                                                                  52
                                  Figure A.1: Measures of the Convenience Yield
The figure shows the time series of different measures of the convenience yield. The dashed blue line is the spread of 6-month zero
coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with 6-month Treasury bill rate. The dotted red line is the spread of 12-month zero
coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with 12-month Treasury bill rate. The dashed yellow line is the spread of 18-month
zero coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with 18-month Treasury bond rate. The data is from van Binsbergen, Diamond,
and Grotteria (2019). The solid black line is the weighted average of the Aaa-Treasury yield spread and the high-grade commercial
papers-bills yield spread. All yields are in the quarter frequency, and expressed in percentage per annum. The sample period is from
2014-01 to 2017-04.
                          1.4
                                                                          SPX implied - Treasury (6m)
                                                                          SPX implied - Treasury (12m)
                          1.2                                             SPX implied - Treasury (18m)
                                                                          Weighted Average CY

                           1


                          0.8


                          0.6


                          0.4


                          0.2


                           0
                           2004       2006      2008       2010        2012     2014       2016          2018




                                                                  53
D      Coefficient Estimates
D.1      The VAR System
                                                                                    1
The Cholesky decomposition of the residual variance-covariance matrix,  2 , multiplied by 100 for readability is given by:


                            1.11           0        0          0         0            0       0             0      0       0
                                                                                                                               
                            0.12         2.02       0          0         0            0       0             0      0       0 
                            0.38         0.50     1.21         0         0            0       0             0      0       0 
                                                                                                                               
                           -0.05         -0.23    -0.28      0.44        0           0        0             0      0       0 
                                                                                                                               
                           -2.24         -2.90    1.40       0.73      14.92         0        0             0      0       0 
                       1
                                                                                                                               
                100 ×  2 = 
                           -1.32         1.41     0.67       -0.55     -1.01        4.83      0              0      0      0 
                                                                                                                               
                           
                            0.74         2.73     -0.17      -0.48      0.60        1.77     4.88           0      0       0 
                                                                                                                               
                            1.13
                           
                                         -3.37    -1.11      -0.11      0.25        -1.50    -0.42         3.90     0       0 
                                                                                                                               
                            0.74         2.73     -0.17      -0.48      0.60        1.77     4.88          0.00   0.00     0 
                            1.13         -3.37    -1.11      -0.11      0.25        -1.50    -0.42         3.90   0.00    0.00

    In this matrix, the last two columns are all zero. This is because the dependent variables log t - log 0 and log gt - log g0 do not
have independent shocks. For example, log t - log 0 can be expressed as

                                           log t - log 0       =      log t + (log t-1 - log 0 )
                                                                                                    1
                                                               =     ( e    + e  ) z t -1 + e    2  t ,

which loads on the first eight shocks in the same way as  log t - µ0
                                                                   .



D.2      Cointegration Tests
We perform a Johansen cointegration test by first estimating the vector error correction model :
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                  log Tt
                                 wt    =    A ( B w t -1 + c ) + D  w t -1 +  t ,    where wt =  log Gt  .
                                                                                                log GDPt

Both the trace test and the max eigenvalue test do not reject the null of cointegration rank 2 (with p-values of 0.11), but reject the null
of cointegration rank 0 and 1 (with p-values lower than 0.01). These results are in favor of two cointegration relationships between
variables in wt .
     We also conduct the Phillips-Ouliaris cointegration test on the {wt } matrix with a truncation lag parameter of 2, and reject the
null hypothesis that w is not cointegrated with a p-value of 0.03.


D.3      Market Prices of Risk
The constant market price of risk vector is estimated to be:

                                                  0 = [0, 0.25, -0.43, 0.29, 0, 1.41, 0, 0, 0]

     The time-varying market price of risk matrix is estimated at:

                         0               0          0         0          0           0       0           0          0        0
                                                                                                                                   
                         0            -8.61        0         0          0            0       0           0         0        0      
                         0               0       -9.56     -79.65        0           0       0           0         0        0
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                       24.24           3.20       0.01      2.75       0.15         2.61    -5.37       2.91      0.72     0.00
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                         0               0          0         0          0           0       0           0          0        0
                                                                                                                                   
                  1 = 
                                                                                                                                   
                       -37.21         -25.78     -13.97    57.32       -3.77        2.43    -2.62       -1.12     -0.92    -2.65
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                         0               0          0         0          0           0       0           0          0        0
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                         0               0          0         0          0           0       0           0          0        0
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                         0               0          0         0          0           0       0           0          0        0     
                         0               0          0         0          0           0       0           0          0        0




                                                                       54
E                 Model Fit
Figure A.2 shows that the model matches the nominal term structure in the data closely. The figure plots the observed and model-
implied 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 20-, and 30-year nominal Treasury bond yields. In the estimation of the market prices of risk, we overweigh
matching the 5-year bond yield since it is included in the VAR and the 30-year bond yield since the behavior of long-term bond yields
is important for the results.

                              Figure A.2: Dynamics of the Nominal Term Structure of Interest Rates

                    Nom yield on 1-yr bond                             Nom yield on 2-yr bond                Nom yield on 5-yr bond
             15                                                   15                                    15
                      model                                              model                                 model
                      data                                               data                                  data

             10                                                   10                                    10
% per year




                                                     % per year
              5                                                    5                                     5



              0                                                    0                                     0
                    1960      1980   2000     2020                     1960       1980   2000    2020        1960      1980   2000      2020


                    Nom yield on 10-yr bond                            Nom yield on 20-yr bond               Nom yield on 30-yr bond
             15                                                   15                                    15
                      model                                              model                                 model
                      data                                               data                                  data

             10                                                   10                                    10
% per year




                                                     % per year




              5                                                    5                                     5



              0                                                    0                                     0
                    1960      1980   2000     2020                     1960       1980   2000    2020        1960      1980   2000      2020


The figure plots the observed and model-implied 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 20-, and 30-year nominal Treasury bond yields. Yields are measured at
the end of the year. Data are from FRED and FRASER. the sample is 1947 until 2019.

      Figure A.3 shows that the model matches the real term structure in the data closely. The figure plots the observed and model-
implied 5-, 7-, 10-, 20-, and 30-year real Treasury bond yields (Treasury Inflation Indexed securities). In the estimation of the market
prices of risk, we overweigh matching the 30-year bond yield since the behavior of long-term bond yields is important for the results.
      The top panels of Figure A.4 show the model's implications for the average nominal (left panel) and real (right panel) yield curves
at longer maturities. These yields are well behaved, with very long-run nominal (real) yields stabilizing at around 7.54% (2.84%) per
year. We impose conditions that ensure that the nominal and real term structure are well behaved at very long maturities, for which
we have no data. Specifically, we impose that average nominal (real) yields of bonds with maturities of 50, 100, 200, 300, and 400 years
remain above 6.23% (3.04%) per year, which is the long-run nominal (real) GDP growth rate x0 + 0 (x0 ) observed in our sample.
Second, we impose that nominal yields remain above real yields plus 3.18% expected inflation at those same maturities. This imposes
that the inflation risk premium remain positive at very long maturities. Third, we impose that the nominal and real term structures
of interest rates flatten out, with an average yield difference between 100- and 50-year yields that must not exceed 2% per year and
between 300- and 100-year maturity that must not exceed 1% per year. These restrictions are satisfied at the optimum.
      The bottom left panel of Figure A.4 shows that the model matches the dynamics of the nominal bond risk premium, defined
as the expected excess return on the five-year nominal bond, quite well. Bond risk premia decline in the latter part of the sample,
possibly reflecting the arrival of foreign investors who value U.S. Treasuries highly. The bottom right panel shows a decomposition
of the nominal bond yield on a five-year bond into the five-year real bond yield, annual expected inflation inflation over the next five
years, and the five-year inflation risk premium. On average, the 4.9% nominal bond yield is comprised of a 1.5% real yield, a 3.2%
expected inflation rate, and a 0.3% inflation risk premium. The graph shows that the importance of these components fluctuates over
time.
      Figure A.5 shows the equity risk premium, the expected excess return, in the left panel and the price-dividend ratio in the right
panel. The risk premia in the data are the expected equity excess return predicted by the VAR. Their dynamics are sensible, with low
risk premia in the dot-com boom of 1999-2000 and very high risk premia in the Great Financial Crisis of 2008-09. The VAR-implied
equity risk premium occasionally turns negative. The figure's right panel shows a tight fit for equity price levels. Hence, the model
fits both the behavior of expected returns and stock price levels.




                                                                                 55
                                                           Figure A.3: Dynamics of the Real Term Structure of Interest Rates

                                           Real yield on 5-yr TIPS                                                   Real yield on 7-yr TIPS                                                                           Real yield on 10-yr TIPS

             4                                                                                          4                                                                                                  4
% per year




                                                                                           % per year




                                                                                                                                                                                              % per year
             2                                                                                          2                                                                                                  2


             0                                                                                          0                                                                                                  0

                                             model                                                                        model                                                                                          model
             -2                              data                                                       -2                data                                                                             -2            data

                      1990                        2000             2010          2020                        1990            2000                                   2010            2020                        1990        2000                   2010   2020


                                           Real yield on 20-yr TIPS                                                  Real yield on 30-yr TIPS

             4                                                                                          4
% per year




                                                                                           % per year



             2                                                                                          2


             0                                                                                          0

                                             model                                                                        model
             -2                              data                                                       -2                data

                      1990                        2000             2010          2020                        1990            2000                                   2010            2020


The figure plots the observed and model-implied 5-, 7-, 10-, 20-, and 30-year real bond yields. Data are from FRED and start in 2003.
For ease of readability, we start the graph in 1990 but the model of course implies a real yield curve for the entire 1947-2019 period.


                                                                         Figure A.4: Long-term Yields and Bond Risk Premia

                                                     Average nominal yield curve model                                                                                           Average real yield curve model
                                  10                                                                                                                       10

                                  8                                                                                                                         8
              percent per annum




                                                                                                                                       percent per annum




                                  6                                                                                                                         6

                                  4                                                                                                                         4

                                  2                                                                                                                         2

                                  0                                                                                                                         0
                                       0             100           200          300            400                  500                                         0             100            200                  300            400               500
                                                               maturity in years                                                                                                           maturity in years

                                                   Risk Premium on 5-yr Nominal Bond                                                                                       Decomposing Nominal Yield on 5-Year Bond
                                   5                                                                                                                       15
                                                  model                                                                                                                                                                                 ynom
                                   4              data                                                                                                                                                                                  yreal
                                                                                                                                                           10                                                                           exp infl
                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IRP
                  % per year




                                   2
                                                                                                                                                            5
                                   1
                                   0
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                  -1
                                  -2
                                           1950    1960     1970         1980   1990    2000            2010        2020                                            1950      1960    1970         1980           1990    2000         2010    2020


The top panels plot the average bond yield on nominal (left panel) and real (right panel) bonds for maturities ranging from 1 to 500
years. The bottom left panel plots the nominal bond risk premium on the five year bond in model and data. The nominal bond risk
premium is measured as the five year bond yield minus the expected one-year bond yield over the next five years. The bottom right
panel decomposes the model's five-year nominal bond yield into the five-year real bond yield, the five year expected inflation, and
the five-year inflation risk premium.



                                                                                                                                  56
                                         Figure A.5: Equity Risk Premium and Price-Dividend Ratio

                                    Equity risk premium                                                      Price-Dividend Ratio on Equity
             40
                                                                  model                        90          model
             35                                                   data                                     data

                                                                                               80
             30

             25                                                                                70

             20                                                                                60
% per year




             15
                                                                                               50

             10
                                                                                               40
              5
                                                                                               30
              0
                                                                                               20
              -5

             -10                                                                               10

             -15                                                                                0
                    1950   1960     1970    1980   1990   2000   2010     2020                      1950    1960      1970      1980      1990     2000   2010   2020


The figure plots the observed and model-implied equity risk premium on the overall stock market in the left panel and the price-
dividend ratio in the right panel. The price-dividend ratio is the price divided by the annualized dividend. Data are from 1947-2019.
Monthly stock dividends are seasonally adjusted.



F                  Measurability Constraints
Exploiting the affine exponentially-nature of bond prices and price-dividend ratios of spending and revenue strips, the generic mea-
surability restriction in (4) becomes:

                                                    1
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                             H     Q$
                                   PDt (h)                          PDt (h)                                 
                                                                            g                                       t-1,h+1
                             t                e  2 + B (h) - gt                       e g  2 + Bg ( h ) =                     Pt$ (h) · B$ (h) ,            (A.29)
                                  h =0                             h =0                                     h =0
                                                                                                                    GDPt

where we scaled both the left- and the right-hand side by GDP. When there is only one-period risk-free government debt, the right-
hand side of (A.29) is equal to zero. This is a special case of equation (5). Figure A.6 plots the violations of this measurability constraint
with only one-period risk-free debt. Since the left hand side of (A.29) is a vector of 8 variables, we plot their time series in 4 panels of
2 time series each. Each time series is interpreted as the change in the valuation of debt in response to one of the state variables zt . All
these time series are away from zero, suggesting severe violations of the measurability restriction (4).




                                                                                 57
          Figure A.6: Violations of the Measurability Constraint With Only One-Period Debt

                                         2                                                                                            30
                                                                                            infl                                                   y1nom
                                                                                            gdp                                       25           yrsp
                                         0
                      Multiples of GDP




                                                                                                                   Multiples of GDP
                                                                                                                                      20
                                         -2
                                                                                                                                      15
                                         -4                                                                                           10

                                         -6                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                                      0
                                         -8
                                              1950   1960     1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                             1950   1960     1970   1980   1990   2000   2010



                                   0.4                                                                                            0.4
                                                      divgr                                                                                        dt
                                   0.2                pdm                                                                         0.2              dg
          Multiples of GDP




                                                                                                          Multiples of GDP
                                         0                                                                                            0

                             -0.2                                                                                            -0.2

                             -0.4                                                                                            -0.4

                             -0.6                                                                                            -0.6

                             -0.8                                                                                            -0.8
                                              1950   1960     1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                             1950   1960     1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                                                                 1                                                                1
The figure shows the time series of t                                                                                                              g
                                      h=0 PDt ( h ) e  + B ( h ) - gt  h=0 PDt ( h ) e g  + Bg ( h ) - 0, i.e. the violation of
                                                      2                                  2

the measurability constraint with only one-period risk-free debt. Each panel plots the measurability conditions for two of the state
variables. The deviations from zero are expressed as a multiple of U.S. annual GDP so that 1 means the surplus claim increases by
100% of U.S. annual GDP when that state variable changes by 1%.



G      Model with Debt in the VAR
In this appendix, we augment the VAR with government debt as suggested by Cochrane (2019a,b). We impose the natural assumption
that the market value of debt and GDP are cointegrated. This leads us to add both the log change in the debt-to-GDP ratio and the log
level of the debt-to-GDP ratio as two additional elements in the state vector, and two equations in the VAR. The dynamics of the level
of debt-to-GDP and its innovations are implied by those in the change of debt-to-GDP, just like we do for tax revenue and govern-
ment spending. We place no other restrictions on the VAR dynamics. Debt-to-GDP is allowed to predict and be contemporaneously
                                                                                                            1
correlated with all other state variables. The estimated  matrix and  2 matrix are reported in Table A.1.
     One potential issue of including debt-to-GDP in the VAR is that the log(debt/ GPD ) series is not stationary. The augmented
Dickey-Fuller test can not reject the null hypothesis of the presence of the unit root in the log debt-to-GDP ratio in our sample period.
A sign of this non-stationarity is also that the coefficient on lagged debt in the debt equation exceeds 1 (12,12 = 1.046 > 1). To
deal with the non-stationarity, we estimate a structural break around 2007 for the debt-to-GDP ratio (See Figure A.7). Chow tests for
several potential structural breakpoints for the debt-to-GDP ratio from 1947 to 2019 show that we can only reject the null hypothesis
of no structural break in 2007 at the 1% level. We demean the debt-to-GDP ratio with two different sample (before and after 2007)
                                                                                                                                                            1
average, and then re-estimate the VAR (Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008). The  and  2 matrices for the VAR with the structural
break-adjusted debt series are reported in Table A.2. Note that now 12,12 = 0.96 < 1.

Cash Flows in VAR              The dynamics of the tax revenue, government spending, and surplus are affected little by the presence
of debt in the VAR (both with and without the structural break). In particular, we find little evidence for overshooting of the surplus
in response to a shock that lowers the surplus on impact. The third column of Figure A.8 shows the response of the surplus to a
shock in GDP (row 1), tax revenues (row 2), spending (row 3), and debt (row 4). For example, in response to a negative tax revenue
shock ( shock) or a positive government spending shock ( g shock), the surplus declines on impact and then recovers. There is some
overshooting in the surplus in the VAR system with debt, but the magnitude of the overshooting is minor. The responses of the
surplus are not very different from the benchmark model without debt in the VAR, both in an economic and a statistical sense. The
last row shows that an increase in debt results in persistently higher future surpluses, after an initial decline in the surplus, but again
the effects are minor. The effects are shorter-lived for the break-adjusted debt series.
      The first and the second columns of Figure A.8 show the impulse responses of the tax revenue and spending to shocks. In
response to shocks in GDP, tax revenues, and spending, the tax revenue and spending behave similarly across all three VAR models.
For example, in response to a negative  shock or a positive g shock, the tax revenue increases and then declines. Again, the responses


                                                                                                     58
                                                Table A.1: VAR with debt-to-GDP Ratio
=

                  l .       l .x            l .r             l .tp     l .dp      l .dd     l .         l .       l . g       l.g       l .debt       l .debt
                0.450     -0.159          0.134            -0.122     0.006      0.047      0.051     -0.042     -0.006      0.025       -0.049       -0.016
           x    -0.325    -0.091          0.272             0.901     0.005      0.106     -0.025     -0.079     0.081       0.043       -0.163        0.002
           r    0.006     -0.019          0.838             0.119     0.004      0.052     -0.001     -0.033     -0.007      0.021       -0.025       -0.011
          tp    -0.030    -0.032         -0.033             0.359    -0.005     -0.036     0.016       0.019      0.001     -0.018        0.044       -0.001
          dp    -2.067     0.220          0.353            -0.563     0.769     -0.386     -0.040     0.334      0.079      -0.304        0.616        0.064
          dd    0.379      0.028          0.004            -0.471     0.062      0.323     -0.182     -0.268     -0.101      0.137       -0.112        0.050
                -0.863    -0.122          1.176            -1.898     0.097      0.181     0.236      -0.648      0.243     0.261        -0.389       0.077
                -0.863    -0.122          1.176            -1.898     0.097      0.181     0.236      0.352       0.243      0.261       -0.389        0.077
          g     0.320      0.396         -1.489            -1.760    -0.082     -0.237      0.114      0.141      0.266     -0.312        0.185       -0.056
           g    0.320      0.396         -1.489            -1.760    -0.082     -0.237      0.114      0.141      0.266      0.688        0.185       -0.056
         debt   0.860      0.011          0.938             1.314     0.009     -0.097     -0.019      0.180      0.126     -0.013        0.433        0.045
         debt   0.860      0.011          0.938             1.314     0.009     -0.097     -0.019      0.180      0.126     -0.013        0.433        1.045

     1
100 2

                      l .          l .x           l .r          l .tp       l .dp      l .dd     l .       l .    l . g     l.g      l .debt      l .debt
                    0.981            0             0               0           0          0         0        0       0       0           0            0
             x      -0.210        1.784            0               0           0          0         0        0       0       0           0            0
             r      0.255        0.518         1.196               0           0          0         0        0       0       0           0            0
            tp      0.036        -0.123        -0.303          0.383           0          0         0        0       0       0           0            0
            dp      -0.486       -1.463         1.219          -0.163     14.735          0         0        0       0       0           0            0
            dd      -1.209        1.159         0.778          -0.397     -1.079      4.762         0        0       0       0           0            0
                    0.810        2.278         0.086           -0.157      0.464     1.491      4.596        0       0       0           0            0
                    0.810        2.278         0.086           -0.157      0.464     1.491      4.596        0       0       0           0            0
            g       1.097        -3.208        -1.152          -0.067      0.373     -1.344     -0.186       0    3.833      0           0            0
             g      1.097        -3.208        -1.152          -0.067      0.373     -1.344     -0.186       0    3.833      0           0            0
           debt     -1.045       -4.746        -2.884          -0.428     -0.731     -0.454     -1.511       0    2.088      0         3.311          0
           debt     -1.045       -4.746        -2.884          -0.428     -0.731     -0.454     -1.511       0    2.088      0         3.311          0

 1
 2 is the Cholesky decomposition of the residual variance-covariance matrix. It is multiplied by 100 for readability.



of tax revenues and spending in the VAR with debt (with and without structural break) are similar to those from our benchmark VAR,
both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Forecast Errors         Adding debt to the VAR does not meaningfully improve the forecast errors of spending and tax revenues in
the long-run (5-, 10- and 20-years hence). As shown in Figure A.9 and A.10, the long-run forecast errors of future spending and the tax
revenues are similar across all three VAR specifications. The forecasting performance for  log  and  log g is also slightly improved
using the VAR system with debt and structural break (the third columns) compared to the VAR system with debt (the second column).
     However, the VAR system with debt and structural break performs substantially better than the VAR system with debt only when
it comes to forecasting the long-run evolution of debt. The long-run forecast errors for  log(debt/ GDP) in the VAR with debt and
structural break are much lower than those in the VAR with debt (Figure A.11).

Valuation       When we re-estimate the market prices of risk for this model and reprice the claims to tax revenue and spending, we
find a broadly similar valuation puzzle. We estimate the market prices of risk for the VAR system with structural break to avoid the
non-stationary valuation ratios in the presence of the unit root in the debt-to-GDP ratio. In addition, the VAR system with structural
change in the debt-to-GDP ratio performs better in forecasting fiscal cash flows and debt dynamics in the long run.
     Figure A.13 shows the value of the surplus claim in the model with debt and the market value of debt in the data. It shows the
same pattern of a large and widening gap in the last three decades of the sample. The present value of future supluses is on average
-226% of GDP, implying the size of the puzzle (the gap) is -264% of GDP. The right panel of Figure A.13 plots the strip risk premium
curve for the model with debt. As in the main model, risk premia on T-, G-, and GDP-strips converge for long-dated strips. The
government debt portfolio continues to carry a much higher expected return that the safe rate of interest.

Cross-Equation Restrictions                 Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2020) shows that in a model where debt/GDP
is included in the state vector, a no arbitrage relationship pins down the risk-adjusted discounted sum of surpluses. In other words,
when debt is included, surpolus dynamics are redundant and can be backed out from this restriction. In our VAR system with debt
described above, the present value of future surpluses at any horizon k is implied by the value of the state vector zt :

                             Et k
                                j = 1 Mt , t + j S t + j
                                                            = Dt /Yt - PtD (k) = exp(ed zt ) - exp( A0
                                                                                                     d          d
                                                                                                       ( k ) + A1 ( k ) z t ).                                  (A.30)
                                        Yt



                                                                                    59
                       Figure A.7: log Debt/ GDP ratio with and without Structural Break

                                  Debt/GDP ratio                                                                       Debt/GDP ratio
     0.8                                                                               0.3
                                                        Structural break 2007                                                              Structural break 2007
                                                        No break                                                                           No break
     0.6                                                                               0.2


     0.4                                                                               0.1


     0.2                                                                                  0


         0                                                                             -0.1


     -0.2                                                                              -0.2


     -0.4                                                                              -0.3


     -0.6                                                                              -0.4


     -0.8                                                                              -0.5
       1940     1950   1960     1970   1980      1990    2000      2010         2020     1940    1950      1960     1970   1980     1990    2000      2010         2020


The left panel plots the time series of the log Debt/ GDP ratio.The red line is the demeaned log Debt/ GDP ratio. The blue line is the
log Debt/ GDP ratio demeaned by two different sample means (before and after 2007). The Chow test show that we can only reject the
null hypothesis of no structural break in 2007 at the 1% level (F statistics is 8.81). The right panel plots the demeaned  log Debt/ GDP
with and without the structural break.




                                       Table A.2: VAR with Debt and Structural Break
=

                     l .        l .x      l .r        l .tp       l .dp           l .dd        l .        l .         l . g     l.g        l .debt       l .debt
                   0.380      -0.076    0.026       -0.319      -0.008           0.033         0.064    -0.036       -0.015   -0.015         0.002       -0.036
           x       -0.090      0.210    0.391        0.272       0.021           0.081        -0.038    -0.059       0.067     0.078        -0.037        0.042
           r       0.048       0.043    0.899        0.048       0.005           0.046        -0.005    -0.035       -0.005    0.022        -0.019       -0.004
          tp       -0.073     -0.092   -0.050        0.485      -0.008          -0.031        0.017      0.016        0.008   -0.024         0.018       -0.007
          dp       -2.697     -1.347    0.354        2.909       0.769          -0.219        -0.020     0.207        0.089   -0.260        -0.129       -0.032
          dd       0.477       0.453   -0.395       -1.913       0.063           0.276        -0.178    -0.173       -0.105    0.122         0.263        0.066
                   -0.683      0.488    0.642       -3.876       0.106           0.121        0.258     -0.535        0.164   0.258          0.131        0.092
                   -0.683      0.488    0.642       -3.876       0.106           0.121        0.258      0.465        0.164    0.258         0.131       0.092
          g        -0.451      0.054   -2.189       -1.198      -0.170          -0.235         0.188     0.129        0.266   -0.536         0.119       -0.215
           g       -0.451      0.054   -2.189       -1.198      -0.170          -0.235         0.188     0.129        0.266   0.464          0.119       -0.215
         debt      0.154      -0.931    0.773        4.527      -0.025          -0.306         0.109     0.001       -0.042    0.019        -0.072       -0.041
         debt      0.154      -0.931    0.773        4.527      -0.025          -0.306         0.109     0.001       -0.042    0.019        -0.072        0.959

     1
100 2 =

                         l .        l .x         l .r     l .tp        l .dp             l .dd     l .        l .     l . g   l.g      l .debt       l .debt
                       0.922          0           0          0            0                 0         0         0        0     0           0             0
                x      0.555      1.835           0          0            0                 0         0         0        0     0           0             0
                r      0.363      0.494       1.207          0            0                 0         0         0        0     0           0             0
               tp      -0.098     -0.188      -0.274     0.426            0                 0         0         0        0     0           0             0
               dp      -3.411     -2.075       1.168     0.784       14.791                 0         0         0        0     0           0             0
               dd      -0.140      1.022       0.906    -0.798       -0.721             4.228         0         0        0     0           0             0
                       2.324      1.774       0.102     -0.487        0.923            0.819      4.473         0        0     0           0             0
                       2.324      1.774       0.102     -0.487        0.923            0.819      4.473         0        0     0           0             0
               g       -0.899     -2.168      -1.295    -0.403        0.050            -1.306      0.137        0     3.283    0           0             0
                g      -0.899     -2.168      -1.295    -0.403        0.050            -1.306      0.137        0     3.283    0           0             0
              debt     -2.495     -3.244      -1.304    -0.320        2.735             2.037     -0.859        0     0.367    0         6.351           0
              debt     -2.495     -3.244      -1.304    -0.320        2.735             2.037     -0.859        0     0.367    0         6.351           0

 1
 2 is the Cholesky decomposition of the residual variance-covariance matrix. It is multiplied by 100 for readability.




                                                                                  60
                        Figure A.8: Fiscal Impulse-Responses with the Debt/GDP ratio in the VAR

                                                                                    x shock
            0.01                                      0.01                                               0.01                                       0.1
                                                                                                                     With Debt                                With Debt
                                                                                                                     With Debt (SB)                           With Debt (SB)
           0.005                                     0.005                                              0.005        Benchmark                    0.05




                                                                                          surplus/GDP




                                                                                                                                           debt
     tau




               0                                 g       0                                                  0                                        0


           -0.005          With Debt                 -0.005       With Debt                             -0.005                                    -0.05
                           With Debt (SB)                         With Debt (SB)
                           Benchmark                              Benchmark
            -0.01                                     -0.01                                              -0.01                                     -0.1
                    0         10            20                0      10              20                          0    10              20                  0    10              20
                                                                                      shock
            0.01                                      0.01                                               0.01                                       0.1
                                                                                                                     With Debt                                With Debt
                                                                                                                     With Debt (SB)                           With Debt (SB)
           0.005                                     0.005                                              0.005        Benchmark                    0.05


                                                                                          surplus/GDP




                                                                                                                                           debt
     tau




               0                                         0                                                  0                                        0
                                                 g




           -0.005          With Debt                 -0.005       With Debt                             -0.005                                    -0.05
                           With Debt (SB)                         With Debt (SB)
                           Benchmark                              Benchmark
            -0.01                                     -0.01                                              -0.01                                     -0.1
                    0         10            20                0      10              20                          0    10              20                  0    10              20
                                                                                    g shock
            0.01                                      0.01                                               0.01                                       0.1
                                                                                                                     With Debt                                With Debt
                                                                                                                     With Debt (SB)                           With Debt (SB)
           0.005                                     0.005                                              0.005        Benchmark                    0.05
                                                                                          surplus/GDP




                                                                                                                                           debt
     tau




               0                                         0                                                  0                                        0
                                                 g




           -0.005          With Debt                 -0.005       With Debt                             -0.005                                    -0.05
                           With Debt (SB)                         With Debt (SB)
                           Benchmark                              Benchmark
            -0.01                                     -0.01                                  -0.01                                                 -0.1
                    0         10            20                0      10              20            0                  10              20                  0    10              20
                                                                                   debt shock
            0.01                                      0.01                                    0.01                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                     With Debt                                With Debt
                                                                                                                     With Debt (SB)                           With Debt (SB)
           0.005                                     0.005                                              0.005                                     0.05
                                                                                          surplus/GDP




                                                                                                                                           debt
     tau




               0                                         0                                                  0                                        0
                                                 g




           -0.005                                    -0.005                                             -0.005                                    -0.05
                           With Debt                              With Debt
                           With Debt (SB)                         With Debt (SB)
            -0.01                                     -0.01                                              -0.01                                     -0.1
                    0         10            20                0      10              20                          0    10              20                  0    10              20


Solid line shows impulse-response functions for the VAR with changes in the log debt/GDP ratio and the level of log debt/GDP;
dashed red line is for the VAR system with changes in the log debt/GDP ratio and the level of log debt/GDP after applying the
structural change in the level of log debt/GDP; dashed yellow line is for the VAR without the debt variables. The impulse in the
top row is a shock to GDP. The xt shock is defined as the shock that increases xt by one standard deviation of its VAR residual. The
impulse in the second row is a shock to tax revenues. The impulse in the third row is a shock to spending growth. The impulse in the
last row is a shock to log debt/GDP growth.




                                                                                      61
                                                              Figure A.9: Long Term Forecast for 

                                                                                       5 Yr Forecast

                     log data                                                        log data                                                          log data
  0.5                                                              0.5                                                              0.5
                   Benchmark, rmse=69.7692                                         VAR+Debt, rmse=60.597                                             VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=67.3267
  0.4                                                              0.4                                                              0.4

  0.3                                                              0.3                                                              0.3

  0.2                                                              0.2                                                              0.2

  0.1                                                              0.1                                                              0.1

    0                                                               0                                                                 0

  -0.1                                                            -0.1                                                              -0.1

  -0.2                                                            -0.2                                                              -0.2

  -0.3                                                            -0.3                                                              -0.3

  -0.4                                                            -0.4                                                              -0.4

  -0.5                                                            -0.5                                                              -0.5
         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010   2020          1950   1960     1970   1980    1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010   2020
                                                                                       10 Yr Forecast

  0.6                log data                                      0.6               log data                                       0.6                log data
                   Benchmark, rmse=88.1718                                         VAR+Debt, rmse=83.3254                                            VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=83.2708


  0.4                                                              0.4                                                              0.4



  0.2                                                              0.2                                                              0.2



    0                                                               0                                                                 0



  -0.2                                                            -0.2                                                              -0.2



  -0.4                                                            -0.4                                                              -0.4

         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010   2020          1950   1960     1970   1980    1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010   2020
                                                                                       20 Yr Forecast

  0.6                log data                                      0.6               log data                                       0.6                log data
                   Benchmark, rmse=110.4917                                        VAR+Debt, rmse=92.6999                                            VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=104.1329


  0.4                                                              0.4                                                              0.4



  0.2                                                              0.2                                                              0.2



    0                                                               0                                                                 0



  -0.2                                                            -0.2                                                              -0.2



  -0.4                                                            -0.4                                                              -0.4

         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010   2020          1950   1960     1970   1980    1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010   2020




We plot the actual log tax growth rates over 5-year, 10-year and 20-year rolling windows in solid blue lines. The value at each year
represents the k-year growth rates that end at that year. We also plot these rates as forecasted by the benchmark model (the first
column), the rates forecasted by the VAR with debt/gdp ratio (the middle column), and these rates as forecasted by the VAR with
debt/gdp ratio and structural change (the last column). The value at each year represents the k-year growth rates condition on the
information k years ago.




                                                                                                 62
                                                            Figure A.10: Long Term Forecast for  g

                                                                                      5 Yr Forecast    g

                     log g data                                                     log g data                                                       log g data
  0.5                                                            0.5                                                              0.5
                   Benchmark, rmse=151.9876                                       VAR+Debt, rmse=130.8282                                          VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=118.8484
  0.4                                                            0.4                                                              0.4

  0.3                                                            0.3                                                              0.3

  0.2                                                            0.2                                                              0.2

  0.1                                                            0.1                                                              0.1

    0                                                              0                                                                0

  -0.1                                                           -0.1                                                             -0.1

  -0.2                                                           -0.2                                                             -0.2

  -0.3                                                           -0.3                                                             -0.3

  -0.4                                                           -0.4                                                             -0.4

  -0.5                                                           -0.5                                                             -0.5
         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960    1970   1980    1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010   2020
                                                                                  10 Yr Forecast       g

  0.6                log g data                                  0.6                log g data                                    0.6                log g data
                   Benchmark, rmse=221.9357                                       VAR+Debt, rmse=167.0335                                          VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=156.1576


  0.4                                                            0.4                                                              0.4



  0.2                                                            0.2                                                              0.2



    0                                                              0                                                                0



  -0.2                                                           -0.2                                                             -0.2



  -0.4                                                           -0.4                                                             -0.4

         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960    1970   1980    1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010   2020
                                                                                  20 Yr Forecast       g

  0.6                log g data                                  0.6                log g data                                    0.6                log g data
                   Benchmark, rmse=251.1592                                       VAR+Debt, rmse=217.6819                                          VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=191.573


  0.4                                                            0.4                                                              0.4



  0.2                                                            0.2                                                              0.2



    0                                                              0                                                                0



  -0.2                                                           -0.2                                                             -0.2



  -0.4                                                           -0.4                                                             -0.4

         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960    1970   1980    1990   2000   2010   2020          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010   2020




We plot the actual log spending growth rates over 5-year, 10-year and 20-year rolling windows in solid blue lines. The value at each
year represents the k-year growth rates that end at that year. We also plot these rates as forecasted by the benchmark model (the first
column), the rates forecasted by the VAR with debt/gdp ratio (the middle column), and these rates as forecasted by the VAR with
debt/gdp ratio and structural change (the last column). The value at each year represents the k-year growth rates condition on the
information k years ago.




                                                                                               63
                                      Figure A.11: Long Term Forecast for  log(debt/ GDP)

                                                                                  5 Yr Forecast     debt
                           1                                                                          1
                                                                log debt data                                               log debt data
                       0.8                                    VAR+Debt, rmse=627.4083               0.8                   VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=321.6989


                       0.6                                                                          0.6

                       0.4                                                                          0.4

                       0.2                                                                          0.2

                           0                                                                          0

                       -0.2                                                                         -0.2

                       -0.4                                                                         -0.4

                       -0.6                                                                         -0.6
                         1950         1960    1970    1980    1990    2000   2010       2020          1950        1960    1970     1980    1990    2000    2010        2020
                                                                                 10 Yr Forecast     debt

                                           log debt data                                                               log debt data
                           1             VAR+Debt, rmse=1631.319                                      1              VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=480.5189

                       0.8                                                                          0.8

                       0.6                                                                          0.6

                       0.4                                                                          0.4

                       0.2                                                                          0.2

                           0                                                                          0

                       -0.2                                                                         -0.2

                       -0.4                                                                         -0.4

                       -0.6                                                                         -0.6

                       -0.8                                                                         -0.8

                        -1                                                                           -1
                               1950    1960    1970    1980    1990   2000   2010       2020               1950    1960     1970    1980    1990    2000    2010       2020
                                                                                 20 Yr Forecast     debt

                                           log debt data                                                               log debt data
                                         VAR+Debt, rmse=1844.383                                                     VAR+Debt (Structural Break), rmse=668.9369
                           1                                                                          1



                       0.5                                                                          0.5



                           0                                                                          0



                       -0.5                                                                         -0.5



                        -1                                                                           -1

                               1950    1960    1970    1980    1990   2000   2010       2020               1950    1960     1970    1980    1990    2000    2010       2020




We plot the actual log debt/gdp growth rates over 5-year, 10-year and 20-year rolling windows in solid blue lines. The value at each
year represents the k-year growth rates that end at that year. We also plot these rates as forecasted by the benchmark model (the first
column), the rates forecasted by the VAR with debt/gdp ratio (the middle column), and these rates as forecasted by the VAR with
debt/gdp ratio and structural change (the last column). The value at each year represents the k-year growth rates condition on the
information k years ago.




                                                                                               64
Given that the log price-dividend ratios on spending strips are affine in the state vector, the cross-equation restrictions can be stated
as:

                                     k               k
                                t    Pt (h) - gt  PtG (h)
                                    h =1            h =1
                                              k                                        k
                           =   exp(log t )    (exp( A (h) + B (h)zt ) - exp(log gt )  (exp( Ag (h) + Bg (h)zt )
                                             h =1                                     h =1
                                                   d          d
                           =   exp(ed zt ) - exp( A0 ( k ) + A1 ( k ) z t ),  k                                                    (A.31)

where ed selects the log debt/GDP ratio in the VAR, and A0  d ( k ) and Ad ( k ) is solved in Appendix of Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh,
                                                                         1
and Xiaolan (2020).
    Based on the estimation of the VAR system with debt and structural break, we evaluate the cross-equation no-arbitrage restriction
A.31, and Figure A.12 shows that the restrictions are severely violated over 1yr-, 5yr-, 25yr-, 50yr-, 100yr-, 500yr- horizons.




                                                                          65
                                                             Figure A.12: Testing No-Arbitrage Restrictions



                              fraction of GDP




                                                                                                 fraction of GDP
                                                    0                                                                  0

                                                                                                                   -0.5
                                                -0.2
                                                                 k=5                                                                  k=10
                                                                                                                       -1
                                                -0.4
                                                    1940       1960     1980     2000     2020                         1940         1960     1980    2000   2020
                                 fraction of GDP




                                                                                                    fraction of GDP
                                                    0                                                                  0

                                                    -5           k=50                                                  -5            k=100

                                                   -10                                                                -10

                                                    1940       1960     1980     2000     2020                         1940         1960     1980    2000   2020
                                 fraction of GDP




                                                                                                    fraction of GDP
                                                    0                                                                  0

                                                    -5                                                                 -5
                                                                 k=200                                                               k=500
                                                   -10                                                                -10

                                                                                                                      -15
                                                    1940       1960     1980     2000     2020                          1940        1960     1980    2000   2020

                                                                        PV of Surplus (k)/GDP                          Debt/GDP - PV of Debt/GDP (k)


                                                     0

                                                   -20

                                                   -40

                                                   -60

                                                   -80
                          % of GDP




                                            -100

                                            -120

                                            -140

                                            -160

                                            -180

                                            -200
                                                         0               20                40                                  60               80           100
                                                                                                              k

Top panel shows the violation of the cross equation restrictions over 1yr-, 5yr-, 25yr-, 50yr-, 100yr-, 500yr- horizons. The blue solid line
is the present value of future surplus over a k-period horizon: t k                    k    G
                                                                    h=1 Pt ( h ) - gt  h=1 Pt ( h ) where t is the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio
                                                                         

and g is the spending-to-GDP ratio from 1947 to 2019. The red dashed line is the debt-to-GDP ratio minus the present value of the
debt in k period Dt /Yt - PtD (k ). The bottom panel show the terms structure of the violation t k                      k    G
                                                                                                     h=1 Pt ( h ) - gt  h=1 Pt ( h ) - ( Dt /Yt -
                                                                                                          

PtD (k)).




                                                                                                66
               Figure A.13: Valuation and Risk Premium Puzzles in the Model with Debt
                                                                                          Term Structure of Risk Premia (Cointegration)
  5                                                                              12

                                                                                 10

                                                                                  8
  0
                                                                                  6
                                                                Risk Premium %




                                                                                  4
 -5
                                                                                  2

                                                                                  0
-10
                                                                                 -2                                                G Claim
                        Price of S claim                                                                                           T Claim
                        Govt Debt Outstanding                                    -4                                                Equity
                                                                                                                                   GDP
-15
                                                                                 -6
      1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                              0          50           100           150              200
                               Year                                                                       Period (Year)
The left panel illustrates the government debt valuation puzzle. The solid line is the market value of government debt. The dashed
line is the market value of the surplus claim. Both time series are scaled by the US GDP. the right panel shows the risk premia on
strips of government spending, tax revenue, equity and GDP.




                                                               67
H      Model with Priced Fiscal Shock
Next, we explore the case in which we allow for non-zero market price of risk for shocks to government spending growth. We re-
estimate our SDF, fixing the first 6 elements of 0 and the first 6 rows of 1 , but freeing up 0 (8) and the 8th row of 1 . Since the
stocks and bonds do not load on the government spending shock, their pricing remains the same. On the other hand, 0 (8) and the
8th row of 1 changes how the government surpluses are priced. We estimate these parameters by minimizing the squared errors
between the debt-to-GDP ratio and the model-implied present value of primary surpluses.
     The constant market price of risk vector is estimated to be:

                                              0 = [0, 0.25, -0.43, 0.29, 0, 1.41, 119.84, 0, 0]

    The time-varying market price of risk matrix is estimated at:

                     0              0           0         0           0        0         0           0             0         0
                                                                                                                                   
                     0            -8.61         0         0           0        0         0           0             0         0     
                     0              0        -9.56     -79.65        0         0         0           0             0         0
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                   24.24          3.20        0.01      2.75        0.15      2.61      -5.37       2.91          0.72     0.00
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                     0              0           0         0           0        0         0           0             0         0
                                                                                                                                   
              1 = 
                                                                                                                                   
                   -37.21        -25.78      -13.97    57.32        -3.77     2.43      -2.62      -1.12          -0.92    -2.65
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                     0              0           0         0           0        0         0           0             0         0
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                   431.70
                  
                                 -228.91     12.79     -67.73       -2.16    223.19     -1.57      -36.57        -188.88   47.14
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                     0              0           0         0           0        0         0           0             0         0     
                     0              0           0         0           0        0         0           0             0         0

     Lastly, Figure A.14 plots the implied present value of government surpluses. While we do not have a perfect fit, this modification
brings the present value of government surpluses much closer to the market value of government debt. However, this is done at the
cost of permitting very large Sharpe ratio: In fact, the government spending has to carry a very high price of risk in order to reduce its
valuation. The market price of risk associated with the spending shock is 119.84, compared with 1.41 that is associated with the stock.
As a result, the implied maximal Sharpe ratio permitted by the new SDF is 119.84, whereas that of the benchmark SDF is 1.50.

Figure A.14: Government debt-GDP Ratio and Present Value of Government Surpluses, with
Priced Spending Shock


                                   0.8
                                                                                      Value of Surplus Claim
                                                                                      Debt/GDP Ratio
                                   0.7


                                   0.6


                                   0.5


                                   0.4


                                   0.3


                                   0.2


                                   0.1
                                    1940    1950    1960     1970     1980    1990      2000      2010         2020




                                                                     68
I     Betting Against The Treasury
The government bond valuation puzzle implies that Treasuries are overpriced relative to other asset classes, such as equities, once the
riskiness of the cash flows is taken into consideration. To illustrate this point in a model-free way, this appendix explores a simple
investment strategy which shorts the portfolio of all outstanding Treasuries and goes long in all equities.


I.1    Portfolio Construction
The portfolio goes long all outstanding corporate equities, taking into account equity issuances and repurchases, and short all out-
standing U.S. Treasuries, taking into account all bond issuances and redemptions.
     We use the market value of non-financial corporate equity (reported in Table L103 of the Financial Accounts of the U.S.) and
the value of all outstanding Treasuries (FL313161105.Q in Table L106). Since 2015, the Financial Accounts of the U.S. include some
non-marketable debt: the holdings of the federal government employees defined benefit plans. We use the dividend payments
(FA106121075.Q) and issuance of equity (FA103164103.Q) by the non-financial corporate sector (from Table F.103). Flow series are
seasonally adjusted. We use the CRSP Treasury data to compute the market value of all marketable Treasuries held by the public
computed from the zero coupon yield curve. We also use the coupon, principal payment and issuance data from CRSP.
     In each year, we implement a zero-cost strategy. We short $1 of the entire Treasury portfolio at the start of each year, and we
invest $1 in the entire non-financial corporate sector. Each year, we buy all the newly issued equities net of repurchases and collect
dividends. In addition, we make the Treasuries' coupon payments and issue new Treasuries. The net cash flow equals dividends
minus net equity issuance per dollar invested minus coupon payments plus net Treasury debt issuance per dollar invested.


I.2    Cyclicality of Cash Flows and Returns
The Treasury cash flows on the short leg are strongly pro-cyclical and hence hedge the equity cash flows of the long leg. Figure A.15
plots the annual cash flows. Remarkably, despite of the counter-cyclical nature of the cash flows, the annualized Sharpe ratio for this
investment strategy is 0.58 and the average excess return is 8.85% per annum. Both are higher than for equities, even though the
strategy is a recession hedge, unlike equities.
     The pricing of pay-outs to shareholders of non-financial corporations cannot be reconciled with the pricing of the pay-outs to
Treasury bondholders, at least not ex-post over the past seven decades. Interest rates on government debt are too low, or alternatively,
the government debt portfolio is too expensive. This puzzle is related to the standard equity premium puzzle. In the absence of an
equity premium, there would be no debt valuation puzzle. But it is obviously distinct from the equity premium puzzle given the
pro-cyclical nature of equity cash flows and the counter-cyclical nature of the cash flows on this investment strategy.




       Figure A.15: Net Cash Flows from shorting Marketable Treasuries and buying Equities
The figure plots the net annual cash flows per $1 invested (full line) from a zero-cost strategy that shorts $1 of all marketable Treasuries
to purchase $1 of the non-financial corporate sector at the start of each year. The cash flows consist of dividends minus net issuance
for equities (dashed line), and net lending plus interest for Treasuries.


                                                  Bondholders
                                                  Stockholders
                                                  Net
                                           0.2
                   Payout per $ invested




                                           0.1



                                             0



                                           -0.1



                                           -0.2



                                           -0.3
                                                  1957           1971        1984             1998             2012




                                                                        69
