                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 AN ECONOMETRIC MODEL OF INTERNATIONAL LONG-RUN GROWTH DYNAMICS

                                       Ulrich K. Müller
                                       James H. Stock
                                       Mark W. Watson

                                     Working Paper 26593
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26593


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




For helpful comments we thank participants at several seminars and in particular those at the
Resources for the Future workshop on Long-Run Projections of Economic Growth and
Discounting. Müller acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation grant
SES-1919336. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ulrich K. Müller, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Econometric Model of International Long-run Growth Dynamics
Ulrich K. Müller, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 26593
December 2019
JEL No. C32,C55,O47

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a Bayesian latent factor model of the joint evolution of GDP per capita for 113
countries over the 118 years from 1900 to 2017. We find considerable heterogeneity in rates of
convergence, including rates for some countries that are so slow that they might not converge (or
diverge) in century-long samples, and evidence of "convergence clubs" of countries. The joint
Bayesian structure allows us to compute a joint predictive distribution for the output paths of
these countries over the next 100 years. This predictive distribution can be used for simulations
requiring projections into the deep future, such as estimating the costs of climate change. The
model's pooling of information across countries results in tighter prediction intervals than are
achieved using univariate information sets. Still, even using more than a century of data on many
countries, the 100-year growth paths exhibit very wide uncertainty.

Ulrich K. Müller                                Mark W. Watson
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Princeton University                            Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013                        Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
umueller@princeton.edu                          and NBER
                                                mwatson@princeton.edu
James H. Stock
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M26
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
James_Stock@harvard.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26593
                                          1. Introduction

       Among the many technical problems in the economics of climate change is the need to
make projections of global and regional economic growth into the deep future. Future levels of
GDP drive future energy consumption, future emissions of carbon dioxide, the economic
capacity to reduce those emissions, and human ability to adapt to the changing climate caused by
those emissions. These factors thus affect the economic cost of climate change and in particular
the Social Cost of Carbon (SCC), which is the monetized net present value of the economic
damages resulting from emitting an additional ton of carbon dioxide. Because of the long
residence time of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the horizon for these projections is up to
several centuries. And, because the effect of climate change is location specific, both regional
and global projections are required. The method used to make the initial US Government
estimate of the SCC, described in Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton (2013), uses five
judgmental scenarios of global economic growth. It is generally recognized, however, that a
modern, internally consistent probabilistic approach grounded in historical data is needed. In
particular, the National Academy of Sciences (2017, Ch. 3) report on the SCC suggests using the
Müller-Watson (2016) long-term trends framework to produce long-term GDP forecasts.
       This paper develops a probability model of the joint growth of national per-capita GDP,
estimated using up to 118 years of data on 113 countries. The premise of this exercise is that the
joint stochastic process followed by the long-run growth of national incomes over the past
century is a useful starting point for projecting their evolution ­ more precisely, for computing
their joint predictive probability distribution ­ over the next 100 years. To this end, our model
admits, but does not require, a number of features that the previous literature suggests
characterize long-term economic growth. First, the model allows for convergence (in
expectation) to a single global factor, however there can be considerable heterogeneity in the rate
of convergence. Second, if this rate of convergence to the global factor is sufficiently slow, a
century-long realization can produce apparent convergence to parallel paths in the long run (so-
called conditional convergence). Third, an individual country can have a highly variable long-
term growth rate, including strong multidecadal growth and prolonged periods of economic
collapse. Fourth, the model allows for "convergence clubs," that is, clusters of countries with
highly correlated long-run income levels within the cluster. Fifth, the global factor itself is



                                                  1
allowed to evolve in a flexible way that, consistent with the historical evidence, allows for
persistent changes in its underlying mean growth rate. We build these features into a multi-factor
Bayesian dynamic factor model, where the factors are distinguished by their dynamics and their
(latent) commonality across groups of countries.
       Although we have motivated this exercise as one of long-run forecasting, our analysis
also sheds new light on a number of classic questions in the large and mature literature on
growth regressions and cross-country convergence (Barro (1991); for recent reviews see Jones
(2016) and Johnson and Papageorgiou (2018)). In particular, we find additional evidence of
historical convergence groups in the form of disconnected networks that include rapidly
developing and developed countries in Asia, Anglo-Saxon countries, and selected countries in
Europe, the former Soviet bloc, Africa and Latin America. As this list suggests, the model
endogenously provides evidence of regional convergence. We also find considerable variation in
the rate of convergence to the global factor, with a 90 percent interval of half-lives ranging from
78 years to 502 years, pooled across all countries.
       Our analysis also contributes methodologically to both the low-frequency modeling and
growth convergence literatures. The extension of the Müller-Watson (2008, 2016, 2018)
approach from a small number of time series to the joint evolution of 113 time series is
nontrivial. To make this extension we draw on both their low-frequency trend approach,
Bayesian dynamic factor modeling, convergence on multiple time scales, and time series models
for growth rate dynamics. By focusing on low-frequency trends, we filter out variation and
comovements with periods shorter than 15 years, including comovements over business cycles.
       We begin in Section 2 with a description of the data, which is an unbalanced panel of
GDP per capita for 113 countries, taken from the Penn World Table (Feenstra, Inklarr and
Timmer (2015)) and the updated Maddison Project Database (Bolt, Inklarr, de Jong and van
Zanden (2018)) and covering 1900 to 2017. Plots and descriptive statistics highlight five features
of the data: a common growth factor, persistent changes in long-term growth rates within
countries, a temporally stable dispersion of the historical cross-sectional distribution, extremely
persistent country-specific effects, and a possible group structure of cross-country correlations.
       Section 3 outlines an econometric model that captures these features. The model has a
simple structure, but it allows cross-country heterogeneity and a flexible pattern of dynamic




                                                 2
covariability across the 113 countries. Unfortunately, this flexibility comes at the expense of
introducing hundreds of unknown parameters.
        Section 4 takes up the problem of estimating these parameters and computing the long-
run joint predictive distribution for the 113 countries. We focus on 50- and 100-year ahead
predictions. As a general matter, Bayes estimation of a high dimensional model (n = 113
countries, T = 118 years, with over 800 parameters, with a goal of estimating a joint predictive
distribution 100 years into the future) presents daunting computational challenges.
        As we show, however, the structure of the model, priors, and data transformations yield
important simplifications. Because the long-run nature of our analysis allows us to focus on low-
frequency averages of the raw data, the effective dimension of the data is reduced by a factor of
approximately seven. Furthermore, because those low-frequency averages follow normal laws in
large-samples, estimation can be based on a Gaussian likelihood and predictive distributions can
be deduced from familiar Gaussian formulae. The model incorporates a linear factor structure,
which facilitates the use of Gibbs MCMC methods. These features, together with the structure of
the priors introduced in Section 4, makes Bayes estimation feasible; indeed, we computed all the
results for our benchmark model in a matter of minutes using a 24-core workstation.
        Section 5 presents our results for the historical period for which we have data, including
rates of convergence and convergence clubs. In Section 6, we turn to the long-run predictive
distribution. Section 7 concludes.


                                    2. Data and Descriptive Statistics


2.1 The data
        The data are annual values of real per-capita GDP for 113 countries spanning the 118-
year period 1900-2017, taken from the Penn Word Table (Feenstra, et. al. (2015)) and Bolt et.
al.'s (2018) Maddison Project Database. GDP is measured at constant 2011 national prices,
expressed in U.S. dollars.1




1
  Specifically, real GDP is rgdpna from the Penn World Table and population is population. We link these series to
per-capita GDP rgdpnapc and pop from the Maddison database beginning in the earliest available Penn World Table
date for each country (typically 1950).


                                                        3
        The 113 countries are those with at least 50 years of available data and 2017 population
levels of at least 3 million people. The resulting 113 countries account for 96% of world GDP
and 97% of world population in 2017. Of the 69 countries in the Penn World Table that are
excluded, 41 are excluded because of limited data (the largest being Ukraine, which has only 38
years of data), 54 because of a small population (the average 2017 population is less than one
million for these countries), and 26 for both reasons. The 113 included countries are depicted in
Figure 1. The data set is an unbalanced panel with between 36 and 52 countries for the years
1900-1949, 108 countries in 1950, 111 in 1952, and all 113 beginning in 1960. Appendix 1
discusses the data in more detail and lists the countries and sample periods.
        The data, in logarithms, are plotted in Figure 2.


2.2 Long-run components
        The paths of GDP per capita in Figure 2 exhibit both long-run movements and high
frequency fluctuations arising from measurement error, business cycles, and other relatively
short-lived sources. Because our interest is in modeling the long-run growth properties of these
data, we adopt a procedure that eliminates short-run fluctuations while retaining long-run trends.
        In principle, trend extraction can be done using a low-pass filter. The specific method we
use is from Müller and Watson (2008, 2018) and reviewed in Müller and Watson (2019). For a
given time series yt, the low-frequency trend y
                                              ^t is the fitted value from the OLS regression of yt

onto a vector Xt which consists of a linear trend, a constant, and q-1 low-frequency periodic
functions.2
        This low-frequency trend extraction method has three useful features. First, as shown in
Müller and Watson (2008), it well-approximates an ideal "low-pass" trend that extracts
periodicities longer than 2T/q, where T is the sample size and q is the number of regressors
excluding the constant term. We focus on periodicities longer than 14 years, so for countries with
a full set of T =118 years of data, and we use q =16  2×118/14. Second, as shown in Müller and
Watson (2008, 2019), under quite general conditions on the stochastic process for yt (including
unit root and fractionally integrated models), the OLS regression coefficients are approximately

2
  Müller and Watson (2018) use a constant term and Type II cosine transforms for the periodic regressors to
compute the low-frequency trend. Here we also include a linear time trend and, following Müller and Watson
(2008), use the q-1 eigenvectors of the T×T covariance matrix of a detrended random walk for the periodic
regressors associated with the largest eigenvalues.


                                                        4
jointly asymptotically normal. Thus inference and Bayesian modeling can treat the trend
coefficients as Gaussian even if the underlying data are not. Third, this method is in effect a data
compression method that reduces the dimensionality of the data from T to q+1, which provides
computational advantages.
        The method is illustrated in Figure 3. Panel (a) focuses on countries with data available
over the entire 1900-2017 sample period. The first panel plots the regressors Xt: the linear trend,
the constant, and the periodic functions. The remaining panels show the logarithm of GDP per
                                                         ^ i ,t from the OLS regression of yi,t onto Xt.
capita for various countries (yi,t) and its fitted value y

The countries are chosen to illustrate how the method extracts the trend component of time series
that have quite different historical behavior. In each case, the trend component evidently matches
the long run movements in GDP per capita for each country, including fairly subtle shifts such as
the multiple pronounced swings in Argentina, the multidecadal slowdown of growth in Germany,
the acceleration of growth in India since the 1970s, the shift to slower growth in Mexico
following the 1994 Peso crisis, and the plateau in GDP per capita in the United States following
the financial crisis recession.
        Panels (b) and (c) illustrate the method for countries with data available for only part of
the sample. In panel (b) the data are available from 1950-2017, so T = 68 and we set q = 9 to
capture periods longer than 15 years. Even with this shortened sample, the resulting trend
component captures the disparate low-frequency patterns in Liberia and Saudi Arabia. Twelve
countries have data available over disconnected sub-periods; for example, panel (c) shows data
for China, where the data are available from 1929-1938 and then again from 1950-2017. In these
cases, the periodic regressors are computed by modifying the method discussed in footnote 2 to
accommodate missing values. Details are provided in Appendix 2.


2.3 A first look at the data
        Figure 4 plots the low-frequency transformed data for all 113 countries.
        We highlight five features of the data that play a role in the econometric model
introduced in the next section (for a complementary discussion see Johnson and Papageorgiou
(2018, Section II)).
        1. Common growth factor. Figures 2 and 4 also show the OECD per-capita level of GDP,
computed from the subset of OECD countries available at each date. The OECD aggregate


                                                    5
shows substantial growth over the 118-year sample, increasing 9-fold from $4.6k in 1900 to
$41.5k in 2017. Average growth for all countries was even greater: the median average annual
growth rate for all countries over all available dates was 2.1%, which corresponds to a 12-fold
increase on per-capita GDP over 118 years. Despite the evident heterogeneity in growth paths,
there is commonality to the growth of the overall cross-country distribution. For example, the
average pair-wise correlation of the trends plotted in Figure 4 is 0.58.
        2. Variable multidecadal growth rates. As is evident for the eight countries in Figure 3
and as can also be seen by curves for individual countries in Figure 4, growth rates for individual
countries have substantial long-run variability. Pritchett (2000) characterized this variability as
episodic growth, which led Hausmann, Pritchett, and Rodrik (2005), Jones and Olken (2008),
and others to develop empirical models of discrete transitions, or breaks, across growth regimes.
As seen in Table 1(a), this variability of long-run growth rates is evident in both developed
economies (witness the long-run growth slowdown in the United States over the past two
decades) and in non-OECD countries.
        3. Cross-section dispersion. Also evident in Figures 2 and 4 is the wide dispersion in the
levels of per-capita GDP. This spread is summarized in Table 1(b), which only considers the
period for which data on most countries are available (1950-2017). In the cross-country growth
literature, convergence in the spread of the log-levels of GDP per capita is referred to as -
convergence. The cross-sectional standard deviation and the 75%-25% and 90%-10%
interquantile ranges show an increase over time, suggesting -divergence not -convergence. The
cross-sectional dispersion has, however, been roughly stable since 1990. In any event, Figures 2
and 4 and Table 1(b) provide no evidence supporting -convergence.3
        4. Country-specific persistence. Another feature of the data is the extreme persistence of
a country's position in the cross-section distribution through time. Quah (1993), Jones (1997,
2016), and Kremer, Onatski and Stock (2001) document this by computing the transition
frequencies across different percentiles of the cross-section distribution. Table 2 shows the
transition frequencies across quartiles using average per-capita GDP for 1960-88 and 1989-2017.
Treating these as Markov transition probabilities, a country in the bottom quartile has more than
a 75% chance of remaining in the bottom half of the distribution after 280 years, and similarly


3
 We do not engage in formal tests of -convergence. Johnson and Papageorgiou (2018) discuss the literature on -
convergence and of the econometric challenges (power, selection) of tests for -convergence.


                                                       6
for a country that starts in the top quartile of the income distribution. For a typical country, the
transition across quartiles occurs very slowly.
       5. Correlation within groups of countries. The final feature of the data involves the
correlation of economic growth within groups of countries. In the econometric model discussed
below, groups will be endogenously determined, but these turn out to be related to standard
cultural and geographical groupings. Figure 5 gives a visual impression of these correlations
using selected 5-country groups with high within-group correlation. We revisit the question of
group structure below after describing the econometric model.
       These five features of the data ­ a dominant common factor, variable multidecadal
growth rates, relatively constant cross-sectional dispersion, highly persistent relative income
levels, and high correlations within groups of countries ­ are incorporated into the econometric
model to which we now turn.


            3. A Time Series Model of Cross-country Long-run Growth Dynamics


       This section begins by presenting the econometric model, and then discusses its
connection to the large empirical growth literature.


3.1 Econometric model
       Let yi,t denote the logarithm of per-capita GDP for country i in year t. This section
describes a model of the joint stochastic process for yi,t for the 113 countries in our sample.
Before providing a detail description of the model we offer a few general remarks about the low-
frequency features of the data that the model is designed to capture.
       Specifically, two important modeling simplifications follow from our use of the low-
frequency transformations of yi,t. First, only the low-frequency properties of the stochastic
process need to be modeled. In particular, the stationary I(0) dynamics do not need to modeled
because the only feature of those dynamics that enters the joint distribution of the low-frequency
components is the I(0) long-run variance . The second simplification follows because the low-
frequency properties of the data are summarized by the estimated trend coefficients, which are
normally distributed in large samples. Thus, a Gaussian likelihood can be used for low-frequency
inference, so that only first two (low-frequency) moments of the process need to be modeled.



                                                  7
        While I(0) dynamics are irrelevant over low-frequencies, highly persistent, but stationary,
dynamics are relevant. To capture these highly persistent stationary dynamics the model includes
components with autocorrelations that decay at the rate rk where r is sufficiently close to one
that rk is significantly larger than zero even when k is large, say k = 50, 100, or even 500 years.
Because of their very slow exponential decay, these are called `local-to-unity' AR(1) processes,
but it should be understood that the AR(1) label refers only to the low-frequency behavior of the
process; general I(0) dynamics are allowed for the shorter-run properties of the process. We will
refer to the parameter r as the low-frequency AR parameter. For these local-to-unity processes it
is also useful to characterize persistence in terms of their half-life: for a stationary process x, the
half-life is the smallest value of h for which corr(xt, xt+h) = ½, and for a AR(1) process with AR
parameter r, the half-life solves rh = ½. Thus, a half-life of h = 100 yields r = 0.993, while h =
400 yields r = 0.998; when r is near 1, small changes in r lead to large changes in half-life.
         The model is designed to capture the five key features of the data evident in the
descriptive statistics: (i) long-run global growth, (ii) low-frequency variation in that growth rate,
(iii) a roughly stationary distribution of the cross-section around the global growth factor, (iv)
highly persistent country-specific deviations from the global factor, and (v) cross-country
correlations within groups of countries. We present the model in two steps, focusing first on
cross-country covariation and then on temporal covariation.
        Cross-country covariation. Common factors are used to capture low-frequency cross-
country covariation. The model includes a single common global growth factor, ft, that affects all
countries. The evolution of this factor shifts the entire cross section and is responsible for the
time-varying level of per-capita GDP in Figure 2:


                      yi,t = ft + ci,t,                                                                     (1)


where the country-specific term, ci,t, shows country i's location in the time t cross-section. We
use an additional set of factors to describe the cross-country covariance of ci,t. There are 35 of
these factors, which enter through a clustered hierarchical structure.4 Specifically, each country


4
  Frühwirth-Schnatter and Kaufmann (2008) and Hamilton and Owyang (2012) develop clustered factor structures to
explain common business-cycle variability across regions. See Moench, Ng, and Potter (2013) for a discussion and
example of hierarchical factor structures.


                                                       8
is allowed to be a member of a single group (or club) whose members share a single common
factor. For example, country i might belong to group J(i), with factor gJ(i),t,


                              ci,t = µc + lc,i gJ(i),t + uc,i,t                                       (2)


where uc,i,t captures low-frequency variation that is unique to country i, i.e., over low-
frequencies, it is uncorrelated across countries. To accommodate low-frequency covariation
across countries in different groups, we allow each of the g-level factors to belong to a higher-
level group (a group-of-groups), which in turn is affected by a common factor. Thus, the group
factor gj,t evolves as


                              gj,t = lg,j hK(j),t + ug,j,t                                            (3)


where K(j) denotes j's group-of-groups, hK(j),t is a common factor for this group, ug,j,t captures
idiosyncratic low-frequency variation within group j, and the factor hk,t captures covariation of
countries whose groups belong to the kth group-of-groups. The elements of J(i) and K(j) (that is,
group and group-of-groups membership) are latent binary indicators so group membership is
estimated, not specified a-priori. In the empirical model, there are ng = 25 groups and nh = 10
group-of-group factors corresponding to 35 factors, g and h. For symmetry in notation, we
denote


                              hk,t = uh,k,t,                                                          (4)


so that low-frequency variation in yi,t arises from four distinct and uncorrelated sources: ft, uc,i,t,
ug,J(i),t and uh,K(J(i)),t.
          Temporal covariation. The common factor ft captures common long-run global growth.
We model its evolution as an I(1) process (i.e., a low-frequency `random walk') with local drift,


                              Dft = mt + Dat ,                                                        (5)




                                                                  9
where Dat is I(0) with mean zero and uncorrelated with mt over low-frequencies. The local
growth rate mt is modeled as a highly persistent AR(1) process with mean µm and low-frequency
AR coefficient m. That is,


                     at ~ I (0) with mean 0 and long-run variance  2
                                                                     a
                                                                                                    (6)

  mt = (1 -  m ) µ m +  m mt -1 + et where et ~ I (0) with mean 0 and long-run variance  e
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           ,        (7)
                                                                                         m




where the intercept in (7) is written so that the mean of mt is µm.
       The model (5)-(7) for the common factor has the following interpretation. If s e2m is small

relative to s D
              2
               a , then ft evolves over the long-run like a random walk with drift, but with a slowly

varying drift term (mt). If m were one, then the model would be a low-frequency version of
Harvey's (1989) local level model. By specifying m close to but less than one, the drift term is
stochastic but, over a very long horizon, is mean reverting. Thus, the common factor can have
persistent excursions in its growth rate ­ as it evidently has had over the past 118 years (Table
1(a)) ­ but over the very long run reverts to a mean growth rate µm. The persistence of these
growth excursions is determined by m. The variance of mt over long time spans is
sm
 2
   = s e2 / (1 - rm
        m
                  2
                    ) , which is a key parameter in the model because it determines the magnitude
of the persistent growth excursions of the common global factor.
       The term ci,t in (1) is the discrepancy between of the log-level of per-capita GDP in
country i and the global factor. The descriptive statistics suggest that this is highly persistent. As
described above, variation in ci,t arises from the u random variables in (2), (3), and (4). We model
each of these variables as stationary but potentially highly persistent. Thus, over the very long
run, each country's growth is determined by ft, but slow mean reversion in ci,t provides country-
specific dynamics that are ultimately transitory but may have a half-life of several centuries.
       Autoregressive component models are a convenient and flexible way to capture
persistence. We therefore model each of the ut terms as the sum of two independent low-
frequency AR(1) processes, say ut = u1,t + u2,t, with low-frequency AR coefficients r1 and r2 and

where (1-rjL)uj,t has long-run variance  2
                                         j
                                           for j = 1, 2. Different values of (r1, r2, s1, s2) allow

for processes with, for example, a relatively quickly mean-reverting component (say, a half-life


                                                  10
of 30 years) and very slowly mean-reverting component (say, a half-life of 300 years). In AR
models, parameters such as r1 affect both the persistence and variance of the process. To
separate persistence from variability we parameterize each ut process as


                        ut = su × wt                                                             (8)
                        wt =z w1,t + (1 - z2)1/2w2,t
                        wj,t = rj wj,t-1 + ej,t, j = 1, 2


where w1,t and w2,t are independent, each with a unit unconditional variance, and z is the weight
placed on w1,t. In this parameterization, wt has a unit variance, (r1, r2, z) describe the persistence
in ut, and su is its unconditional standard deviation.
        There are 148 u-processes, corresponding to the 113 countries in (2), the 25 g-factors in
(3) and 10 h-factors in (4). We model each as an independent 2-component low-frequency AR
process with its own (r1, r2, z, su) parameters.
        Relationship of the model with previous work. The model features two forms of b -
convergence familiar from the growth literature (c.f., the surveys by Durlauf and Quah (1999)
and Johnson and Papageorgiou (2018)). First, in the long run, the expected GDP paths of any
two countries i and j are expected to converge in the sense of Bernard and Durlauf (1995, 1996),
that is, limhE(yi,t+h - yj,t+h | Wt) = 0, where Wt contains the history of y through time t. This
convergence obtains in the model because the country-specific terms ci,t+h and cj,t+h exhibit mean
reversion to their common mean µc, and ft has the same effect on all countries so that ft is a single
common trend. While all country's forecast paths converge to the same point, the speed of
convergence differs across countries because of the heterogeneity in the persistence parameters
(r1, r2, z). Said differently, because ci,t is stationary, in this model all countries share a single
common trend (ft), and in this sense are cointegrated. The persistence parameters might be such
that this cointegration would not be evident in any century-long sample, however.
        Second, in the medium run (which in our model can be a half a century or more), the
model also features a form of conditional b - convergence (e.g., Barro (1991), Barro and Sala-i-
Martin (1992), and Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992)) in which yi,t tends toward a growth path
with a country-specific level. The vast growth-regression literature has investigated the sources



                                                       11
of heterogeneity in these levels (see Sala-i-Martin (1997) for several examples and Durlauf
(2009) for a survey). In our framework, conditional convergence is captured by the AR-
component of the various u random variables that determine the evolution of ci,t. Each u term is
the sum of two independent components, the first with persistence parameter r1 and the second

with r 2 . If r1 is very close to unity, the first component will be very persistent, for example it

can have a half-life of several centuries. While ultimately mean reverting, this component can
vary little over, say, 50-year samples and in this sense captures the economic forces underlying
the level-shifters included in growth regressions. A smaller value of r 2 produces a component

with relatively rapid mean reversion; for example, r 2 = 0.98 produces the 2%-per year

convergence rate often found in growth regressions (see Barro (2012)).
       The model also features convergence clubs discussed for example in Quah (1996, 1997).
Near unit-root dynamics for one of the AR components describing the factors gt or ht generates a
highly persistent common level component for the group of countries that load on this persistent
factor. This persistent group component could have a half-life of several centuries, so that there
could be relatively rapid convergence within the club but the club itself converges very slowly to
the global factor.
       Our model generalizes the model of Raftery et al (2017), which was developed to
construct long-horizon forecasts of per-capita global GDP growth as an input to climate change
research. That model features a single common factor, proxied by the U.S., which follows a
random walk with a drift that breaks in 1973, but is otherwise constant. Their country-specific
terms (ci,t in our notation) follow independent zero-mean AR(1) processes. Relative to Raftery et
al. (2017), the model here allows for low-frequency variation in the growth rate of the common
factor and group convergence dynamics.
       There are also notable features that are not incorporated in the model. In particular the
model does not feature s-convergence, a narrowing of the cross-sectional distribution over time.
In our formulation, while we allow heterogeneity in the variance of ci,t across countries, these
variances are constant through time, so the implied variance of the cross-sectional distribution of
ci,t is time invariant. This modeling choice is based on the apparent lack of s-convergence over
the 118-year sample shown in Figures 2 and 4. In addition, the model does not incorporate non-
stationarities like those postulated in Lucas (2000) and empirically implemented in Startz (2017).



                                                  12
In those models, each country's growth is governed by a two-state process that determines its
convergence to frontier economies: there is no convergence in the first state, but convergence
occurs in the second, absorbing state. Following a transition to the convergent state, poor
countries grow rapidly and inequality in income levels decreases over time. Long-run point
forecasts of future growth from this model may look much like those from the model we
implement ­ both feature unconditional convergence (in expectation) with a rate estimated from
historical data ­ but long-run predictive densities will differ because of the Lucas-Startz
framework has -convergence whereas ours does not. In addition, compared to those models we
allow for (data-influenced) additional variability in the long-run growth rate of the common
factor.


                                4. Bayes Estimation and Prediction


    The challenge in specifying a model that describes the joint dynamics of 113 countries is
balancing flexibility about the many ways these variables might interact with the limited
information in the sample data. The model outlined in the last section strikes one such balance,
but at a cost of introducing more than 800 parameters, some of which are only weakly identified
by the sample data. With this in mind, we estimate the model using Bayes methods that augment
the sample data with judgment about the values of many of these 800+ parameters.
     We begin by presenting the priors used in the empirical analysis. These priors are flat
(uninformative) about a handful of the model parameters, but are otherwise informative, and
therefore require discussion and justification. We then discuss how the computation of the
posterior and the predictive distributions takes advantages of the multiple simplifications arising
from the use of low-frequency projections combined with the linear factor structure of the model.


4.1 Priors
          There are two sets of parameters in the model. One set includes parameters that are
common to all countries; this includes the initial condition f0, the mean common growth rate µm,
the persistence parameter rm, the long-run standard deviations s Da and sm that characterize the

global factor, ft, in (5) and the parameter µc, the common mean of ci,t in (2). The other set of
parameters are country- or group-specific; this includes the factor loadings {lc,i, lg,j} in (2) and


                                                 13
(3) and the parameters (r1, r2, z, su) that describe the evolution of the various u random
variables in (2)-(4). We discuss these in turn.
        Common parameters. We use uninformative (flat) priors for f0, µm and µc, and for s D
                                                                                           2
                                                                                            a


use a nearly uninformative inverse- c12 prior that is scaled to have median equal to 0.032.

        The prior for (m, m) is a key informative joint prior governing the long-term distribution
of the growth of the common factor. We choose the prior for rm so that the half-life of growth
rate excursions (hm) is roughly a century. Specifically, the prior for m is such that the half-life hm
~ U[50, 150], approximated by a grid of 25 discrete values. For sm, we specify an independent
symmetric triangular informative prior with support 0.1  100sm  2.0, also approximated by a
grid of 25 discrete values.
        The prior mean for the long-run standard deviation of mt is 1.05 percentage points of
growth. Over the 1900-2017 sample, the mean OECD growth rate was 1.9% so a +/- one (prior)
standard deviation range around that mean is 0.9% to 2.9%. This range encompasses the 25-year
growth rates for the OECD (and the United States) tabulated in Table 1. The data turn out to be
relatively uninformative about the value of m, and long-horizon forecast uncertainty depends on
this parameter, so this distribution is a substantive restriction that makes this prior informative
for the out-of-sample predictive distributions. We discuss sensitivity of the predictive
distributions to this prior in Section 6.
        Country- and factor-specific parameters. We use a common framework for these
parameters that incorporates an exchangeable prior on a discrete support with a hierarchical
structure. Let qi, i = 1, ... , m, denote a set of these parameters, for example, the set of the
country-specific factor loadings, {lc,i}, in (2), so that m = n. We specify the common support for
qi as qL  qi  qU, with values for q represented by nq grid points, q1, ..., q nq between the uppper
and lower bounds. Given a prior p = (p1, ... , pnq ), the prior distributions for qi are i.i.d. with

P(qi = q j) = pj, so that the number of qi `s taking on the value q j has a multinomial distribution.
We use a Dirichlet prior with common parameter a/nq for the multinomial probabilities, pj. That
is p ~ D(a/nq), where the parameter a is the parameter of a discrete Dirichlet process prior. With
the grid points evenly distributed in [qL, qU] and nq large, the Dirichlet prior over p with common




                                                  14
parameter a thus shrinks the prior over  toward an approximately continuous uniform
distribution on [qL, qU]. Throughout, we use a =20.
        This framework has two key features. First, the discrete support for qi greatly simplifies
the calculations required for the posterior, a point we discuss in more detail below. Second, the
hierarchical structure allows the data to inform the posterior for {qi} through its effect on the
posterior probability assigned to the possible values of qi, that is P(qi = q j) = pj. The Dirichlet
prior shrinks these probabilities toward a common value, but as we will see in the empirical
analysis, the data modifies this prior in interesting ways. Specifics for each set of parameters are:
    ·   For {lc,i} in (2), qL = 0.0, qU = 0.95, with nq = 25 gridpoints evenly distributed between
        these values. The same prior is used for {lg,j} in (3), with an indepedendent Dirichlet
        process prior.
    ·   The persistence parameters for the various sets of u random variables in (2), (3) and (4)
        follow indpendent Dirchlet-multinomial priors. Each u is charcterized by (r1, r2, z) (see
        (8)). We found it useful to parameterize the prior for these parameters in terms of the
        implied half-life for the stochastic process. We specify a joint prior for (r1, r2, z) using
        three independent random variables Ui ~ U(0,1), i= 1, 2, 3, and let q = (U1, U2, U3).
        Denote the half-life for w1 as h1 = 25 + 775(U1)2, so that the half-life is between 25 and
        800 years, and the implied value of r1 is r1 = (0.5)1/ h1 . Define r2 similarly using U2, and

        let z = U3. We construct a uniform grid on Q = [0,1]3 for (U1, U2, U3) which defines a
        grid over the values of (r1, r2, z) and use nq = 100 grid points. A calculation shows that
        the resulting prior shrinks the half-lives for each ut toward a distribution with 25th, 50th,
        and 75th percentiles of 130, 290, and 510 years.
    ·   The prior for the set of scale factors, su in (8) was calibrated relative to a homoskedastic
        benchmark model. Specifically, let {su,c,i} denote the set of scale factors for the u random
        variables in (2). We parameterized these as su,c,i = sc,i = (1 - lc2,i )1/2 k c,iw , and similarly for

        {su,g,j}, the scale factors for the u-variables in (3), and {su,h,k} in (4). In this
        parameterization, unit values of kc,i, kg,j and kh,k imply that the variance of ci,t is equal to
        w2 for all i. The k parameters measure the variances of the various components relative to
        this homoskedastic benchmark. For w2, we use a nearly uninformative inverse- c12 prior



                                                     15
        that is scaled to have median equal to 1. Priors for q = {kc,i}, {kg,j}, or{kh,k} are
        independent Dirchlet-multinomial and use qL = 1/3, qU = 3 and nq = 25 evenly spaced
        grid points.
    ·   The final parameters govern the selection of countries into groups associated with the g-
        factors in (2) and how these g-factor groups are further grouped using the h-factors in (3).
        There are ng = 25 g-groups and nh = 10 h-groups (groups-of-groups). Let ic,j,i = 1 if
        country i is a member of group j, and ig,k,j = 1 if group j is a member of group-of-group k.
        We specify these as independent with P(ic,j,i = 1) = 1/ng = 1/25 and P(ig,k,j = 1) = 1/nh =
        1/10.


In-sample values of ft. The final feature of the prior concerns the in-sample values of the
common global factor ft. Since ft determines the very long-run average growth in our model, it
must capture frontier growth, that is growth in the developed economies. To ensure that the in-
sample values ft accord with this interpretation, we force ft to average growth in developed
economies. We do this by imposing a prior on the in-sample values of a population-weighted
average of ci,t for OECD countries. Specifically, we assume       å
                                                                iÎOECD
                                                                         ci ,t wi ~ iidN (0,0.012 ) , where

the wi weights are proportional to average population of country i over 1965-1974, scaled to sum
to one. This prior shrinks the in-sample values of ft toward the population weighted logarithm of
per capita GDP of OECD countries. Since the OECD countries have no missing data after 1950,
this means that the value of ft has very little posterior uncertainty and is effectively treated as
observed over the last 65 years. We stress that this constraint is used for the in-sample values of
ft, but not the forecast out-of-sample values.


4.2 Computing the posterior and predictive distributions
    Various features of the model provide simplifications for the calculation of posterior. The use
of low-frequency projections of the sample data (that is, the OLS regressions of yt onto Xt from
figure 3) yields two: first, using low-frequency projections reduces the effective sample size for
each country from T annual observations, to the q+1 OLS coefficients. In this application, T is as
large as 118 and q is 16.




                                                  16
    Second, because these OLS coefficients are low-frequency averages of the sample data with
nonrandom weights, the coefficients are approximately jointly normally distributed under quite
general conditions. We therefore use a Gaussian likelihood, which allows for analytic posterior
calculations for a subset of the model parameters and the use of conditional normal distributions
for Gibbs sampling and prediction. Specifically, let Yi denote the (qi+1) low-frequency OLS
coefficients for country i, where qi depends on sample size, which differs across countries in our
unbalanced sample. Our analysis relies on the data through Y = (Y1¢,Y2¢,...,Yn¢)¢. A central limit
                                                        a
result (see Müller and Watson (2019)) yields Y ~ N(µ(q), S(q)) where q are the mean, long-run
variance and persistence parameters of the model in Section 3.1. This normal distribution serves
as the likelihood, which together with a prior yields the posterior for the model parameters q.
                                                                                              k
Average values of yt over the forecast period (2018-2027), that is yT +1:T + k = k -1 å yT +i , are also
                                                                                             i =1

jointly normally distributed with the sample projection coefficients Y when (k,T) are large, so
                a
yT +1:T + k (Y ,q ) ~ N ( µk (q ), Sk (q )) . This yields the predictive density for yT +1:T + k | Y by averaging

the N(µk(q), Sk(q)) density using the posterior for q.
    A third simplifying feature is the linear factor structure of the model. Conditional on the
model parameters, linear Gaussian filtering can be used to generate draws of the factors, which
in turn can be used to obtain posterior draws of the parameters. Each of these Gibbs steps is
relatively straightforward, only involving low-dimensional multivariate normal random vectors.
The corresponding densities are easily computed by simply evaluating the associated quadratic
form for any model of time series persistence. (For the original T dimensional data, this would be
prohibitively expensive, so instead, one would need to rely on Kalman iterations or other
approaches tailored to the assumed form of persistence.)
    Fourth, the calculations are simplified by priors that impose a discrete support for many of
the parameters. This makes it possible to pre-compute the covariance matrices and their inverses
that are the building blocks for the various Gaussian densities used for the likelihood and Gibbs
calculations.
    Finally, we treat the missing data in our unbalanced panel as missing at random.
    Appendix 2 contains a detailed description of the methods we use to sample from the
posterior and predictive densities.


                                                        17
        5. In-sample Results: Persistence, Cross-country Correlations, and Volatility


       The in-sample characteristics of the posterior shed light on various aspects of cross-
country growth convergence, including the speed of convergence, the heterogeneity of that
convergence, and the existence and composition of convergence clubs. We begin with the global
growth factor, then turn to cross-country dynamics.


5.1 Evolution of ft
       Recall that the prior (strongly) shrinks the in-sample values of ft toward a population-
weighted average of yi,t for the OECD countries, so that the resulting in-sample values of ft
roughly coincide with the logarithm of OECD per-capita GDP. This is evident in the first panel
in Figure 6, which plots the estimates of ft along with the trend components of yi,t, shaded to
differentiate OECD from non-OECD countries. The 67% error bands for ft computed from the
posterior have length of approximately 0.008, with the small value a consequence of the tight in-
sample prior.
       The evolution of ft is governed by four parameters, sDa, µm, sm, and rm (see (6) and (7)).
Table 3 summarizes the posterior for these parameters. The posterior median for sDa is somewhat
lower than a typical estimate for the U.S., but this is consistent with using the OECD average for
ft. The spread of the posterior is roughly what one would find using 16 i.i.d. normal observations,
that is using q = 16 low frequency observations with Dft an i.i.d. process. The posterior for the
average growth rate, µm, is centered around 1.9% per year with 67% error bands of roughly ± 1%
per year. The second panel of Figure 6 shows the posterior estimates for mt, the local level of Dft.
The posterior median shows some variation over the sample, but a constant value of 1.9% (its
mean) is within the (pointwise) 67% credible set for all dates.
       The long-run standard deviation sm is an important factor characterizing the evolution of
ft in the out-of-sample forecast period and therefore in determining uncertainty about the future
values of yt. The prior and posterior for sm are plotted in Figure 7. The posterior differs little
from the prior, so the data have little to say about sm at least over the support of the prior. This is
also a finding in frequentist inference on the related local-level relative variability parameter (c.f.



                                                  18
Stock and Watson (1997)). The posterior for the persistence in mt (parameterized using the half-
life parameter hm) is also essentially identical to its prior. (See Table 3).


5.2 Persistence and variability in ci,t
        The country-specific terms ci,t are functions of uc,i,t in (2) and ug,j,t and uh,k,t for the
relevant factors in (3) and (4). Each of these u-terms has its own persistence and variance
parameters, so there are many parameters that affect the persistence and variability in each ci,t.
To summarize these effects, we focus on three characteristics of the marginal distribution of ci,t:
(i) its long-run standard deviation (sc); (ii) its half-life, the value h for which corr(ci,t, ci,t+h) = 1/2;
and (iii) the standard deviation of the change in ci,t over a 50-year span, ( s (c            t +50 - ct   )
                                                                                                               ). The first two,

sc and h, are obvious ways to summarize variability and persistence. The third, s (c                             t +50 - ct   )
                                                                                                                                  ,

combines both the persistence and long-run variability of ci,t to measure the likely size of long-
run (50-year) changes in ci,t. For fixed values of sc, s (c  t +50 - ct   )
                                                                              is decreasing in the persistence of the

process, while for fixed persistence, it is increasing in sc.
        The posterior for these parameters is summarized in Table 4. The upper panel shows the
posterior pooled over the OECD and non-OECD countries. The posteriors of c and h are plotted
in Figure 8. For both OECD and non-OECD countries the country-specific terms, ci,t, are highly
persistent, but persistence is markedly higher for the OECD countries. The median half-life
exceeds 300 years for the pooled OECD countries, but is closer to 200 years for the non-OECD
countries. The variance is also smaller for the OECD countries, and taken together, the standard
deviation of 50-year changes in ci,t are roughly 1/3 smaller for the OECD countries. Rich
countries tend to remain rich, a feature that, in part, defines inclusion in the OECD.
        The bottom panel of Table 4 shows results for eight of the 113 countries in the sample.
(Results for all countries are given in Appendix 3.) The first six countries are taken from the
groups of countries shown previously in Figure 5. Countries that exhibited rapid development
show relatively less persistence: for example, Singapore (plotted in panel (b) of Figure 5) has a
median half-life of roughly 185 years, compared to, say, the Belgium and the U.S. (shown in
panels (e) and (f) of Figure 5) with half-lives of 400 years. Former Soviet-bloc countries exhibit
relatively low persistence and large volatility. The country with the highest persistence and
lowest variance of 50-year changes is Australia (median half-life = 461 years and s (c                                 t +50 - ct     )
                                                                                                                                          = 0.34



                                                     19
log-points), and the lowest persistence and highest variance country is Liberia (median half-life =
70 years and s (ct +50 - ct   )
                                  = 1.34 log-points).

        Figure 9 summarizes the joint posterior for selected features of the ci,t process. Panels (a)-
(c) present scatter plots of the posterior means of the initial values ci,0 and s c (panel (a)), the half-
                                                                                                  i



life, hi (panel (b)), and the 50-year change standard deviation, s (c i ,t +50 - ci ,t   )
                                                                                             (panel (c)). Countries

that were poor at the beginning of the sample (low values of ci,0) tend to be more variable, less
persistent, and therefore exhibit larger changes over 50-year samples. The lower persistence
leads to more rapid convergence towards the global factor for these countries, but the larger
variance implies greater uncertainty about their location in the stationary cross-section
distribution. Panel (d) highlights the negative relationship between persistence and variability.
The final panel shows a negative relationship between volatility (measured by sc) and growth
(measured by the change ci,t over 1960-2017, the balanced panel sample period); see Ramey and
Ramey (1995) for a discussion based on other data.


5.3 Covariance clubs
        Correlation between countries in the model arises from three sources: (i) ft, the global
factor, affects all countries, (ii) groups of countries load on the same g-group factor in (2), and
(iii) countries might load on different g-factors, but these factors might load on the same h-
group-of-group factor in (3). We summarize the resulting pairwise correlations by computing the
posterior average population correlations between 50-year changes in yi,t and in ct (the latter
excluding covariability arising from ft), where again the 50-year horizon is motivated by our
interest in long-run covariability.
        The average pairwise correlation between 50-year changes in log-per-capita-GDP is 0.59,
the largest pairwise correlation is between France and the Netherlands (0.97) and the smallest is
between Liberia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (0.29). The average pairwise correlation between
the country-specific terms ci,t is, of course, much smaller (0.08); the largest of these is between
France and the Netherlands (0.90), and this correlation is less than 0.01 for 38% of the countries.
        While the sparse factor structure sets the correlation of 50-year changes in ci,t to zero for
many of the country pairs, there are large pairwise correlations between some countries. It turns
out that these pairwise correlations between the long-run idiosyncratic growth components



                                                        20
defines natural groups, which we refer to as correlation groups. These correlation groups can be
represented as non-directed networks, where the network edges are defined by the strength of the
pairwise correlation.
         Figure 10 plots the network formed by setting edges (unit values in the undirected
adjacency matrix) to be 1 if the posterior mean of the correlation between ci,t and cj,t for countries
i and j exceeds 0.25 and = 0 otherwise. The resulting network is fairly sparse with only 11% of
the pairwise correlations exceeding 0.25. With this threshold, the network reduces to six separate
correlation groups involving three or more countries, displayed separately in panels (a)-(f). Panel
(e) shows four additional two-country groups.
         It turns out that these groups have natural interpretations that relate to their growth
history over the 20th century. The first two groups ((a) and (b)) are Asian countries, where the
first group grew rapidly during the 1960-1990 and the second group experienced more recent
rapid growth. (Somewhat anomalously, Panama is also included in this latter Asian group.)
Group (c) is composed of former Soviet-bloc countries, group (d) are countries with Anglo-
Saxon origins, group (e) includes 10 European countries, and group (f) contains 45 low- and
middle-income countries, primarily in Africa and Latin America. Panel (g) shows four 2-country
groupings, where Austria-Germany and Portugal-Spain have obvious geographic and cultural
linkages, and Syria-Yemen suffered coincident civil wars. There are 24 countries that are
isolates, not connected to any of these groups.5


                                             6. Predictive Distributions


         Given the posterior, we computed predictive distributions for country-level GDP growth
at 50- and 100-year horizons. We also examined its sensitivity to changes in the priors, checked
the calibration of the predictive densities using a pseudo-out-of-sample experiment, and
compared the predictive distributions from the multivariate model to the model-implied
univariate predictive distributions.




5
  There is little relationship between the pairwise correlations of ci,t and distance between countries. The simple
correlation between the posterior mean of the ci,t - pairwise correlations and distance is -0.2; restricting the sample to
countries with pairwise correlations greater than 0.25 leaves this unchanged.


                                                           21
6.1 Baseline predictive distributions
        Figure 11 shows 67% and 90% predictive intervals for the global factor ft, and for eight
representative countries. Results for all countries are shown in Appendix 3. The median of the
predictive distribution calls for the global factor to increase at an average annual rate of 1.9%
from the end of the sample in 2017 through 2118. This translates into a more than 6-fold increase
in the level of the global factor. The 67% prediction interval for the average growth rate is quite
wide, ranging from 0.9% to 2.7%.
        The countries shown in Figure 10 illustrate the range of marginal prediction distributions.
The stationarity of ci,t implies that each country tends to mean revert to ft + µc, where µc is the
mean of ci,t in (2); countries with end-sample-values of yi,t below ft + µc will tend to grow faster
than ft and similarly for yi,t above ft + µc. The posterior for µc is summarized in Table 3; its
median is -0.6 with a 67% credible that ranges from -0.8 to -0.5 The rate at which countries
converge to this global mean is heterogeneous, so some countries are predicted to converge to
the global mean over this 100-year horizon while others do not. For example, the United States is
predicted to evolve much like the global factor, albeit with a slightly wider predictive density.
Singapore (the second richest country at the end of the sample), is predicted to grow more slowly
than average (1.4% per year over the next 100 years) as it mean-reverts down toward the growth
path of ft + µc. The end-of-sample values of yi,t for China is near ft + µc, so it is predicted to grow
at the same rate as ft; this entails a slowdown in its growth rate to that of the global factor.
Liberia has very low GDP per capita, high trend variability, and low trend persistence, so it is
predicted to revert rapidly to the global mean, however there is great uncertainty about that
prediction, and the 90% prediction interval 50 years ahead includes the possibility that its GDP
per capita fails to return even to its level in the 1960s.
        Figure 12 shows prediction intervals for 50- and 100- year average growth rates for each
of the 113 countries, where the countries are ordered from poorest to richest based on end-of-
sample values of per-capita GDP. The prediction intervals shift down when moving from the
poorest to the richest country, reflecting the mean reversion (convergence) in the model which in
turn implies that poor countries are predicted to grow faster than rich countries.
        A striking and important feature of the intervals in Figures 11 and 12 is their width,
which in all cases exceeds 2 percentage points for 50-year average growth for 67% prediction
intervals and is typically 5 percentage points for 90% prediction intervals. For the United States,


                                                   22
for example, the 67% prediction interval for average growth over the next 50 years is 0.6% to
2.7%, and over the next 100 years it is 0.7% to 2.6%.
       As can be seen in the figure, the 100-year prediction intervals are narrower than the 50-
year intervals. For example, the average width of the 67% bands for h = 100 is 2.2 percentage
points, but is 2.7 percent points for h = 50. Increasing the horizon has two countervailing effects
on forecast uncertainty: on the one hand, averaging I(0) processes over longer periods reduces
variance, but variances increase for highly persistent processes like those describing mt, the local
level of f. Figure 12 indicates that the first effect dominates, at least for 50- and 100-year forecast
horizons.
       Table 5 summarizes results for the average growth rates for the groups of countries in
Figure 10, using end-of-sample populations to weight the country-specific per-capita values.
This weighting scheme suggests that global per-capita income will rise by an annual rate of 2.0%
of the next 100 years, resulting a more than seven-fold increase in per-capita GDP. The degree of
uncertainty is, however, very wide, with a 67% prediction interval of 1.1% to 3.0% per year. The
richer countries are predicted to increase more slowly than the poor countries: the 67%
prediction interval for 100-year per-capita GDP growth for non-OECD countries is essentially
the same as that for OECD countries, but shifted up by 0.4 percentage points. This pattern of
faster growth for the poorer countries also can be seen in the correlation-group breakdowns.


6.2 Sensitivity
       We investigated the sensitivity of the model to several key assumptions, three of which
we discuss here. The first is the prior distribution for m, the long-run standard deviation of the
growth rate trend for ft in (5). The results are summarized in Table 6.
       The parameter m governs the extent to which the local trend growth rate of ft varies over
time, with larger values of m admitting larger variation in the growth rate. Because we treat ft as
effectively observed (the OECD average) within sample, changes in the prior for m have very
little effect on the in-sample results on convergence and clubs discussed in Section 5. For the
forecasts, however, larger values of m have two important effects. First, larger values of m
allows the posterior mean of mt to vary more and because of the slowdown in OECD growth
over the final 25 years of the sample, larger values of m mean that the estimated (filtered) 2017
value of the local growth rate is lower, leading to a lower posterior median growth forecast.



                                                  23
Second, larger values of m allow mt to vary more over the future, leading to a greater dispersion
of growth rates.
        The second and third rows of Table 6 summarize the sensitivity of the posterior to
changes in the prior for m, specifically shifting the prior in (towards smaller values of m) and
out (towards larger values) by 50%. Because the data are largely uninformative about m,
changing the prior has a large effect on the posterior for sm (Table 6(a)). Because ft is effectively
treated as observed in-sample, ci,t is effectively observed in sample, so changing the prior on the
parameters of ft has essentially no effect on the posterior for the parameters of ci,t (Table 6(b)).
When the prior favors smaller values of m, the predicted median growth rate increases and the
spread around that median tightens, but when the prior favors larger values of m, the median
growth rate falls and the spread widens (Table 6(c)).
        We also investigated the sensitivity of the results to q, the number of periodic terms used
to obtain the estimated country-level trend for log GDP per capita. A larger value of q includes
variation of shorter duration, for example we obtained results using q = 23 which corresponds to
a low-pass filter keeping variation greater than 10 years. As seen in Table 6, using q = 23
increases the estimated variability of at (the I(1) term in the evolution of ft) but results in only
small changes in the results about persistence, convergence, and clubs discussed in Section 5.
Using q = 23 has little effect on the predictive distributions. Using the smaller value q = 9, which
corresponds to a low-pass cutoff of 26 years, yields results that are very similar to the benchmark
model of q = 16.
        As another check, we re-estimated the model over the 1950-2017 sample, when we have
a nearly balanced panel. For these calculations we used q = 9, focusing on periods longer than 15
years as in the benchmark specification. The results are shown in the final row of Table 6. The
shorter sample suggests a somewhat smaller value for sDa and larger value for sm (panel (a)),
similar country-specific parameters (panel (b)) and future growth (panel (c)).


6.3 A pseudo-out-of-sample forecasting experiment
        Typically, pseudo-out-of-sample (POOS) forecasting experiments are of limited use for
evaluating long-horizon forecasts because of the limited number of independent long-horizon
POOS time-series observations. However, in our context each of the n = 113 countries provides




                                                  24
some independent POOS information about the validity of the predictive distribution. We have
carried out a POOS experiment that focuses on this cross-sectional information.
          Specifically, in the first experiment we estimated the complete model through time T1 =
1977, and computed joint predictive distributions for the average growth rate of ft and yi,t for
each of the 113 countries over the subsequent h = 20, 30 and 40 years. The realized values of yi,t
are known over these POOS forecast periods; moreover, the realized value of ft is well
approximated by full-sample estimates ft|T (see Figure 6a). Thus, ci,t|T = yi,t - ft|T provides an
accurate estimate for the POOS out-of-sample realized value of ci,t. We therefore used ft|T and
ci,t|T to evaluate the POOS predictive distributions. Specifically, as is standard for evaluating
predictive distributions (see Diebold, Gunther and Tsay (1998)), sample values of the predictive
distributions probability integral transform (PITs) were computed by evaluating the predictive
distributions at the realized POOS values of ft|T and ci,t|T. Recall that for a correctly specified
predictive distribution, the sample values of the PIT are distributed as a U(0,1) random variables.
          Table 7 summarizes the resulting PITs for the experiment, and two other experiments
with used T1 = 1987 (with a forecast horizon h = 20 and 30 years) and T1 = 1997 (with a forecast
horizon of h = 20 years). Table 7 summarizes the results. These result in six forecasts for ft and
with PIT values shown in the first column of the table. This is a very small sample of dependent
observations, but the PITs provide no evidence of misspecification in the predictive distributions
for ft.
          There are 113 forecasts ci,t for each POOS experiment and forecast horizon, so these
forecasts are more informative about their predictive distributions. The table summarizes the ci,t
forecasts by showing the fraction of PITs in each of the quartiles or the U(0,1) distribution:
ideally, 25% of the PITs should be less than 0.25, 25% should be between 0.25 and 0.50, and so
forth. The table also shows the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics testing the null hypothesis
that the actual values were draws from the predictive distributions (i.e., that the PITs were
U(0,1) draws). The p-values for the KS statistic were computed treating the posterior predictive
distribution as the truth, which incorporates the model-implied cross-sectional dependence in ci,t.
          The results suggest that the predictive distributions for T1 = 1977 were somewhat too
optimistic: roughly half of the realized values of ci,t lie in the lower quartile of the predictive
distributions. The predictive distributions for T1 = 1987 and T1 = 1997 seem to be reasonably
well-calibrated.


                                                   25
6.4 Comparison of multivariate forecasts to univariate forecasts
       A key feature of the simultaneous model of all countries is that the Bayesian methods
have the effect of introducing shrinkage in the parameters. Thus, the forecasts for the individual
countries reflect shrinkage to common dynamics. It is thus of interest to compare the forecasts
emerging from these joint predictive densities to univariate forecasts that do not use the
information from other countries.
       We used the joint model described and prior described above to compute univariate
forecasts, constructed by treating as missing the data for all countries other than the country at
hand. The 67% 50-year ahead forecast intervals are summarized in Figure 13, overlaid on the 50-
year intervals in Figure 12. Two features are evident. First, the implied univariate intervals are
typically (but not always) substantially wider than the multivariate intervals. Second, the
projections for the lower-income countries are typically lower in the univariate than multivariate
methods, and in many cases include negative values so that the 67% interval includes 50 years of
stagnation or collapse. One driver of this difference, especially for low-income countries, is that
the univariate forecasts cannot impose the convergence that is allowed for in the multivariate
forecasts, albeit with the possibility that the convergence might be so slow that it is not evident
for some countries even in a 100-year sample.
       As an illustration, the univariate and multivariate forecast intervals are shown in Figure
14 for selected countries. The univariate forecasts extrapolate country-specific in-sample
behavior, so for example the Central African Republic is predicted to continue contracting and
India and the Republic of Korea are predicted to continue their rapid growth. Indeed, the median
univariate forecasts imply that in 100 years, per-capita GDP in Korea will be more than six times
larger than the value in the U.S., and the univariate model produces similarly unreasonable
forecasts for other rapidly developing countries. In contrast, for several countries the univariate
forecasts are similar to the multivariate forecasts; Denmark and Ecuador, plotted in the figure,
are two examples.




                                                 26
                                         7. Concluding Comments


       We offer two sets of concluding comments. The first focuses on our empirical application
and the second on future applications.
       In our application, the data turned out to be informative about many aspects of the
analysis. For example, it is clear that there is a wide range of rates of convergence, with some
countries having convergence half-lives of less than a century and others having half-lives so
long that, in a century-long sample, there is essentially no convergence at all. Similarly, the data
support the presence of convergence clubs. In fact, the model delivers convergence clubs as
disconnected sub-networks, where those sub-networks have intuitive historical and/or regional
interpretations.
       One aspect on which the 118 years of data on GDP per capita do not speak strongly is the
amount of persistent variation in long-term growth rate of the common factor. The long-run
standard deviation, sm, is weakly identified in the data. In our model, this weak identification
does not substantially influence our in-sample conclusions, such as those about convergence
clubs, because we treat the factor ft as essentially observed in-sample (the OECD mean). But for
forecasts 50 and 100 years ahead, the prior on sm affects both the mean growth rate of the factor
(through the estimate of its long-run growth rate today) and the spread of the predictive
distribution. We have proposed a particular prior for the value of sm that seems reasonable to us,
but others might have different priors. We provided examples of how the predictive distributions
would change for alternative candidate priors on sm. A virtue of the model is that it reduces a
seemingly overwhelming question of what is the future distribution of growth for 113 countries
over the next century to a question about a scalar parameter, the relative magnitude of the
persistent and nonpersistent changes in the growth rate of the global factor.
       Finally, the modeling framework outlined here provided a flexible, yet tractable
framework for studying the joint dynamics for a large number of related time series (n = 113
countries) over a long span (T = 118 years) with data irregularities (missing data). It yielded
insights about the joint in-sample behavior of the series and provided sensible long-run joint
prediction distributions. This framework holds promise for delivering similar insights in other
high dimensional empirical applications involving economic time series.




                                                 27
                                          References

Barro, R. J. (1991), "Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 106(2), pp. 407-443.

Barro, R.J. (2012), "Convergence and Modernization Revisited," NBER Working Paper 18295.

Barro, R.J. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1992), "Convergence," Journal of Political Economy, 100(2),
   pp. 223-251.

Bernard, A. and S.N. Durlauf. (1995), "Convergence of International Output Movements,"
   Journal of Applied Econometrics, 10, 97-108.

Bernard, A. and S.N. Durlauf. (1996), "Interpreting Tests of the Convergence Hypothesis,"
   Journal of Econometrics, 71, 161-173.

Bolt, J., R. Inklarr, H. de Jong, and J.L. van Zanden (2018), "Rebasing 'Maddison': New Income
   Comparisons and the Shape of Long-Run Economic Development," Groningen Growth and
   Development Centre Research Memorandum 174.

Diebold, F.X., T.A. Gunther, and A.S. Tay (1998), "Evaluating Density Forecasts with
   Applications to Financial Risk Management," International Economic Review, 39(4), 863-
   883.

Durlauf, S.N. (2009), "The Rise and Fall of Cross-Country Regressions," History of Political
   Economy, 41, pp. 315-333.

Durlauf, S.N. and D. Quah (1999), "The New Empirics of Economic Growth," in Handbook of
   Macroeconomics, J. Taylor and M. Woodford eds. North-Holland.

Feenstra, R.C., R. Inklarr, and M.P. Timmer (2015), "The Next Generation of the Penn World
   Tables," American Economic Review, 105(10), pp. 3150-3182.

Frühwirth-Schnatter and Kaufmann (2008), "Model-based clustering of multiple time series,
   Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26(1), 2008, 78-89.

Greenstone, M., E. Kopits, and A. Wolverton (2013), "Developing a Social Cost of Carbon for
   US Regulatory Analysis: A Methodology and Interpretation," Review of Environmental
   Economics and Policy 7(1), 23-46.

Harvey, A.C., Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter. Cambridge
   UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Hamilton, J.D. and M.T. Owyang (2012), "The Propagation of Regional Recessions," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 94(4), pp. 935-947.



                                              28
Hausmann, R., L. Pritchett, and D. Rodrik. (2005). "Growth Accelerations," Journal of
   Economic Growth, 10, 303-329.

Johnson, P. and C. Papageorgiou (2018), "What Remains of Cross-Country Convergence?"
   Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Jones, B.F. and B.A Olken. (2008). "The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth," Review of Economics
   and Statistics, 90, 582­587.

Jones, C.I. (1997), "On the Evolution of the World Income Distribution," Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 11(3), pp. 19-36.

Jones, C.I. (2016), "The Facts of Economic Growth," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2A,
   J.B. Taylor and H. Uhlig (eds), pp. 3-68.

Kremer, M., A. Onatski and J.H. Stock (2001), "Searching for Prosperity," Carnegie Rochester
   Conference Series on Public Policy, 55, pp. 275-303.

Lucas, R.E. (2000), "Some Macreconomics for the 21st Century," Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 14(1), pp. 159-168.

Maddison, A. (2007). Contours of the World Economy, 1-2030AD: Essays in Macro-Economic
  History, Oxford University Press.

Mankiw, N.G., D. Romer and D.N. Weil (1992), "A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
  Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), pp. 407-437.

Moench, E., S. Ng and S. Potter (2013), "Dynamic Hierarchical Factor Models," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 95(5), pp. 1811-1817.

Müller, U.K. and M.W. Watson (2008), "Testing Models of Low-Frequency Variability,",
  Econometrica, Vol. 76, No. 5 (September, 2008), 979­1016.

Müller, U.K. and M.W. Watson (2016), "Measuring Uncertainty about Long-Run Predictions,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 83 (4), October 2016, pp. 1711-1740.

Müller, U.K. and M.W. Watson (2017), "Low-Frequency Econometrics," in Advances in
  Economics and Econometrics Vol. II, B. Honore, A. Pakes, M. Piazzesi, and L. Samuelson
  (eds). Cambridge University Press.

Müller, U.K. and M.W. Watson (2018), "Long-run Covariability," Econometrica, Vol. 86, No.3,
  pp. 775-804.

Müller, U.K. and M.W. Watson (2019), "Low-Frequency Analysis of Economic Time Series," in
  preparation for Handbook of Economics Vol. 7, S. Durlauf, L.P. Hansen, J.J. Heckman and
  R. Matzkin (eds). North Holland.



                                              29
National Academy of Sciences, Committee on Assessing Approaches to Updating the Social
   Cost of Carbon, Cropper M.L. and Newell, R.G. co-chairs (2017). Valuing Climate Changes:
   Updating Estimation of the Social Cost of Carbon Dioxide. National Academies Press at
   http://www.nap.edu/24651.

Pritchett, L. (2000). "Understanding Patterns of Economic Growth: Searching for Hills among
    Plateaus, Mountains, and Plains," World Bank Economic Review, 14, 221-225.

Quah, D. (1993), "Empirical Cross-Section Dynamics in Economic Growth," European
   Economic Review, 37, pp. 426-434.

Quah, D. (1996), "Twin Peaks: Growth and Convergence in Models of Distribution Distribution
   Dynamics," Economic Journal, 106, pp. 1045-1055.

Quah, D. (1997), "Empirics for Growth and Distribution" Polarization, Stratification, and
   Convergence Clubs," Journal of Economic Growth, 2(1), pp. 27-59.

Raftery, A.E., A. Zimmer, D.M.W. Frierson, R. Startz, and P. Liu (2017), "Less than 2o C
   Warming by 2100 Unlikey," Nature: Climate Change, 7(9), pp. 637-641.

Ramey, G. and V.A. Ramey (1995), "Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between Volatility
   and Growth," American Economic Review, 85(1), pp. 1138-1151.

Sala-i-Martin, X. (1997), "I Just Ran Two Million Regressions," American Economic Review
   Papers and Proceedings, 82(2), pp. 178-183.

Startz, R. (2017), "The Next Hundred Years of Growth: Growth and Convergence," manuscript,
    U.C. Santa Barbara.

Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (1998), "Asymptotically Median Unbiased Estimation of
   Coefficient Variation in a Time Varying Parameter Model," Journal of the American
   Statistical Association, 93, pp. 349-358.




                                               30
                                             Figure 1: Countries included in data set
                                                 (shown as shaded areas on map)




                                           Figure 2: GDP per-capita for 113 countries


                                  10 5




                                  10 4
                2011 US Dollars




                                  10 3




                                  10 2
                                    1900    1920     1940      1960     1980      2000   2020
                                                               Year




Notes: The thick black curve is OECD GDP per-capita, computed for those countries in the OECD in 2017 that have
data available in the indicated year.



                                                               31
Figure 3: Low-frequency regressors (Xt) and the logarithm of GDP per capita (yi,t)
                                       ^ i,t ) for selected countries
                and estimated trends ( y


             (a) Selected series with data over 1900-2017 (full sample)




                   (b) Selected series with data over 1950-2017




                  (c) Series with data over 1929-1938 and 1950-2017




                                          32
                                      Figure 4: GDP per-capita for 113 countries: Trend components


                                  5
                             10




                                  4
                             10
           2011 US Dollars




                             10 3




                                  2
                             10
                               1900           1920       1940       1960      1980       2000        2020
                                                                    Year




Notes: The thick black curve is OECD GDP per-capita, computed for those countries in the OECD in 2017 that have
data available in the indicated year.




                                                                  33
Figure 5: Selected five-country groups
   (low-frequency transformed data)




                   34
Figure 6: In-sample estimates of the global common factor ft and its local growth rate mt


    (a) Trend components of yi,t for OECD countries (blue), and non-OECD countries (grey)
                               and posterior median of ft (Black)

                                     12




                                     11




                                     10




                                      9
                         Logarithm




                                      8




                                      7




                                      6




                                     5
                                     1900          1920     1940    1960   1980    2000      2020
                                                                    Year




                   (b) Posterior median of mt and 67% posterior error bands

                  0.04




                 0.035




                  0.03




                 0.025




                  0.02




                 0.015




                  0.01




                 0.005




                    0
                    1900                    1920          1940     1960     1980      2000          2020
                                                                   Year




                                                                   35
                                            Figure 7. Prior and posterior for sm
                                            0.08
                                                                                                                                  Prior
                                                                                                                                  Posterior


                                            0.07




                                            0.06




                                            0.05




                              Probability
                                            0.04




                                            0.03




                                            0.02




                                            0.01




                                              0
                                                   0   0.002   0.004   0.006   0.008   0.01       0.012   0.014   0.016   0.018      0.02
                                                                                              m




Figure 8. Posterior distribution of the long-run standard deviation c and half-life h of ci,t for
                               OECD and non-OECD countries

               (a) c                                                                                                              (b) h




                                                                                       36
Figure 9: Cross-country relation between initial conditions, half-life, variability and growth


                             (a) c 0 and c                                             (b) c0 and half-life                                  (c) c 0 and (c -c )
                                                                                                                                                           t+50 t
            1.6                                                             500
                                                                                                                                  1.4
            1.5
                                                                            400                                                   1.2
            1.4

            1.3                                                                                                                    1
                                                                            300




                                                                                                                         -c )
                                                                                                                           t
                                                                half-life




                                                                                                                           t+50
        c




            1.2                                                                                                                   0.8




                                                                                                                         (c
            1.1                                                             200
                                                                                                                                  0.6

             1
                                                                            100                                                   0.4
            0.9
                                                                                                                                  0.2
            0.8                                                              0
                      -2       -1          0          1                           -2       -1            0       1                      -2        -1        0       1
                                     c0                                                         c0                                                     c0


                           (d) half-life and c                                     (e) c 2017 - c 1960 and c
            1.6                                                             1.6

            1.5                                                             1.5

            1.4                                                             1.4

            1.3                                                             1.3
        c




                                                                    c




            1.2                                                             1.2

            1.1                                                             1.1

             1                                                               1

            0.9                                                             0.9

            0.8                                                             0.8
                  0    100     200        300   400       500                     -2      -1         0       1       2
                                half-life                                                 c 2017 - c 1960




Notes: Scatterplots are of the posterior means of the indicated parameters, where each observation is a country.




                                                                                           37
Figure 10. Correlation group networks computed from pairwise correlations of ci,t
                  (average pairwise correlation in parentheses)


          (a) Asia-1 (0.65)                                   (b) Asia-2 (0.51)




    (c) Former Soviet-Bloc (0.66)                          (d) Anglo-Saxon (0.45)




                                       38
                                           Figure 10 (Continued)



                  (e) Europe (0.45)                                     (f) Other low- and middle-income (0.35)




                        (g) Pairs




Notes: Pairwise correlations are shown on edges, except in panel (f).




                                                         39
            Figure 11: 67% and 90% prediction intervals for per-capita GDP
                             Global factor and selected countries




Notes: Dark shaded areas are 67% prediction intervals; 90% intervals include the light shaded areas. Median
forecasts are shown as solid lines. The in-sample value of the global factor and its median forecast are shown in
each panel.




                                                         40
Figure 12: 67% and 90% prediction intervals for average growth rates
       Countries ordered from poorest to richest at end sample


              (a) Average growth rate over next 50 years




             (b) Average growth rate over next 100 years




                                 41
Figure 13: Univariate (blue) and Multivariate (red) 67% prediction intervals for
                  average growth rates over next 100 years:
           Countries ordered from poorest to richest at end sample




                                      42
    Figure 14: Median, 67% and 90% prediction intervals for per-capita GDP:
Multivariate (red line and shaded regions) and Univariate (blue line, dashes and dots)




                                         43
                               Table 1: Selected summary statistics

(a) Mean growth rates of GDP per capita over 30-year periods (annual percentage growth rates)

                     1901-1930           1931-1960           1961-1990           1991-2017
United States           1.4                 2.2                 2.5                 1.5
   OECD                 1.2                 2.0                 2.9                 1.4
 non-OECD               1.4                 1.8                 2.1                 3.0
     all                1.3                 1.9                 2.1                 1.9

     (b) Cross-sectional distribution of yi,t in selected years (logarithm of GDP per capita)

   Average value of yi,t   Cross-section Cross-section                 Cross-section
          over                median       standard                Inter-quantile range:
                                           deviation            75%-25%            90%-10%
       1950 - 1954              7.8           1.0                 1.5                 2.5
       1971 - 1975              8.3           1.1                 1.8                 2.9
       1992 - 1996              8.6           1.3                 2.0                 3.5
       2013 - 2017              9.3           1.2                 2.1                 3.3




Table 2: Averages of yi,t over 29 year periods: Fraction of countries of moving from growth
                          quartile i (1960-1988) to quartile j (1989-2017)

                                                         Quartile in 1989-2017
                                            1               2               3                4
  Quartile in              1              0.79            0.21              0                0
  1960-1988                2              0.21            0.68            0.11             0.00
                           3                0             0.11            0.71             0.18
                           4                0               0             0.18             0.82




                                                  44
            Table 3: Posterior percentiles for selected parameters, ft and ct processes

               Parameter                                     Percentiles of Posterior
                                              0.05         0.17         0.50        0.84                      0.95
                             (a) Parameters for ft process (in percentage points)
                    sDa                       2.34         2.70         3.33        4.14                      4.87
                    µm                       -0.08         0.77         1.85        2.79                      3.56
                    sm                        0.42         0.73         1.13        1.52                      1.76
                    hm                         50           63           96         133                       146
                                       (b) Parameters for c process
                     µc                      -0.97        -0.83        -0.63       -0.45                      -0.32

Notes: Dft = mt + Dat, where Dat is I(0) and mt is a low-frequency AR(1) with mean µm and low-frequency AR
coefficient m. The half-life, hm, solves rm
                                          hm
                                             = 1/ 2 .




                 Table 4: Posterior percentiles for selected parameters, ci,t process

                          Half-life                            sc                           s (c
                                                                                               t +50 - ct )

                                                      Percentiles of Posterior
                  0.17     0.50       0.84        0.17       0.50      0.84        0.17       0.50             0.84
                                             (a) Pooled across countries
 All countries     130     233        389         0.85       1.10      1.37        0.45       0.63             0.86
     OECD          201     338        486         0.74       0.91      1.15        0.35       0.44             0.58
 Non-OECD          121     211        342         0.91       1.15      1.40        0.52       0.68             0.89
                                                (b) Selected countries
    China          150     222        330         1.00       1.20      1.40        0.59       0.68             0.79
  Singapore        111     185        291         0.92       1.13      1.34        0.61       0.72             0.86
 Madagascar        148     214        317         1.08       1.24      1.42        0.61       0.72             0.85
   Belgium         286     394        507         0.69       0.82      0.98        0.32       0.37             0.44
    Russia          78     138        239         0.90       1.10      1.34        0.66       0.79             0.94
    United
    States         303     413        529         0.75        0.89    1.06         0.34       0.39             0.45
   Australia       340     461        567         0.71        0.84    1.00         0.30       0.34             0.40
    Liberia         50     70         108         1.36        1.51    1.62         1.17       1.34             1.50




                                                         45
                Table 5: Percentiles of predictive distributions for average growth
                                    over next 50 and 100 years
                    (2017-population weighted average of country growth rates)

                                  Percentiles: 50 year horizon         Percentiles: 100 year horizon
                                  0.17        0.50        0.84         0.17         0.50       0.84
Global Factor (ft)                0.92        1.86        2.70         0.92         1.87       2.72
                                          Global aggregates
All countries                     1.03        2.05        3.00         1.06        2.04        2.96
OECD                              0.74        1.69        2.62         0.79        1.73        2.62
Non-OECD                          1.05        2.13        3.11         1.11        2.10        3.04
                                   Groups of countries from Figure 9
Correlation group
                      Asia-1      0.17       1.47        2.67          0.53        1.62        2.64
                      Asia-2      0.72       2.01        3.14          0.94        2.01        3.04
        Former Soviet Block       0.49       1.80        3.11          0.72        1.82        2.86
              Anglo-Saxson        0.62       1.67        2.68          0.70        1.73        2.64
                     Europe       0.66       1.73        2.77          0.72        1.74        2.72
      Other low- and middle-
                     income       1.37       2.43        3.45          1.38        2.38        3.28
                       Other      0.97       1.94        2.86          1.01        1.93        2.83




                                                 46
Table 6. Sensitivity of selected results to the prior for  and to the number of low-frequency
                                  periodic functions used (q).

                          (a) Posterior for f process (in percentage points)
       Prior for sm           q                   sDa                                   sm
                                      Percentiles of posterior               Percentiles of posterior
                                     0.17       0.50      0.84              0.17       0.50      0.84
         Baseline            16      2.70       3.33      4.14              0.73       1.13      1.52
     0.5 × Baseline          16      2.95       3.55       4.3              0.33       0.56      0.76
     1.5 × Baseline          16      2.52       3.10      3.84               1.1       1.69      2.29
         Baseline             9      1.91       2.91      4.19              0.81       1.29      1.68
         Baseline            23      3.40       3.95      4.66              0.65       1.05      1.52
   Baseline, 1950-2018        9      1.25       1.76      2.57              1.05       1.37      1.68


                         (b) Posterior for c process (pooled across all countries)
       Prior for sm           q              Half-life (years)                       s (c
                                                                                        t +50 - ct )

                                      Percentiles of posterior               Percentiles of posterior
                                     0.17       0.50      0.84              0.17       0.50      0.84
         Baseline            16      130        233        389              0.44       0.63      0.86
     0.5 × Baseline          16      129        232        387              0.45       0.63      0.86
     1.5 × Baseline          16      130        233        391              0.45       0.63      0.86
         Baseline            9       107        209        398              0.43       0.66      0.94
         Baseline            23      137        245        395              0.44       0.60      0.82
   Baseline, 1950-2018       9       120        229        438              0.39       0.66      0.92


              (c) 100-year-ahead predictive distributions for average growth rates (PAAR)
      Prior for sm           q           Global Factor (ft)               2014-population weighted
                                                                        average of country growth rates
                                    Percentiles of posterior               Percentiles of posterior
                                   0.17        0.50         0.84         0.17        0.50        0.84
        Baseline            16     0.92        1.87         2.72         1.06        2.04        2.96
    0.5 × Baseline          16     1.34        1.97         2.64         1.45        2.17        2.87
    1.5 × Baseline          16     0.53        1.75         2.88         0.69        1.95        3.11
        Baseline             9     0.65        1.67         2.63         0.85        1.92        2.91
        Baseline            23     0.97        1.89         2.81         1.09        2.04        3.01
  Baseline, 1950-2018        9     0.86        1.84         2.75         1.03        2.05        3.02




                                                    47
Table 7. Summary of probability integral transforms for pseudo-out-of-sample forecasts

  Forecast                                PITs
  Horizon
                 f                  Fraction of c-PITs between
                         0 ­ 0.25    0.25-0.50      0.50-0.75  0.75-1.00   KS-c (p-value)
                                       (a) T1 = 1977
  20 years      0.41       0.57         0.14           0.18       0.11      0.36 (0.01)
  30 years      0.38       0.50         0.15           0.19       0.16      0.28 (0.06)
  40 years      0.30       0.46         0.17           0.17       0.20      0.23 (0.14)
                                       (b) T1 = 1987
  20 years      0.30       0.30         0.31           0.22       0.17      0.15 (0.42)
  30 years      0.20       0.27         0.26           0.28       0.19      0.09 (0.83)
                                       (c) T1 = 1997
  20 years      0.24       0.12         0.29           0.29       0.29      0.14 (0.47)




                                           48
