                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A MARKET FOR WORK PERMITS

                                        Michael Lokshin
                                        Martin Ravallion

                                      Working Paper 26590
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26590


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




For their comments the authors thank Arthur Alik Lagrange, Emmanuelle Auriol, Michael
Clemens, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Asif Dowla, Alvaro Gonzalez, Anna Maria Mayda, Alice
Mesnard, Branko Milanovic, Çalar Özden, Daniel Valderrama-Gonzalez, Maja Vezmar,
Dominique van de Walle and seminar participants at the World Bank. Daniel Valderrama-
Gonzalez also assisted greatly in helping us form the cross-walk from the occupational categories
in the Mexican data to those in the US data. These are the views of the authors and need not
reflect those of their employers, including the World Bank, nor those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael Lokshin and Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Market for Work Permits
Michael Lokshin and Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 26590
December 2019
JEL No. F22,J61

                                           ABSTRACT

It will be politically difficult to liberalize international migration without protecting host-country
workers. The paper explores the scope for efficiently managing migration using a competitive
market for work permits. Host-county workers would have the option of renting out their
citizenship work permit for a period of their choice, while foreigners purchase time-bound work
permits. Aggregate labor supply need not rise in the host country. However, total output would
rise and workers would see enhanced social protection. Simulations for the US and Mexico
suggest that the new market would attract many skilled migrants, boosting GDP and reducing
poverty in the US.


Michael Lokshin
World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Georgetown University
ICC-564,
3700 O St NW
Washington, Dist 20037
mlokshin@worldbank.org

Martin Ravallion
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC 580
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
mr1185@georgetown.edu
1.            Introduction
              Barriers to international labor migration are a major factor in explaining inter-country
gaps in the marginal products of labor, implying large economic gains from reducing those
barriers.2 The main economic barrier is that, almost everywhere, a foreigner needs official
permission--typically in the form of a work permit (WP)--to take-up employment in the host
country. Binding quotas on the supply of WPs create an excess demand for permission to work
in high-wage countries among people living in relatively low-wage countries.
              Despite the likely economic gains from freer migration, there is much resistance in host
countries. The citizens of high-wage countries often view migrants as a threat to their living
standards, and so resist reforms that would help free up migration. That resistance also reflects a
cultural backlash in some quarters against migrants, though to some extent this backlash also
stems from economic insecurity.3 Migration will continue to be restricted unless we can figure
out a way to assure that international migrants are seen as an asset from the perspective of
citizens of the host country rather than a threat.
              A clue into how that might be done is found in the fact that citizens have a legally-
recognized right-to-work--an entitlement to accept any job offer in their own country once one
reaches the legal working age. We can call this the "citizenship work permit." This is
undoubtedly the most valuable asset held by most low- and middle-income workers in high-wage
economies--probably 90% or more of their total wealth.4 However, currently, that asset is not
something that a citizen can cash in on. The main asset of most poor people in high-wage
economies is a non-marketable entitlement.
              Yet, there are times at which some citizens would be happy to rent out their (implicit)
WP. At any one time, there are both foreigners who want jobs at the higher wage rates on offer
in rich countries and workers in those countries who have something they would prefer to do
than work for a wage. We have a missing market in WPs.


                                                            
2
  See Clemens et al. (2019) and other estimates surveyed in Clemens (2011).
3
  Inglehart and Norris (2017) discuss how economic insecurity has interacted with cultural changes in America over
recent decades. On the role of perceived economic threats from migrants in perpetuating prejudice and opposition to
migration see Pereira et al. (2010).
4
  Tamborini et al. (2015) estimate the life-time (50 year) labor earnings of American men to be (in 2009 prices) $1.5
million for those with only high-school education (rising to $2.4 million for those with a Bachelor's degree). The
median net (non-labor) wealth of this education group was around $100,000 in 2013 (Boshara et al., 2015).

                                                               2 
 
              Restrictions on international migration for work are the root cause of this missing market.
Without those restrictions, citizens would still not be able to rent out their WP--to monetize this
important asset of citizenship--but that would be a moot point since nobody would have any
interest in buying it. However, removing all such restrictions is clearly a tall order. There is
another policy option--to create the market that is currently missing.
              This paper explores that option. It argues that creating a market for WPs not only
generates aggregate output gains from freeing up migration but enhances social protection in
high-wage countries--providing both insurance and relief from poverty and doing so in a way
that is self-targeted rather than requiring administrative assignment of benefits. Importantly,
migrants become an asset rather than a threat to workers in the host country. Simulations of the
market for the US and Mexico point to the potential for sizeable welfare gains, though
uncertainty remains about some key parameters relevant to impact.


2.            The policy and its antecedents
              Suppose that all working citizens of a country were free to rent out their WP for a time
period of their choosing. The purchasers of those WPs would then be able to take up a job offer
in that country. The ownership of the WP would remain with the citizen, and return to its owner
at the end of the stipulated rental period. The market is anonymous, with no personalized
matching of buyers and sellers. The market is in equilibrium when the price of WPs equates their
aggregate supply with the aggregate demand.
              A version of only one side of this policy has been around for a while. Gary Becker
proposed that the US government should sell citizenship rights (including WPs) to foreigners,
rather than requiring quotas and long queues (Becker, 1992; also see Becker and Becker, 1997;
Becker and Lazear, 2013).5 The revenue from selling WPs has also been advocated as a means of
compensating those native workers who are vulnerable to competition from migrant workers, as
in Weinstein (2002), although the mechanism for such compensation is unclear. There have also




                                                            
5
   An earlier proposal along similar lines had been mentioned by Chiswick (1982). A market mechanism has also
been proposed by Moraga and Rapoport (2014) as an efficient means of allocating migrants across host-countries,
using tradable immigration quotas. Selling visas has also been suggested as a means of controlling human smuggling
(as in Auriol and Mesnard, 2016).

                                                               3 
 
been various "cash-for-passport" programs, often targeted to a global elite of the very rich
(Sumption and Hooper, 2014; Shachar, 2017).6
              Other approaches to freeing up migration do not entail an explicit market for selling WPs.
Posner and Weyl (2008) propose a "Visas between Individuals Program" (VIP). The VIP entails
that an individual citizen can sponsor a visa for a specific migrant, and the citizen and migrant
share the earnings gain realized by migration.
              Another approach advocates that migrants be treated differently to citizens. Freeman
(2006) proposes higher taxes on migrants than for citizens. Milanovic (2019) proposes legally-
defined differences in citizenship rights between native-born citizens and migrants.7 To some
observers this form of discrimination against migrants is a necessary evil to assuring freer
migration (Ruhs, 2013; Milanovic, 2019).
              Like these past policy proposals, creating a competitive market in WPs would help
address host-country resistance to migrants, stemming from the expectation that migrants take
the jobs of citizens--an externality. (There are other potential external costs, such as in providing
public services to migrants.) However, the idea of a market for WPs that we study here differs
from these past proposals in five main respects.
              First, instead of the government supplying some pre-selected (arbitrary) number of WPs
at some selected price (also arbitrary), the supply and their price would be market determined,
with the efficiency benefits of introducing a competitive market that is currently missing. WPs
for foreigners generate revenue for citizens who have something better to do than work for a
wage. Furthermore, by balancing the demand for WPs with the supply, the market for WPs
avoids an increase in aggregate labor supply in the host country.
              Second, in the proposal considered here, only a time-bound WP can be purchased, not
citizenship per se. While cash-for-passport programs have been in large part striving to attract
rich individuals, and have come with high prices, what we study here is a scheme with
competitive prices that is likely to have broader appeal.
              Third, this policy would provide an extra source of social protection for workers in high-
wage economies. All workers in the host country would have the new option of renting out the

                                                            
6
  Some but not all of these programs require that one makes an investment, but this is still owned by the applicant.
Here we refer to the subset of programs in which the purchaser makes a payment to the government.
7
  Milanovic (2019) refers to "citizenship rent" as the rent derived by a citizens given their rights but does not
consider the possibility that this could in fact be rented out.

                                                               4 
 
WP. One can think of many examples of valuable things that people could do by renting out their
WP for some period. Someone who lost their job in a company town (such as due to automation)
could rent out their WP for a period to cope with the unemployment, while re-training and/or
migrating. A young person who has reached the minimum age for paid work may choose to rent
out her WP for a limited period to help finance extra schooling or skill-training. Or someone may
use this option to help raise their children in a critical period or to provide home-care for a loved
one in need (such as an elderly parent or grandparent). It might also help someone deal with the
onset of a serious illness or disability.
              Fourth, the proposal studied here does not require that migrant workers are treated any
differently to citizens. Objections are often raised to the various forms of discrimination against
migrants found in some countries, with respect to education, health, housing and social
protection.8 In addition to the concerns about human rights, there is a risk that such
discrimination may backfire, by legitimizing prejudiced thinking, and even strengthening the
hand of those opposed to migration on xenophobic grounds. Questionable discriminatory
practices are not necessary for making migrants more welcome in host countries.
              Fifth, a market for WPs does not require sponsorship. The transactions involved are
anonymous--there is no contact between the parties involved. This would reduce the transaction
costs of the non-tradable VIP, such as in finding each other and dividing up the gains from
migration.9
              In short, creating a market in WPs would eliminate the inefficiency that arises from the
current market failure that prevents citizens from renting out the WP, while foreigners want work
in high-wage economies, but find that their entry is restricted. By tailoring the number of WPs
issued to the amount of work that citizens do not want to do, one removes the current
imbalance--the disequilibrium that stems from the missing market--without requiring a change
in total employment. And a new form of social protection is created for workers in high-wage
economies. Nor does a competitive market in work permits entail high transaction costs or
ethically questionable discrimination against migrants.
              The same idea can be used to help make refugees more popular in host countries, and
assimilated more productively into the local labor market. Currently few refugees get WPs, and
                                                            
8
  The U.N.'s Commission for Human Rights has viewed such discrimination against migrants in host countries as an
important source of racism and xenophobia (U.N. undated). 
9
  Posner and Weyl propose that the gains be shared equally, but in practice this would be open to negotiation.

                                                               5 
 
often turn instead to government handouts or the informal sector, facing exploitation and poor
working conditions. Given that people who have fled war-torn countries, or ethnic genocide, are
unlikely to have the money needed to purchase WPs, the host government or international
community could subsidize their WPs for refugees, financed (in part at least) by diverting funds
from existing public spending on caring for refugees. The refugees who then have a legal route
for entering the host country labor market, while citizen workers would benefit from the new
option of renting out their WP.


3.     Model of the market and some implications
       We start with a simple expository model that ignores costs of migration but still contains
the essence of the idea. This model suggests a high price of WPs. We then introduce costs of
migration that suggest a lower price. Some implications are then drawn for social protection in
the host countries.

3.1    Benchmark model

       There are high-wage and low-wage countries. A single high-wage country introduces the
proposed market for WPs, with citizens from some or all low-wage countries being eligible to
purchase the WPs. The market is in equilibrium when aggregate supply balances aggregate
demand over some period of time, which we call the market-clearing period. The equilibrium
price is taken to hold within that period of time, recognizing that the market need not clear at
each instant within the period.
       In principle, different people may choose different sub-periods to participate in the
market, and the distributions of these contracted time periods can differ between the two sides of
the market. On the supply side, citizens will probably opt for shorter periods than are desired by
potential migrants given the fixed costs of migration. Thus, the number of people renting out
their WP in the host country may well exceed the number of people entering the country as
migrants with WPs. All that matters to the equilibrium price is the aggregate demand and supply
in time units--aggregating over all market participants within the market-clearing period.
However, to simplify the exposition we model the market for a common fixed interval such as
one year on both sides, though this can be readily relaxed. Thus, the equilibrium equates the
number of workers renting out their WP with the number of migrants buying WPs.

                                                 6 
 
              In the high-wage country, wages have a continuous distribution function   for the
wage                             ,                (with  . strictly increasing as usual).10 Thus,   gives the share of
the workforce in the high-wage economy that earn less than  . The lower bound to the
distribution of wages,                                , can be interpreted as a statutory minimum wage. This is assumed to
be binding, i.e.,                                       0 (though we can relax this to allow           to be less than the
statutory minimum wage rate). By definition,                                              1. Within the interval       ,            ,
the equilibrium price of a WP, , is a specific value of  that clears the market. The proportion
of the workforce in the high-wage economy earning less than  is   and the country has a
workforce of size  ( is the index for high-wage country). For the purpose of this expository
model we treat  as exogeneous, unaffected by the price of the WP. We assume that citizens
are willing to rent out their WP for a price exceeding their current wage rate. Then the aggregate
supply of WPs is    .
              On the other side of the market, the workforce of the low-wage countries is  . We
normalize such that                                            1. Let us assume for now that there is a labor surplus in the low-
wage economy such that there is no foregone income from migration. Also assume that there are
no other costs of moving and no taxes levied by the high-wage country on the purchase of a WP.
Also assume that workers in the low-wage countries expect to receive a wage drawn from the
same distribution of wages as observed in the high-wage country. The demand for the new WP
within the market-clearing period is then 1                                       .
              There is a positive excess demand for WPs at                                  (given that             0 and 
0; the necessary and sufficient condition for an excess demand at                                       is that                ).
There is excess supply at                                      (the excess supply is 1         0). Thus, by continuity and
monotonicity of the supply and demand functions, a unique equilibrium exists.11 The market
equilibrium solves:
                               1                                1-    implying that                                          (1)




                                                            
10
    There can be some disutility of work, represented by a taste parameter  , and we can let  ,  denote the joint
distribution of wages and the disutility of work.   is then the marginal distribution integrating out the variation
in the disutility of work.
11
    Here and later we invoke standard mathematical properties of continuous functions. 

                                                                                7 
 
where       .) is the quantile function of wages in the high-wage country. The equilibrium is
stable under the standard assumptions about the market's adjustment process out of equilibrium;
in this case we require that the price rises (falls) whenever   is less than (greater than)  .
       The solution in (1) is the point on the quantile function for wages in the high-wage
country corresponding to the share of the global workforce in the low-wage countries. This is
clearly a high equilibrium price if  is high; for example, if        0.5 then the equilibrium price
is above the median wage rate in the high-wage country.

3.2    Allowing for costs of migration

       A lower equilibrium price is found when we introduce costs of migration that naturally
create frictions to migration flows. The costs of migration include foregone earnings back home,
remittances sent back home, extra living costs in the US, as well as out-of-pocket migration costs
and taxes levied by the host country. Such frictions imply that workers in the low-wage countries
cannot reasonably expect to receive a net wage gain drawn from the existing distribution in the
high-wage country. Differences in human capital endowments can have a similar effect.
       To allow for costs of migration we focus now on the expected distribution of net wages
(gross wage less costs of moving). Potential migrants expect to receive a net wage with a
cumulative distribution   (with  . strictly increasing as usual). Given the costs of moving,
the net wage distribution can be taken to be unambiguously "poorer" than the   distribution,
in that              for all  for all  . Demand for the WPs is now 1             . We impose
two restrictions on the  . distribution, namely that                  and                  1, which
imply positive excess demand at           and an excess supply at        . Again invoking
continuity and monotonicity, a (unique) equilibrium exists at given  . Then the new market
equilibrium is:
                              )                                                               (2)
where                            is the weighted mean distribution. Clearly            .
       The high-wage country may want to tax the purchase of a WP. This can be thought of as
just another cost of moving (as embedded in the  . distribution), but it is instructive to make it
explicit. Let that tax be       0 such that the relevant net wage distribution for potential migrants
is now             . Existence of a unique equilibrium is assured under the same assumptions as
for the model with         0, with the modification that we assume that                  

                                                   8 
 
(although this can be relaxed somewhat while still assuring that an equilibrium exists). The new
market equilibrium ( ) solves:
                                            1                      1-                                         (3)
Evidently                                 . (Note that [                                                 0. This
cannot hold if                           .) How much lower the equilibrium price will be depends on . The higher
is the value of , the lower is the price solving (3); more precisely:

                                                               0                                              (4)
                         .
where                            and  . and  . are the density functions (corresponding to  . and  .
                          .

respectively) evaluated at the equilibrium price. This suggests that the existence of a binding
minimum wage yields a limit to how high the tax can go. If  is too high then the solution of (3)
will reach                       and the market will vanish for any higher value of . From (3) it is clear that for
the market to exist at the minimum wage we require that:12

                                                 1                                                            (5)

(where                   . is the quantile function of migrants' net wages).
              A tax on the purchase price of the new WPs (or increase in the cost of moving, such as
due to a higher forgone income in the low wage economy) is naturally passed on in part to the
sellers through the equilibrium price. It is readily verified that a unit increase in  will (to a first-
order approximation) lead to a final purchase price of                             / 1    with a final selling price
of              1/ 1              . (In the special case of uniform densities and equal workforces the tax is
shared equally.)

3.3           Some policy implications

              The proposed market would create a new binding floor to labor earnings in the host
country--a new lower bound, above the current floor and potentially above the current minimum
wage rate for the contracted period.13 Workers in the host country will rent out their WP if they


                                                            
12
    Our assumption that                     already implies an upper bound to the tax (namely                ), but
at that bound the market does not exist at             (assuming that            1).  
13
    The only estimate of the level of the income floor in America (averaged over reported incomes of the poor, with
higher weight on poorer people) puts the floor at about $5 per person per day (Jolliffe et al., 2019). Allowing for
(say) one dependent, this implies an income of $10 a day. It would be reasonable to assume that this is lower than

                                                                          9 
 
earn less than  (and some earning more than  will also do so if they experience a disutility
of work). Thus, the policy is a means of assuring a normatively-chosen, minimum income,  .
              In rationalizing  , we can posit a first-best distribution in the host country that maximizes
some weighted aggregate of utilities, with the weights reflecting the government's social
preferences. The first-best distribution of income is bounded below by  . However, in the
absence of this policy, the first-best is not implementable given other constraints (notably on
information and administrative capabilities). The observed distribution has incomes below  due
to uninsured shocks or longer-term disadvantages. With the policy in place, instead of solving (3)
for  , the host government can now solve for the tax rate on WPs required to assure that 
 , namely:14
                                                                  
                                                   1                                                                                                                           (6)

Thus, the market for WPs now makes it feasible to implement the host country's socially optimal
minimum income. We refer to this as the "inverse problem."
              There is another control available to the host country, namely its power over eligibility to
purchase or sell WPs. For example, the US might (initially at least) choose to make the market
only available to citizens of (say) Mexico (as we simulate later). This can yield discrete changes
in  but for analytic convenience, we can treat eligibility restrictions as a continuous reduction
in  (either by restricting migrant eligibility or expanding eligibility to rent out the WP among
citizens of the host country). This will reduce the equilibrium price (differentiating (3)):
                                                    .         .
                                                                      0                                                                                                        (7)
                                              .           .

              The difference between these two policy instruments--the tax on WPs and eligibility
conditions--is that the tax instrument can raise revenue, albeit at the expense of both citizens
renting out their WP and foreigners buying WPs. It is reasonable to assume that the (positive)
partial equilibrium effect of a higher tax rate on revenue dominates the (negative) effect
stemming from the deterrent effect of a higher tax on migration.15 Then the host government
faces a trade-off between the level of the income floor,  , and the extra revenue generated by a

                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                               
the equilibrium price of a WP. Indeed, $10 a day is lower than the minimum wage rate in the US for an eight hour
day.
14
    Recalling that           , it is readily verified that a sufficient condition for   0 for any desired  is that
           . 
                               .
15
    This requires that  .           1.

                                                                                            10 
 
higher tax on WPs. Writing that revenue per capita as    1-                                           / , we might
postulate that a host government maximizes                                    for some          0. Sufficient conditions for
the existence of an interior optimum tax rate are that the distributions  and  are locally
uniform, which guarantees that  is also strictly concave in  (though those conditions can be
relaxed somewhat). The optimal tax on WPs then sets marginal revenue (/) to
1/  1                 .


4.            How might the policy be implemented?
              There is more than one way to implement a competitive market for work permits. One
option is to create a web-platform for online double auctions of WPs--a natural analogue to the
economic model of a competitive market in the previous section. This would be managed by the
government of the host country, which retains its monopoly over the supply of WPs. A separate
bank account would be maintained for deposits and withdrawals associated with the new market.
              The government (acting as an auctioneer) first announces the program and opens the site.
A citizen interested in participating registers on the site and provides some necessary legal
documents that verify eligibility to trade on the site (for example, to verify age).16 Once cleared,
citizen i submits an offer to rent out her WP, with a stipulated duration  and minimum
acceptable asking price,                                  . At the same time, potential buyer j submits their desired duration
 for a WP and maximum price                                        .
              Once a reasonable number of transactions are in the system, the canned software finds the
market-clearing price  such that aggregate labor time is in balance between the two sides of the
market. (Recall that balance is only required in the aggregate, and in time units, not people.) The
equilibrium price equates the total duration of the proposed spells for renting out the WP for
those willing to accept at least  with the total duration of the bids for WPs from those willing to
pay no more than  plus the stipulated tax,  (or other costs of moving). Exact balance is
unlikely, but one can instead find the  that gives the least imbalance, i.e.,

                                      arg min                                                                          (8)


                                                            
16
    If another high-wage economy introduces this market then there may need to be a coordination mechanism to
address migrants between the two countries who face little or no restriction on migration, and so should not be
eligible for renting out their RTW.

                                                                            11 
 
              The price is then announced. All those citizens who said they are willing to rent out their
WP for at least  will take the offer, while a similar number of people wanting a WP but willing
to pay no more than                               take it up.
              This is not the only way of implementing the proposed market in WPs.17 One could give
the first WP to the highest initial bidder, and use that to cover the lowest initial selling price, and
continue this way. That would entail that the government recouped the individual surpluses as
extra revenue from the scheme.
              An optional design that may well be more popular for citizens of the host country (for its
familiarity as well as transparency) is similar to the auction site eBay. Once cleared for using the
site, a citizen submits an offer to rent out a WP, specifying the conditions (notably the desired
duration and start date) and the price he wants to get. A seller should be able to monitor the
ongoing prices for the similar WPs and set up the price for his WP accordingly. After the WP is
listed on the site, anybody in the world can bid for that as a WP with the appropriate taxes and
charges added. A particular WP will go to the highest bidder. The WPs can also be bundled, so
that purchasers get their desired time periods (or something close).
              Once the transaction is confirmed, the seller (a citizen) receives the money to his bank
account and a note is made in his profile (linked, for example in the US to his Social Security
Number) indicating the period when that person is not eligible to work in his own country. From
that moment, the seller has no obligation either to the buyer or to the authorities. On the
expiration date of the WP, the work status of the seller is reset to an original state and he again
becomes eligible to work.
              The buyer (most likely a foreign national) receives an official confirmation from the host
country's government that he has purchased a WP for a specified period. This confirmation
becomes a document supporting the buyer's petition to obtain an entry visa to that country. The
confirmation would not guarantee that the entry visa is granted, as there could be other reasons
(notably security) why that individual might not be allowed into the country. (Nor does the
confirmation guarantee that on arrival the buyer will find a job.)
              If the visa is issued, a buyer enters the country and looks for a job (or takes up a pre-
contracted job). The start and end day of the visa will be linked to the dates of the WP (allowing


                                                            
17
     An overview of the generic options for designing auctions can be found in Haeringer (2017).

                                                                12 
 
some grace period). A foreigner with the purchased WP could stay in the country for the duration
of the WP plus some extra time for relocation.
       A secondary market might develop to provide services and support both to the buyers and
sellers. The legal services could be offered assisting sellers with the preparation of the necessary
documents to confirm their eligibility to rent out the WP. The services for buyers would be more
extensive. Because not all foreigners will be able to pay for the WP upfront, commercial banks
(most likely in the receiving country) could provide loans to buyers to pay for the WP. The loan
application will include checking the applicant's qualifications and will be given based on the
likelihood of the buyer finding a job in the country, possibly in a form of an employment
contract or binding employment offer. Legal and immigration support might also be privately
provided. Insurance instruments could be developed to insure buyers against the events of not
obtaining a visa or failing to find a job while in the country.


5.     Illustrative application to the US and Mexico

       We simulate the scenario when only currently employed citizens of the US can sell their
work permits, and only citizens of Mexico are allowed to purchase a yearlong work permit in the
US. We only model the market for WPs.

5.1    Data and methods

       We use data from the 2018 Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the US Current
Population Survey (CPS), US Census Bureau (2019), and the Mexico National Survey of
Occupation and Employment (ENOE) (INEGI 2019). The CPS is a monthly survey of
approximately 60,000 US households. The survey provides information on the labor force,
employment, unemployment, persons not in the labor force, hours of work, earnings, and other
demographic and labor force characteristics. The supplement of the CPS includes detailed
questions on income received in the previous calendar year. We use the official poverty lines for
the US, which gives a poverty rate of 12.3% (Semega et al., 2019).
       For Mexico, we use the National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE). This
is a trimonthly survey applied to a representative household sample in Mexico. The survey aims
at providing statistical information on the population's occupational and substantive socio-
demographic characteristics at the national level. We do the currency conversion at Purchasing

                                                  13 
 
Power Parity (PPP).18 However, we also allow for extra costs of living in the US. For example,
given that this is temporary migration, the worker will probably still incur costs back home, such
as in maintaining the permanent residence.
              We illustrate the impact of creating a market for work permits on the US economy
through a series of simulations imposing different assumptions about the parameters of our
empirical model. We assume that a US citizen  would sell his work permit for a year if offered a
price  exceeding her current yearly wage (                                     ); the total number of US citizens willing to sell
their work permit is then given by:

                                                      1                                                                    (9)

where                 is the number of employed in the US. A Mexican migrant  will purchase the work
permit if his expected net wage in the US (                                    ) is higher than the price of the work permit and
additional fees and costs associated with moving to the US. The expected gross wage of each
Mexican worker in the survey is predicted based on Mincer-type earnings regressions estimated
on the US data and the characteristics of the Mexican worker. The net wage is post-tax, where
the taxes take two forms: the tax on earnings levied by the US government and the implicit "tax"
levied by the family back home--the "remittance tax." Thus, the number of buyers is:  

                                         1 1                   1                 1                                         (10)

Here                is the number of working-age Mexicans,                                0 is the "remittance tax,"     0 is the
tax on a migrant's earnings in the US,                                        0 is the tax a migrant pays on a purchase of the
work permit,                         is the out-of-pocket cost of moving to the US, that includes travel expenses to
the US and back and visa fees,                                     is the cost-of-living adjustment for the US, and      is the
migrant's wage rate in Mexico.
         The market-clearing price of the work permit ( ) minimizes the difference between the
numbers of sellers  and buyers  :

                                                       argmin|            |                                                (11)

         We can be more confident about some parameters than others. We apply standard US tax
rates for the expected wages of a migrant, as given in the Appendix (Table A1).19 There is more
                                                            
18
     We use the Mexico PPP rate for 2018 of 9.38 (World Bank 2019).

                                                                               14 
 
uncertainty about the remittance tax. Yang (2011) reports that Mexican migrants in the US remit,
on average, 31% of their US earnings. As Yang also notes, this is on the high side compared to
other data. We will allow values of  over a wide range up to 40% of post-tax earnings in the
US. A seemingly reasonable assumption for the out-of-pocket cost of moving (and returning) is
$4,000. This includes legal costs of obtaining a US visa as well as travel and relocation costs.20
         To predict expected wages of Mexican migrants in the US, we first estimate the coefficients
( ) of a Mincer earning regression for the log yearly earnings of US worker i on a set of their
productive characteristics using the CPS data:
                                           ln                                                                                                                                  (12)

where  is a standard (0,  ) error term. We predict the expected earnings of Mexican migrants
(         ) if they migrate to the US using the estimated coefficients ( ) and characteristics of
Mexican workers (                            ) from the ENOE data.21

                               ln                                      and                       exp ln                                /2                                      (13)

where  is the unbiased estimator of  from (12) (Wooldridge 2012).
         We postulate that a migrant makes a migration decision assuming that his earnings in the
US are functions of his specific human capital characteristics and his occupation in Mexico.
Here, the migration decision is also a function of migrant's professional experience in his home
country. A Mexican electrician plans to work in that occupation in the US forming his wage
expectations (                         based on information about wages of electricians in the US. The other
explanatory variables                                   include information about age, gender, marital status, race, the
highest level of education, citizen status, job classification, and whether a worker works full- or
part-time. The detailed regression results can be found in the Appendix.
         We estimated a second specification that drops the worker's occupation, on the grounds that
this is endogenous. Causal inference is not the objective of the predictions, but it is nonetheless
                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                               
19
   In other words, a migrant is assumed to make calculations based on his net income in the US, given prevailing tax
rates. (So, if a migrant's expected gross wage in the US is $100,000, he will be expected to pay taxes at the rate of
24 percent on that income, based on Table A1.)
20
   We took an approximate amount of $1,700 for processing of H1B visa.
21
   When predicting migrant wages in the US, we assume that Mexican migrants in the US are employed in the
private sector (not working for the federal, state, or local government, and not are in the arm forces); we also assume
that all migrants are Hispanic, single (for the purpose of work migration), and have no US Citizenship or permanent
residency status.     

                                                                                            15 
 
of interest to see if the results change much if we do not condition on occupation, which may
well change in the US. The Appendix also provides results for this alternative restricted
specification. The results turn out to be very similar. The following discussion focuses on the full
model.

5.2      Results

         Table 1 gives the simulation results for various combinations of parameter values.
Column 1 is for the benchmark model of no costs of moving (though official taxes on earnings in
the US remain). We consider a wide range of other parameters to reflect the likely frictions, as
indicated in Table 1. Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of solutions of the optimization
problem in (11) for two illustrative scenarios in Table 1.
         Introducing migration costs greatly reduces the equilibrium price (comparing column 1
with other columns). Without the costs of migration, the price is almost $29,000 with 47 million
workers participating in the market. This scenario brings the largest gains to the host country,
with net wage gains of over 7% of US GDP and a poverty rate falling to about 8% (from 12.3%).
Simply adding a 10% remittance tax brings the price of a WP down by $5,000 (Scenario 2).
Adding further frictions, we find equilibrium prices in the (wide) range $13-22,000. The gap in
wages between those selling their WP and those buying it remains large with the frictions, and
more so the lower the equilibrium price, as one would expect. With frictions, the count of
participants in the simulated market varies from 18 to 36 million workers depending on the
parameter values. Tax revenue is highest at lower tax rates on the WP. The gain in earnings
(earnings of migrants less forgone earnings of natives) varies from 4.4-7.4% of US GDP. The
policy brings the poverty rate in the US down to somewhere between 7.9 and 10.8%, with lower
poverty impact as the equilibrium price falls reflecting greater frictions to migration. Figure 2
shows the impact on poverty for a wide range of possible poverty lines.
         We have chosen the succession in pairs of scenarios to help assess the partial effect of
parameters and policy choices. For the pairs of scenarios (2, 3), (5, 6), (8, 9) and (9, 10), we see
the impact of a higher tax rate holding other parameters constant. This brings the equilibrium
price down by around $1,000-1,500. Tax revenue falls in each case. The impacts on the GDP
share and the poverty rate are small. The scenario pairs (3, 4) and (6, 7) show the effect of adding
a 10 percentage point allowance for the extra cost of living in the US (beyond what PPP rates

                                                  16 
 
allow for). This brings the price down more substantially, by around $2-3,000. The pairs (1, 2),
(4, 5) and (7, 8) give the effect of a change in the remittance tax; as expected, this reduces the
equilibrium price of a WP in each step, though the effect is small after the first increment (from 0
to 10%). This also slightly reduces the GDP share and slightly reduces the poverty impact.
       As discussed in Section 3.2, we can also solve the inverse problem of finding the tax rate
that attained any desired price of the work permit, which can be interpreted as a socially
desirable minimum level of earnings. A natural choice (though certainly not the only possibility)
for the latter is $14,500, which is the annual income for someone working a 40 hour week for 50
weeks at the Federal minimum wage rate of $7.25 an hour. Table 2 gives the results for the six
distinct parameter combinations in Table 1. The required tax rate varies substantially depending
on the two cost parameters, decreasing with respect to both. With no frictions, the tax rate would
need to be 143%, but falls to 25% in the "high-cost" scenarios (8, 9 and 10). Given that the price
is fixed (by construction) other outcome variables are affected rather little; indeed, on the seller's
side the impact is zero (for example, the poverty rate falls to 10.6% in all cases). There is some
adjustment on the Mexican side in earnings and tax revenue, which generates modest differences
in the net earnings gain to the US, which represents 4.5-5.2% of GDP.
       The partial-equilibrium simulations above point to large welfare losses from the missing
market. Given this, a general equilibrium analysis is probably called for before implementing
such a policy at scale. The above simulations also suggest that one might not want to go to full
scale too quickly. The government might start instead with a high tax rate on WPs and/or
restrictions on eligibility (on either side of the market), and expand scale later, with fuller
information.


6.     Discussion of the policy issues
       Creating a market for work permits, so as to realize the potential gains, would require
new legislation. A number of issues are likely to arise.
       One issue is how the citizenship work permit should be interpreted legally. There is
already a well-recognized right to own property, and this comes with a right to rent that property
out to others. A citizen's WP can be thought of as their property--a non-physical asset, which
should come with the right to rent it out. Against this view, one might respond that "property"
only refers to physical objects. However, that is clearly not the case in practice given that

                                                  17 
 
intellectual property is well recognized. Once one sees the citizenship WP as a property right,
renting out that right for a period (while retaining ownership) is no more problematic than
renting out other assets, whether physical or not.
              There are precedents. For many jobs, one signs a contract saying that one will take no
other employment at the same time. Then one has already implicitly forgone one's WP during
the contracted period of employment. Surrogate motherhood is another example. We are also
reminded of past land and housing policy in some countries whereby these assets had previously
been administratively assigned to individuals, such as agricultural land in Vietnam or housing in
China or the Russian Federation, without the right to sell the asset. Thus, an important asset for
many poor people was not marketable, effectively reducing their wealth. Subsequent reforms
made these property rights marketable, and active markets emerged in these assets.22 Another
example is the longstanding system of taxi medallions in New York City (NYC). Each
(American) owner of a medallion has the right to drive a yellow cab in NYC, but he or she may
instead rent out the medallion to another driver, often immigrants.23
              While there is a case for making some rights of citizenship marketable, including the WP,
the case is weaker for some other rights. We can distinguish two types of citizenship rights,
namely those that come with a social responsibility and those that do not. It is well recognized
that citizenship comes with both rights and responsibilities, including abiding by the country's
constitution and participating in its governance (such as by voting).24 When rights are tied to
responsibilities, making those rights marketable calls for a means of enforcing the attendant
responsibilities. That would clearly be problematic for many rights of citizenship. For example,
in this respect, the right-to-vote is fundamentally different from the right-to-work--the
citizenship WP. Nor is it clear what problem would be solved by creating a market in (say)
voting rights. The aim here is not to create markets in all rights but rather to address a specific
problem arising from the hostility to immigration in host countries, and the existence of
restrictions on international migration.
              It is also notable that WPs are already being monetized in the form of (legal and illegal)
payments to intermediaries (including human smugglers). The present system is essentially one
                                                            
22
   For an analysis of the efficiency and equity implications of the reform to introduce a market in land-use rights in
the context of Vietnam see Ravallion and van de Walle (2008).
23
   We are grateful to Michael Clemens for pointing out this example. 
24
   See, for example, the statement on citizenship rights and responsibilities by US Citizenship and Immigration
Services (2019).

                                                               18 
 
of formal quotas and (largely informal) side payments. The difference here is that a competitive
market in WPs will eliminate the quotas and channel the payments from people who could
benefit from access to the high-wage segment of the global labor market to citizens who can
make good use of the money in some other activity for some period.
              Some useful insights on the issues raised by this policy can be obtained by comparing it
to other options for domestic social protection.

6.1           Comparison with other social protection policies

              The insurance provided by the proposed market for WPs is universal in that it would be
available to all workers in the host country--it is not means-tested, so even a high-wage worker
who suffers a shock can turn to the program. Nonetheless, there is a self-targeting mechanism.
People with low current wages would undoubtedly be more willing to participate in this market
and gain more from doing so. This would put upward pressure on wages for low-skilled workers,
reducing poverty and inequality in rich countries. Indeed, as noted, this can be thought of as a
policy for lifting the floor to labor earnings in the host country. Note, however, that this
reasoning makes two key assumptions. The first is that the change in earnings distribution does
not attract too many more illegal workers. The second is that the scheme is introduced on top of
existing social protection schemes, such as unemployment allowances. The extra benefits
(including insurance) arise from the fact that anyone can rent out their WP at any time. There
may be some displacement of existing private transfers, such as support from other family
members. On balance, net gains can be expected.
              There would also be non-pecuniary benefits (or at least benefits not reflected in current
incomes). Many of those who take up the new option of renting out their WP can be expected to
be doing things that yield such benefits. For example, extra time spent by parents with their
young children can be expected to bring gains in terms of child development. Similarly, home
care given to one's elderly parent yields a non-pecuniary benefit. The same can be said of other
examples of potential take-up discussed in Section 2.
              In thinking about the redistributive aspect in the host country, it is of interest to consider
how this policy compares to other schemes that aim to guarantee a minimum income.25 One such

                                                            
25
   Ravallion (2019) reviews all these policy options in greater depth. Here we just note key differences with a market
for WPs, viewed as a social protection policy.  

                                                               19 
 
scheme entails topping up all incomes until they reach the desired minimum.26 The information
requirements of such a scheme are considerable, as one must know each person's income. The
incentive effects can also be a concern given that it implies a 100% marginal tax rate on poor
people. Alternatively, one can consider a job guarantee program, which aims to provide work to
anyone who wants it at a stipulated minimum wage rate.27 This also has an in-built self-targeting
mechanism, whereby the program is more attractive to low-wage workers, with no explicit pro-
poor targeting required, such as based on some proxy means test. The major difference is that,
under the proposed market for WPs, the direct beneficiaries in the host country are not compelled
to work to receive payments. Work requirements can generate welfare losses (including foregone
incomes) and also require (often sizeable) costs of monitoring the work and providing non-labor
inputs.28 Against these disadvantages, it has been argued that such "workfare" schemes may be
able to generate useful assets (although that has not, it seems, been the norm in workfare
schemes) and instill a work ethic in transfer recipients.
              Viewed as an option for reducing poverty, the proposed market for WPs also has a
notable advantage over proposals for raising the statutory minimum wage. Both options can
attain the same level of the floor to living standards, and so reduce current poverty. The
difference is that the proposed market for work permits would free up the worker's time and so it
will encourage productivity-enhancing investments that require time. Thus, the policy can be
expected to have longer-term gains in promoting people from poverty.
              An interesting comparison is with a Universal Basic Income (UBI)--one of the most
talked about social policies today. This provides a uniform transfer to everyone, whatever their
income level. (Though, of course, the net gains may be far from uniform once one allows for the
extra taxes or spending cuts needed to finance the policy.) There are some similarities. Like a
UBI, the proposed market in WPs provides a new income source for people who presently have
little or no option but to work and must forgo personally and socially valuable pursuits in doing
so. Like a UBI, there is no explicit targeting mechanism; since the proposal relies on a

                                                            
26
   Famous examples include the Speenhamland System of 1795, which aimed to guarantee a minimum income
through a sliding scale of wage supplements (Himmelfarb, 1984). Another example is the Di Bao program in China,
which similarly aims to top up all incomes until they reach stipulated minima (set by each city) (Ravallion and
Chen, 2015).
27
   An example is the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in India. A Federal Jobs Guarantee scheme has
also been proposed for the US (Paul et al., 2017).
28
   See, for example, the cost-effectiveness calculations for the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in the
state of Bihar, India, in Murgai et al. (2016).  

                                                               20 
 
competitive market mechanism; in equilibrium, everyone (rich or poor) has this new opportunity
and everyone faces the same price for renting out their WP. Thus, like a UBI, creating the
proposed market in WPs can be expected to have broader appeal, and hence be more sustainable
politically, than finely targeted transfers.
        There are some important differences. The market for WPs will probably have a more
pro-poor incidence than a UBI; specifically, it will bring both direct (first-order) gains to poor
people in host countries who take up the option of renting out their WP--the aforementioned
self-targeting mechanism--and indirect gains to others via the likely tightening in the low-wage
labor market. UBI has been advocated as a means of addressing job-loss due to automation (as
in, for example, Yang, 2018). But why would one give the transfer to everyone, including those
who stay working? A market in work permits would directly help those who lose their job due to
automation. Also, unlike a UBI, it is self-financing. This overcomes a widespread concern about
UBI proposals that require higher domestic taxes or are only available as an option to existing
welfare programs, thus reducing the net gains to poor people from the UBI. And the proposed
market for WPs can attain a (domestically) self-financed guaranteed minimum labor earnings in
a way that is self-targeted to poor people.
        A long-standing social protection issue that the policy could address is home care for the
elderly. The policy would open up a new option for financing such care. Governments who are
already providing assistance for this purpose may well be willing to divert some of that towards a
subsidy to citizens who apply to rent out their WP for this purpose. To help assure that this is in
fact the purpose, the application may be filed jointly between the elderly person and the person
(such as a family member) willing to forgo the WP in order to provide that care.
        The policy shares some of the concerns about past social protection policies. It may
discourage work. If the equilibrium price is very high then there will be concerns about so many
people dropping out of the workforce in rich countries. Given that there can be many good
reasons why they do not want to work, it is not clear how much we should be concerned about
this. (A similar point has been made about UBI; see the discussion in Bregman, 2017.)
        In low-wage economies, there will be first-order gains for people who cannot otherwise
get a permit to work in a high-wage economy. Those gains will be greater for those with a
potentially higher wage in the destination country. The scheme would probably not attract many
low-skilled workers in low-wage economies, but nor would it matter much for the highly skilled

                                                 21 
 
who can probably gain access anyway. Rather, introducing this new market seems more likely to
attract middle-level skills to high-wage economies. The wage gains depend mainly on both their
skills (determining realized wages in the host country) and foregone earnings (or other costs of
migrating). Our expectation is that the gains will tend to be in the middle of the income
distributions in the low-wage economies. This can be modified by a number of other factors with
bearing on the distributional outcomes, including access to credit for purchasing the WPs and the
incidence of remittances.
         There may be concerns about brain drain from developing countries. A selection effect is
evident in the fact that the new WPs come at a price. Note, however, that this is temporary
migration. There will be remittances generated. And the returns to education in developing
countries will almost certainly increase. The scheme will probably also reduce the widespread
problem of the educated unemployed in developing countries that has been seen as stemming (in
part at least) from queues generated by restrictions on international migration (Fan and Stark,
2007). (To the extent that the scheme draws heavily on the educated unemployed currently
waiting for WPs in low-wage economies, this will imply lower foregone income and hence a
higher equilibrium price.) Improvements in credit markets in developing countries (possibly with
the help of external development assistance) could help broaden access to the new opportunities
for migration. The host country could also allow migrants to pay off the WP through higher taxes
(similarly to how some countries help students finance tertiary education).
         We have discussed the policy as if it is implemented by only one host country. Multiple
host countries need not face the same price in equilibrium given differences in their
attractiveness to potential migrants, including differences in their tax rate on WPs. Putting those
differences aside, if additional rich countries introduce this market (a higher  ) then the
equilibrium price will fall. Potential migrants in low-wage economies will benefit from greater
competition among high-wage countries.

6.2      Other issues

         There are other issues related to the design that we note briefly, though none seem to
pose insurmountable challenges:
         An important design issue is whether eligibility should be confined to those currently in
         the workforce. Broader eligibility would allow welfare gains to those not in the

                                                 22 
 
       workforce. However, some restrictions could be considered. It would make sense to
       confine eligibility to those with legal and free access to the labor market, i.e., those of
       working age and not incarcerated. Confining eligibility to people who have previously
       been employed as wage-workers for some period may also be desirable behaviorally--to
       assure that the person is making a well-informed decision. It can also be supported from
       the perspective of reducing inequality as it would restrict the "idle rich" from renting out
       their unused WP. However, exceptions could reasonably be allowed for those who have
       only just reached the minimum working age. They could be allowed to rent out their WP
       for a designated period, such as to help finance schooling.
       One could also consider the option of allowing workers to rent out their WP for only part
       of each working week, retaining it for the rest of the week. This could clearly be an
       attractive option at some stages of the life-cycle, such as when a family has young
       school-age children. A full time position of a migrant would essentially be "funded" by
       contributions of several citizens who want to work only part time.
       Other restrictions on eligibility might be considered, possibly on a trial basis. Eligibility
       might be restricted to citizens in poor areas hit by economic shocks; for example, a town
       that has been hit by the collapse or departure of the main employer. Newly unemployed
       workers might then be given the option of renting out their WP for a period, to help
       finance migration and/or retraining.
       To obtain current employment, citizens will need to show that they have not rented out
       their WP. This should not be difficult. Even now, employers in the United States (for
       example) check work eligibility through the Social Security number. This can indicate
       that a person is not eligible to work because she rented out her WP.
       Citizens who have rented out their WP would also be able to buy it back before the end of
       the contracted period. One could add an insurance option whereby those who rent out
       their WP are guaranteed that they can buy it back before the end of the contracted period
       at a price no greater than the price they received initially (adjusted to be fixed per unit
       time). This could be made actuarially sound by a charge on the initial price.
       The demand need not be confined to foreigners, though they would be the bulk of it given
       how many people want to migrate internationally for work. Someone may have rented
       out their WP for two years (say) but decided after one year to rent it back. An important

                                                 23 
 
        design choice is whether domestic firms are allowed to buy WPs. If so, then regulations
        may be needed to assure that large firms do not distort the market.
        The purchaser could be allowed to sell back their WP (adjusted for the time used). This
        would provide an insurance value. The WP could also be given a positive termination
        value at the end of the period, which can only be cashed in on leaving the host country.
        This would provide an incentive for the migrant worker to not overstay the period.
        The sectoral/occupational composition of aggregate employment could well be affected.
        This could generate internal social conflicts and political resistance, although it should be
        noted that a market in work permits has an in-built (financial) compensation mechanism
        for those in occupations or sectors that experience declining domestic demand. These
        structural changes in the economy could be managed by creating occupational WPs, with
        separate market price and taxes. (For example, a lower tax rate can be applied to WPs for
        workers with skills in shortage.)
        The tax on WPs can cover the administrative costs (such as for creating the market) and
        any other external costs of migrants. Raising the tax rate will impact the likely skill
        profile of migrants, but (given the pass on through the equilibrium price of the WP) it
        will also alter the skill profile of those choosing to rent out their WP (in the opposite
        direction). Given that it retains the power to tax these transactions, the host government
        will not lose control over the number of people entering the country.
        There are other implementation issues that we have not discussed, including: How should
        the payments received by those renting out their WP be treated for tax purposes? Are the
        migrants fully eligible for existing welfare benefits in the host country? Should migrants
        be allowed to bring their families? Should the host country provide public services to
        them? Existing tax and migration policies in host countries will undoubtedly have
        something to say about these issues, which are shared with current policies.


7.      Conclusions
        It is widely agreed (at least among economists) that there are likely to be substantial
efficiency and equity gains globally from freer international migration. As Clemens (2011) puts
it, there are "trillion-dollar bills on the sidewalk." Yet freer international migration is not a very
popular idea; indeed, some people are extremely hostile to it. As Dustmann and Preston (2019)

                                                  24 
 
point out, there are political and economic challenges in how to find a feasible mechanism to
capture the gains from international migration. Given that host countries have the power to
restrict entry, any politically feasible mechanism will entail sharing those gains with host-
country workers.
       The policy we have studied here is an anonymous market exchange that provides
working-age citizens with the option of renting out their asset of a work permit, which comes
with citizenship, while someone else can buy a (taxable, time-bound) work permit. The currently
missing market for work permits would no longer be missing. Creating such a market would help
capture the economic gains from freer migration, while keeping the host-country government in
control of the migration flows and (hence) domestic labor supply. A minimum income can be
assured for workers in host countries, financed by tapping into the unexploited gains from
international migration. Thus, this market would offer a new instrument for social protection, as
well as an efficient, growth-promoting, means of managing immigration. The policy will clearly
not pick up all those trillion-dollar bills on the sidewalk, but it will recover some of the loss.
       There have been past proposals for selling passports or work permits, and some examples
in practice. However, we have argued that the past proposals have been incomplete in an
important respect: they have not eliminated the underlying market failure. Alongside the current
excess demand for work permits, there is a potentially large supply side, namely all those
workers in high-wage economies who would be happy to rent out their work permit as long as
they are adequately compensated. There is much they could then do, including coping with
economic and health shocks, financing education or training, homecare of loved ones, or simply
taking a long vacation. The host country will benefit from adopting this policy in several ways:
Relatively low productivity workers who currently have little option but to join the labor market
would be replaced with high productivity workers, raising GDP and tax revenues. The former
workers would have new opportunities, including raising their future returns in the labor market.
The scheme can be designed to avoid changing the total number of jobs (or total hours worked)
in the host country, though the skill composition of employment will change, probably lowering
wage inequality. There would be important complementarities with social protection goals.
Creating a market in WPs also avoids the need to discriminate against migrants by extra taxation
or diminished rights, thus, avoiding the trade-off between migrant welfare and freer migration.
Most importantly in our view, this new market would help relieve the public's concerns about

                                                  25 
 
freer migration, by attenuating the negative externalities in the host countries seen to be
generated by migrants and refugees. International migrants would surely become more popular
in the host countries.
       We have provided illustrative calculations for the US and Mexico. The results suggest
that the missing market is large, with 18-36 million participants (depending on the chosen tax
rate on WPs and other parameters). For example, with a 10% host-country tax on the WPs and a
10-20% "remittance tax" on the US wage earnings of the Mexican migrants, the equilibrium
price of the WPs would be about $20,000 per year, and around 30 million workers would
participate. The US tax revenue would be around $300 billion, and the gain in earnings would
represent about 6% of US GDP. The poverty rate in the US would fall to under 10%, reflecting
the pro-poor feature of the market's implicit targeting mechanism.
       Our simulations for the US and Mexico are only intended to be broadly indicative of
orders of magnitude under certain (explicit) assumptions about the key parameters, including the
policy choice of the tax rate on WPs. The sensitivity of the precise empirical results to the extent
of the frictions to international migration points to the need for further research on specific costs
of migration. Although the stylized policy leaves aggregate employment unchanged, the likely
compositional effects on labor supply point to general equilibrium implications. Further
exploration of these and other issues discussed in this paper appears to be warranted, given the
potential benefits of a market for work permits.




                                                   26 
 
References
Auriol, Emmanuelle, and Alice Mesnard, 2016, "Sale of Visas: A Smuggler's Final Song?"
       Economica 83: 646­678.
Becker, Gary S., 1992, "An Open Door for Immigrants--The Auction," Wall Street Journal
       October 14.
Becker, Gary S., and Guity Nashat Becker, 1997, The Economics of Life: From Baseball to
       Affirmative Action to Immigration, How Real-World Issues Affect Our Everyday Life.
       New York: McGraw-Hill.
Becker Gary S., and Edward P. Lazear, 2013, "A Market Solution to Immigration Reform", Wall
       Street Journal, March 1.
Bochara, Ray, William R. Emmons, and Bryan Noeth, 2015, "The Demographics of Wealth,"
       Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis.
Bregman, Rutger, 2017, Utopia for Realists. How we can Build an Ideal World. New York:
       Little Brown and Co.
Chiswick Barry, 1982, "The Impact of Immigration on the Level and Distribution of Economic
       Well-Being," in Barry R. Chiswick (ed.), The Gateway: U.S. Immigration Issues and
       Policies. Washington DC: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
Clemens, Michael A., 2011, "Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the
       Sidewalk?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 83­106.
Clemens, Michael A., Claudio Montenegro and Lant Pritchett, 2019, "Bounding the Price
       Equivalent of Migration Barriers," Review of Economics and Statistics 101(2): 201­213.
Dustmann, Christian, and Ian P. Preston, 2019, "Free Movement, Open Borders, and the Global
       Gains from Labor Mobility," Annual Review of Economics 11:783­808.
Fan, C. Simon, and Oded Stark, 2007, "International Migration and "Educated Unemployment",
       Journal of Development Economics 83(1): 76-87.
Fernandez-Huertas Moraga and Hillel Rapoport, 2014, "Tradable Immigration Quotas," Journal
       of Public Economics 115: 94-108.
Freeman, Richard, 2006, "People Flows in Globalization," NBER Working Paper No. 12315.
Haeringer, Guillaume, 2017, Market Design: Auctions and Matching. Cambridge, Mass: MIT
       Press.


                                             27 
 
Himmelfarb, Gertrude, 1984, The Idea of Poverty: England in the Early Industrial Age. London:
       Faber and Faber.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris, 2017, "Trump and the Populist Authoritarian Parties: The
       Silent Revolution in Reverse," Perspectives on Politics 15(2): 443-454.
Jolliffe, Dean, Juan Margitic, and Martin Ravallion, 2019, "Food Stamps and America's
       Poorest," NBER WP 26025.
Kennan John and James Walker, 2011, "The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration
       Decisions," Econometrica 79(1): 211­251.
Milanovic, Branko, 2019, Capitalism Alone. The Future of the System that Rules the World.
       Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Murgai, Rinku, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle, 2016, "Is Workfare Cost
       Effective against Poverty in a Poor Labor-Surplus Economy?", World Bank Economic
       Review, 30(3): 413-445.
Paul, Mark, William Darity Jr., and Darrick Hamilton, 2017, "Why we Need a Federal Job
       Guarantee," Jacobin.
Pereira, Ci´Cero, Jorge Vala, and Rui Costa-Lopes, 2010, "From Prejudice to Discrimination:
       The Legitimizing role of Perceived Threat in Discrimination against Immigrants,"
       European Journal of Social Psychology 40: 1231­1250.
Posner, Eric, and Glen Weyl, 2008, Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and Democracy for
       a Just Society. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ravallion, Martin, 2019, "Guaranteed Employment or Guaranteed Income?" (Development
       Review) World Development 115: 209­221.
Ravallion, Martin, and Shaohua Chen, 2015, "Benefit Incidence with Incentive Effects,
       Measurement Errors and Latent Heterogeneity: A Case Study for China," Journal of
       Public Economics 128: 124-132.
Ravallion, Martin, and Dominique van de Walle, 2008, Land in Transition: Reform and Poverty
       in Rural Vietnam, Palgrave Macmillan.
Ruhs, Martin, 2013, The Price of Rights: Regulating International Labor Migration. Princeton
       NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                               28 
 
Shachar, Ayelet, 2017, "Citizenship For Sale?" in Ayelet Shachar, Rainer Bauböck, Irene
       Bloemraad, and Maarten Vink (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Citizenship, Oxford:
       Oxford University Press.
Semega, Jessica, Melissa Kollar, John Creamer and Abinash Mohanty, 2019, "Income and
       Poverty in the United States: 2018 Current Population Reports," P60-266, US Census
       Bureau.
Sumption, Madeleine, and Kate Hooper, 2014, Selling Visas and Citizenship: Policy Questions
       from the Global Boom in Investor Immigration, Washington: Migration Policy Institute.
Tamborini, Christopher R., ChangHwan Kim, and Arthur Sakamoto, 2015, "Education and
       Lifetime Earnings in the United States," Demography 52(4): 1383­1407.
United Nations, undated, "Migration and Human Rights," Office of the United Nations High
       Commissioner for Human Rights.
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, 2019, "Citizenship Rights and
       Responsibilities," Department of Homeland Security, United States Government.
Weinstein, Eric, 2002, "Migration for the Benefit of all: Towards a new Paradigm for Economic
       Immigration," International Labour Review 141(3): 225-252.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 2012, Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, Fifth edition,
       South-Western.
Yang, Dean, 2011, "Migrant Remittances," Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 129-151.
Yang, Andrew, 2018, The War on Normal People: The Truth About America's Disappearing
       Jobs and Why Universal Basic Income Is Our Future, New York: Hachette.




                                              29 
 
Table 1: Policy simulations for a one-year work permit under various assumptions

                                          1         2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9       10
                                        (No
                                     frictions)
 Parameters
 Tax on purchase of Work Permit          0          0       10       10       10       20       20       20       30       40
 (%)
 Extra cost of living in US (% of        0          0        0       10       10       10       20       20       20       20
 US earnings)
 Remittance "tax" on net earnings        0         10       10       10       20       20       20       30       30       30
 in US ( as %)
 Simulation results
 Price of Work Permit ($)             28,700      23,700   22,100   19,900   19,700   18,200   15,400   15,000   14,000   13,100
 Average earnings of sellers ($)      15,800      12,800   12,400   10,300   10,300   9,900    8,400    8,400    7,400    7,000
 Expected earnings of buyers in       48,400      50,500   51,100   52,800   53,800   55,300   57,800   58,100   60,100   60,800
 the US ($)
 Number of sellers(buyers) (M)         47.3       36.2     34.7     31.6     27.7     26.4     22.1     22.0     19.0     18.1
 Total earnings of migrants ($B)       2273       1823     1759     1552     1449     1366     1175     1119     1048     1024
 Total earnings of migrants net of      7.4        6.6      6.5      6.2      5.7      5.4      4.8      4.6      4.4      4.4
 total earnings of natives as % of
 the US GDP
 Tax revenue from migrants'            443         362      352      315      295      283      247      233      222      218
 earnings ($B)
 Net gains for sellers ($B)            608         394      337      266      261      220      153      145      125      109
 The US poverty rate (excluding        7.9         8.9      9.1      9.3      9.6      9.8      10.5     10.5     10.7     10.8
 migrants); base=12.3%
Table 2: Policy simulations under various assumptions for the inverse problem of setting
the tax rate to attain minimum earnings of $14,500

                                      1        2,3          4      5,6       7      8,9,10
                                    (No
                                 frictions)
    Parameters
    Tax on purchase of             143         93           63     58       29       25
    Work Permit (%)
    Extra cost of living in          0          0           10     10       20       20
    US (% of US earnings)
    Remittance "tax" on net          0         10           10     20       20       30
    earnings in US ()
    Simulation results
    Price of Work Permit ($)      14,500      14,500   14,500     14,500   14,500   14,500
    Average earnings of            7,500      7,500    7,500      7,500    7,500     7,500
    sellers ($)
    Expected earnings of          63,200      61,500   60,400     60,300   59,400   59,400
    buyers in the US ($)
    Number of                      19.3        19.3     19.3       19.3     19.3     19.3
    sellers(buyers) (M)
    Total earnings of              1204       1143     1146       1134     1113     1073
    migrants ($B)
    Total earnings of               5.2        4.9          4.9    4.8      4.7      4.5
    migrants net of total
    earnings of natives as %
    of the US GDP
    Tax revenue from               270         251      248        245      237      226
    migrants' earnings ($B)
    Net gains for sellers ($B)     135         135      135        135      135      135
    The US poverty rate            10.6        10.6     10.6       10.6     10.6     10.6
    (excluding migrants)


 


                                                         

                                                         
    Figure 1: Graphical representation of the numerical solution for the market-
    clearing price of year-long work permits for selected scenarios




                                                                   


    Figure 2: Simulated cumulative income distribution and poverty rates for
    selected scenarios  
           




                                         32 
 
Appendix: Supplementary tables

    Table A1: Tax rate on migrants' earnings in the US
     Yearly Income                        Tax rate
     Less than $9,700                      10%
     $9,701 ­ $39,475                      12%
     $39,476 ­ $84,200                     22%
     $84,201 -- $160,725                   24%
     $160,726 -- $204,100                  32%
     $204,101 ­ $510,300                   35%
     More than $510,301                    37%
     Source: IRS (under "2018 Tax Rate Schedule.)"

                                  




                                                     33 
 
Table A2: Log-earning regression estimated on the CPS 2018 sample of the US workers.
Specification 1 includes occupational dummies while specification 2 excludes them
                                                 Specification 1                      Specification 2
                                            Coeff.           Std. Error          Coeff.           Std. Error
    Age                                      0.159             0.007              0.171             0.007
    Age squared                             -0.003             0.000             -0.003             0.000
    Age cubed                                0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000
    Gender: male=1                           0.227             0.006              0.259             0.006
    Marital Status                                           Reference category: Married
    Widowed                                 -0.030             0.023             -0.052             0.024
    Divorced                                -0.054             0.009             -0.070             0.009
    Separated                               -0.124             0.019             -0.152             0.019
    Never Married                           -0.116             0.007             -0.138             0.007
    Education                                               Reference category: Preschool
    Primary school                           0.174             0.072              0.154             0.074
    Secondary school                         0.167             0.071              0.156             0.073
    High school                              0.345             0.069              0.368             0.071
    Normal school                            0.450             0.070              0.516             0.071
    Technical career                         0.464             0.070              0.565             0.071
    Bachelor's degree                        0.723             0.070              0.877             0.071
    Master's degree                          0.955             0.070              1.140             0.071
    Doctorate                                1.137             0.072              1.342             0.073
    Race                                                      Reference category: White
    Black                                   -0.111             0.009             -0.139             0.009
    Hispanic                                -0.061             0.008             -0.083             0.009
    Asian                                   -0.008             0.012             0.010              0.013
    Native American                         -0.018             0.033             -0.044             0.033
    Mixed                                   -0.069             0.022             -0.081             0.022
    Citizen Status                                       Reference category: Born in the US
    Born in Pr/OA                           -0.002             0.035             -0.019             0.035
    Foreign born, US parents                 0.003             0.026             -0.005             0.027
    Foreign born, naturalized               -0.009             0.011             -0.024             0.011
    Foreign born                            -0.102             0.011             -0.132             0.011
    Job classification                                       Reference category: Private
    Federal government                       0.122             0.017             0.127              0.016
    State government                        -0.039             0.013             -0.102             0.013
    Local government                         0.005             0.012             -0.070             0.011
    Self-employed, incorp.                   0.155             0.015             0.196              0.015
    Self_employed, no incorp.               -0.309             0.012             -0.313             0.012
    Without pay                             -1.231             0.228             -1.332             0.233
    Type of employment                                      Reference category: Full time
    Part-time, full year                    -0.759             0.009             -0.823             0.009
    Full-time, part year                    -0.584             0.010             -0.618             0.010
    Part time, part year                    -1.610             0.012             -1.682             0.012
    Occupation                                     Reference category: Management occupations
    Business and financial                  -0.082             0.014
    Computer and mathematical science        0.017             0.016
    Architecture and engineering            0.010              0.019
    Life, physical, and social science      -0.178             0.027
    Community and social service            -0.494             0.021
    Legal                                    0.030             0.026
    Education, training, and library        -0.409             0.014
    Arts, design, entertainment             -0.299             0.020
    Healthcare practitioner and technical   -0.017             0.014
    Healthcare support                      -0.441             0.019
    Food preparation and serving            -0.209             0.021
    Building & grounds cleaning             -0.561             0.015
    Personal care and service               -0.577             0.017
    Sales and related                       -0.564             0.016

                                            34 
 
    Office and administrative support       -0.356            0.012
    Farming, fishing, and forestry          -0.349            0.011
    Construction and extraction             -0.547            0.033
    Installation, maintenance, and repair   -0.255            0.015
    Construction and extraction             -0.304            0.017
    Production                              -0.321            0.014
    Transportation and material moving      -0.379            0.014
    Constant term                            7.846            0.113
    Adjusted R2                                      0.519            0.491
    Number of observations                           76,200           76,788
 




                                            35 
 
Table A3: Policy simulations under various assumptions using Specification 2 of Table A2

                                                      1         2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9       10
                                                    (No
                                                 frictions)
 Parameters
 Tax on purchase of Work Permit (%)                  0          0       10       10       10       20       20       20       30       40
 Extra cost of living in US (% of US earnings)       0          0        0       10       10       10       20       20       20       20
 Remittance "tax" on net earnings in US ()           0         10       10       10       20       20       20       30       30       30
 Simulation results
 Price of Work Permit ($)                         28,700      23,700   22,100   19,900   19,700   18,200   15,400   15,000   14,000   13,100
 Average earnings of sellers ($)                  15,800      12,800   12,400   10,300   10,300   9,900    8,400    8,400    7,400    7,000
 Expected earnings of buyers in the US ($)        48,400      50,500   51,100   52,800   53,800   55,300   57,800   58,100   60,100   60,800
 Number of sellers(buyers) (M)                     47.3        36.2     34.7     31.6     27.7     26.4     22.1     22.0     19.0     18.1
 Total earnings of migrants ($B)                   2273        1823     1759     1552     1449     1366     1175     1119     1048     1024
 Total earnings of migrants net of total            7.4         6.6      6.5      6.2      5.7      5.4      4.8      4.6      4.4      4.4
 earnings of natives as % of the US GDP
 Tax revenue from migrants' earnings ($B)          443         362      352      315      295      283      247      233      222      218
 Net gains for sellers ($B)                        608         394      337      266      261      220      153      145      125      109
 The US poverty rate (excluding migrants)          7.9         8.9      9.1      9.3      9.6      9.8      10.5     10.5     10.7     10.8
