The Large Effects of a Small Win: How Past Rankings Shape the Behavior of Voters and
Candidates
Vincent Pons and Clémence Tricaud
NBER Working Paper No. 26599
December 2019, Revised in August 2020
JEL No. D72,D83,K16

                                         ABSTRACT

Candidates' placements in polls, past elections, or early rounds of a multi-round election can be
powerful coordination devices for parties and voters. Using a regression discontinuity design in
French two-round elections, we show that candidates who place first by only a small margin in
the first round are more likely to stay in the race, win, and win conditionally on staying in than
those who come in a very close second. The impacts are even larger for ranking second instead of
third, and also present for third instead of fourth. Rankings' effects are largest when candidates
have the same political orientation (making coordination more important), but remain strong
when two candidates only qualify for the second round (and coordination is not needed). They
stem from allied parties agreeing on which candidate should drop out, voters coordinating their
choice, and the "bandwagon effect" of wanting to vote for the winner.


Vincent Pons
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 289
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vpons@hbs.edu

Clémence Tricaud
68 Bd Edgar Quinet
75014
France
Paris
France
tricaudclemence@gmail.com
  The Large Effects of a Small Win: How Past Rankings Shape the
                            Behavior of Voters and Candidates

                                 Vincent Pons            Clemence Tricaud

                                                 August 2020



                                                    Abstract

      Candidates' placements in polls, past elections, or early rounds of a multi-round election can be powerful
coordination devices for parties and voters. Using a regression discontinuity design in French two-round
elections, we show that candidates who place first by only a small margin in the first round are more likely
to stay in the race, win, and win conditionally on staying in than those who come in a very close second.
The impacts are even larger for ranking second instead of third, and also present for third instead of fourth.
Rankings' effects are largest when candidates have the same political orientation (making coordination more
important), but remain strong when two candidates only qualify for the second round (and coordination is
not needed). They stem from allied parties agreeing on which candidate should drop out, voters coordinating
their choice, and the "bandwagon effect" of wanting to vote for the winner.

    Keywords: Strategic voting, Coordination, Bandwagon effect, Regression discontinuity design, Elec-
tions
      JEL Codes: D72, K16




   
     Harvard Business School and NBER; vpons@hbs.edu (corresponding author)
   
     UCLA Anderson; clemence.tricaud@anderson.ucla.edu
    
     For suggestions that have improved this article, we are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Abhijit Banerjee, Laurent
Bouton, Pierre Boyer, Julia Cagé, Enrico Cantoni, Gary Cox, Rafael Di Tella, Allan Drazen, Andrew Eggers, Jon
Fiva, Jeffry Frieden, Olivier Gossner, Benjamin Marx, Shom Mazumder, Benjamin Olken, Thomas Piketty, James
Snyder, Matthew Weinzierl, as well as seminar participants at Berkeley, CREST, Ecole Polytechnique, European
University Institute, New York University, Paris School of Economics, Princeton University, Rice University, Stanford
University, Texas A&M, University of Bologna, University of Maryland, and conference participants at the APSA
Annual Meeting, the Economics and Politics Workshop, the Annual Congress of the European Economic Association,
the International Conference on Mathematical Optimization for Fair Social Decisions, the Virtual Political Economy
Workshop at the Norwegian Business School, and Sciences Po Quanti. We thank Sebastian Calonico, Matias Cattaneo,
Max Farrell, and Rocio Titiunik for guiding us through the use of their RDD Stata package "rdrobust" and for sharing
their upgrades; Nicolas Sauger for his help with the collection of the 1958, 1962, 1967, 1968, 1973, 1981, and
1988 French parliamentary election results; Abel François for sharing his data on 1993, 1997, and 2002 candidates'
campaign expenditures; Paul-Adrien Hyppolite for the excellent research assistance he provided at the onset of the
project; and Eric Dubois for his outstanding work of data entry and cleaning.


                                                         1
1    Introduction
Elections are massive coordination games. While some voters make their choice based only on
their own preferences (e.g., Spenkuch, 2018; Pons and Tricaud, 2018), others will strategically
shift their support away from their preferred candidate toward one they like less but expect to have
a better chance of winning (e.g., Duverger, 1954; Myerson and Weber, 1993; Cox, 1997; Anagol
and Fujiwara, 2016). Similarly, candidates can decide whether or not to enter the race based on the
fraction of the electorate they expect to vote for them versus their competitors. They might choose
to stay out of the race if they foresee that they will receive few votes or that their presence could
divide their camp and undermine their cause.
     Predicting the behavior of the entire electorate and adjusting one's own decisions accordingly
is challenging both for voters and candidates. Opinion polls and previous electoral results may
be useful sources of information. However, despite a large body of evidence that the overall in-
formedness of political actors matters (e.g., Hall and Snyder, 2015; Le Pennec and Pons, 2019),
little is known about which specific pieces of information they use to make their decisions, and
how coordination between them actually happens.
     In this paper, we focus on one specific type of information: the ranking of candidates by
performance in polls, previous elections, or a previous round of the same election. While past
and predicted vote shares provide detailed information on the distribution of preferences, rough-
hewn candidate rankings can serve as a coordination device in and of themselves. When more than
two candidates are in the running, their past rankings can be used by strategic voters as a focal point
to coordinate on the same subset of candidates. Past rankings can also be used by sister parties to
determine which of their candidates should drop out in order to increase their collective chance
of victory. These mechanisms, which we henceforth refer to as "strategic coordination," can be
reinforced by behavioral forces such as a "bandwagon effect": voters who gain satisfaction by
being on the winning side might decide to "jump on the bandwagon" and rally behind candidates
who won or had a higher rank in the past, if they are perceived to be more likely to win in the
future.
     We estimate the impact of past rankings on the decisions of voters and candidates, and ex-
amine the role played by strategic coordination and the desire to vote for the winner. To isolate
the effect of rankings from the effects of differences in past vote shares (e.g., Knight and Schiff,
2010), we use a regression discontinuity design (RDD) and compare the likelihood of running,
the likelihood of winning, and the vote share obtained by candidates who had previously received
close-to-identical numbers of votes but ranked just below or just above one another.
     We implement this strategy in 26 French local and parliamentary elections from 1958 to 2017,
using a total of 22,557 individual races. In these elections, the winner is chosen by a two-round


                                                  2
plurality voting rule. Up to three or four candidates can qualify for the second round. This enables
us to measure the effect on second-round outcomes of placing first in the first round (instead of
second), second (instead of third), and third (instead of fourth), and to check how these effects
vary with the number and type of other candidates who qualify for the second round. While the
qualification of more than two candidates for the second round is an unusual feature of the elections
we study, our estimates carry broader implications for any first-past-the-post election in which pre-
electoral information on candidate rankings is available from previous rounds or opinion polls. In
addition, all candidates who qualify for the second round of the elections in our sample can decide
to drop out of the race ­ similarly as candidates who consider participating in any election may
eventually decide to stay out of it. We can thus estimate the impact of first-round rankings both on
voter choice in the second round and on candidate decision to run.
     Our results show that rankings affect the outcome of elections substantially. In the first stage
of our analysis, we run an RDD on the vote share difference between the top-two candidates in the
first round and find that placing first instead of second increases a candidate's likelihood to stay
in the race by 5.6 percentage points and their likelihood to win by 5.8 percentage points. Placing
second instead of third has even larger effects, of respectively 23.5 and 9.9 percentage points.
Coming in third instead of fourth increases a candidate's likelihood to stay in by 14.6 percentage
points and to win by 2.2 percentage points. The effects of past ranking are present both for left-
wing and right-wing candidates, sizable in both local and parliamentary elections, and as large
today as in previous decades.
     We investigate whether the overall effects on winning are fully explained by the effect on a
candidate's decision to stay in the race or whether they are also driven by an effect on vote shares
and winning conditional on staying in, with voters rallying behind higher-ranked candidates. We
use a bounding strategy to estimate effects conditional on candidates' presence in the second round,
in order to deal with the fact that lower- and higher-ranked candidates who decide to stay in the
race may be of different types. We find that placing first instead of second increases a candidate's
vote share by more than 1.3 percentage points and likelihood of winning conditional on staying in
the race by more than 2.9 percentage points. The lower bounds on the effects of ranking second
instead of third (resp. third instead of fourth) are 4.0 and 6.9 percentage points (resp. 2.5 and 3.0).
Within districts, the effects of ranking on vote shares are lower in precincts in which the fraction
of non-voters is higher, and they increase with the fraction of people who voted for the top-two
candidates in the first round. These patterns suggest that effects on voter behavior are driven by
active voters hesitating between the top-two candidates more than the differential mobilization of
nonvoters.
     When we disentangle the mechanisms responsible for the effects of rankings on candidate and
voter choice, we find that the effects are much larger when the higher- and lower-ranked candidates


                                                  3
have the same political orientation. This can come from the fact that shared orientation makes
voter and candidate coordination against ideologically distant candidates more desirable, but also
from the fact that it makes rallying behind the higher-ranked candidate less costly, whatever the
underlying motive may be.
    To investigate the extent to which coordination explains our results, we focus on elections
in which three or more candidates qualify for the second round (and rankings can be used to
coordinate on a subset of them) and compare the effects of placing first instead of second depending
on the challenge posed by the third candidate. We find that the effects on running and winning
decrease with the gap between the second and third candidates' vote shares. This suggests that
coordination between the first and second candidates (which is more critical when the gap with
the third is narrower) explains part of the effects. In addition, the effects of placing first instead of
second are larger when the ideological distance between the top-two candidates is lower than their
distance with the third candidate (making coordination between the top two more desirable).
    To test whether strategic coordination suffices to explain our results, we turn to elections in
which the third candidate does not qualify. In these elections, there is no room or need for coordi-
nation. All voters should vote for their preferred candidate among the top two, and candidates do
not risk contributing to the victory of a disliked competitor by running. Nonetheless, we find that
the effects of ranking first instead of second on running and on winning, conditional on running,
remain large. These results indicate that candidate dropouts are not only driven by the desire to
avoid the victory of a third candidate: they often stem from agreements between left-wing parties,
which consider that when the only two candidates qualifying for the second round are on the left,
the first-round choice of their supporters should determine the winner. In addition, effects condi-
tional on staying in reveal that the desire to be on the winning side is an important driver of voter
behavior and that it generates a bandwagon effect swaying many elections. A complementary in-
terpretation for the effects on vote choice is that voters update their beliefs about the quality of
candidates who qualify for the second round based on their placements in the first. Importantly,
this interpretation can only hold if voters are unaware that the higher- and lower-ranked candidates
obtained nearly identical vote shares, in elections at the threshold. We cannot reject that social
learning contributes to the effects of rankings, but we provide evidence that its role is likely to be
limited.
    Finally, we consider the possibility that factors other than voter choice drive the effects of
rankings on a candidate's likelihood of winning and on their vote share conditional on staying in.
We show that the effects are unlikely to be explained by differences in the campaign expenditures of
the higher- and lower-ranked candidates or by the decisions of other qualifying candidates to stay in
the race or drop out. Furthermore, we collected a total of 76,679 election-related newspaper articles
which were released between the two rounds of all local and parliamentary elections since 1997.


                                                   4
We do not find any effect on the amount of coverage of higher- versus lower-ranked candidates by
newspapers. After reading and annotating a random subset of 517 articles, we also find that the
media do not cover higher-ranked candidates more favorably, either.
    Overall, our analysis reveals that rankings are a public signal of paramount importance, in-
fluencing the choices of many voters and candidates. We further shed light on the motivations
underlying the decisions of political actors. While rankings facilitate strategic coordination among
parties and voters, which can in turn enhance the representativeness of elected leaders, they also
unleash a behavioral bandwagon effect, which may have the opposite consequence. The effects
of rankings should enter in consideration when debating voting rules and regulating the polling
industry, as they are likely to be magnified in voting systems with two rounds or other forms of
sequential voting, and when poll results are released just before the election. Furthermore, our
results have important implications for campaign strategies: The importance of ranking high early
gives candidates strong incentives to front-load some of their voter outreach efforts even if the
effects of persuasive communication may decay over time.


1.1    Contribution to the literature
We contribute to a large political economy literature investigating how voters choose elected of-
ficials, and to a smaller but equally important literature studying how parties' strategies constrain
the set of candidates among whom voters choose.
     Many empirical studies focus on the tension between expressive and strategic motives of voting
(e.g., Fujiwara, 2011; Eggers, 2015; Spenkuch, 2015), and seek to estimate the fractions of citizens
voting based on likely outcomes of the election versus those voting based solely on their preference
among candidates (e.g., Alvarez and Nagler, 2000; Kawai and Watanabe, 2013; Spenkuch, 2018;
Eggers and Vivyan, 2020). In Pons and Tricaud (2018), we use a subset of French two-round
elections used in the present paper, and exploit variation in the presence of a third candidate in the
runoff to assess the extent to which voters behave expressively or strategically.
     Importantly, voters who want to be strategic still need to decide which equilibrium to focus
on. Indeed, models of strategic voting show that voter coordination tends to lead to equilibria in
which two candidates receive most of the votes, but that multiple equilibria of this type generally
exist (Palfrey, 1989; Myerson and Weber, 1993; Cox, 1997). In that case, public signals may
facilitate convergence to a unique equilibrium. Fey (1997) establishes that a sequence of opinion
polls providing information about the distribution of preferences and strategies in the electorate can
bring voters to focus on the same pair of candidates. Myatt (2007) finds that a single poll observed
by everyone may suffice to generate full coordination (where only two candidates obtain votes) if
it is sufficiently precise. In the absence of poll data, a leader can play a similar role (Dewan and


                                                  5
Myatt, 2007).
     Building on this theoretical work on equilibrium selection, we study how voter coordination
works in practice and document the importance of a specific signal: candidate rankings. We show
that rankings enable the decentralized coordination of strategic voters by serving as focal points:
voters are more likely to coordinate on higher-ranked candidates even in the extreme case where
these candidates obtained exactly the same vote share as lower-ranked ones.
     Beyond the trade-off between expressive and strategic voting, economists and political scien-
tists have long recognized that voter choice can also be influenced by the desire to be on the winning
side (Simon, 1954; Fleitas, 1971; Bartels, 1988). Voters rallying behind the predicted winner will
generate a "bandwagon effect" further increasing her lead. Bandwagon voting can take place in
sequential elections (when late voters learn the choices of early ones) as well as in simultaneous
voting (when voters learn the intentions of others through polls or discussions). Bartels (1985) and
McAllister and Studlar (1991) report that many voters declare favoring candidates they deem most
likely to win, but the authors note that people's assessment of candidate chances may be affected
by their voting intention. This concern of reverse causality is absent from studies documenting
systematic over-reporting of voting for the winner in post-electoral surveys (e.g., Wright, 1993;
Atkeson, 1999), a pattern nonetheless consistent with interpretations other than the desire to side
with the winning candidate, such as respondent selection effects (Gelman et al., 2016) and social
desirability bias. Such survey-specific factors cannot explain the findings of Morton et al. (2015),
who compare electoral results in French territories overseas between elections in which these ter-
ritories voted before or after the overall election outcome had been made public through exit polls.
While this natural experiment is one of the best pieces of evidence of bandwagon voting, the fact
that the reform took place simultaneously in all overseas territories makes it difficult to disentangle
its effect from concomitant factors. We build on this body of work and bring causal evidence on
the bandwagon effect using electoral results of a large number of individual races.1
     Laboratory experiments have identified multiple factors that could explain the tendency of
voters to rally behind leading candidates (e.g., Morton and Williams, 1999; Hung and Plott, 2001;
Morton and Ou, 2015; Agranov et al., 2018), but studies of real elections have generally been
unable to isolate the contribution of the desire to be on the winning side from the fact that voters
may use information about the choice of others as a signal about candidate valence. In contrast, our
effects are unlikely to be driven by such social learning, since they are estimated at the threshold,
where the past vote shares of the higher-and lower-ranked candidates are nearly identical. (See
   1 Similarly to our setting, Kiss and Simonovits (2014) study the bandwagon effect in two-round elections in Hun-
gary. Differently from our strategy, they compare the size of the difference between the first and second candidates'
vote shares in the first and second rounds. They interpret the increase in the winning margin as evidence that first-
round results had a bandwagon effect on second-round vote choices. However, differences between the first and second
rounds other than the availability of first-round results could drive this pattern.



                                                         6
Section 4.4 for a detailed discussion.) Our results showing a preference to vote for the winner
bring empirical support for models assuming that voters gain utility from this choice (Hinich,
1981; Callander, 2007, 2008).2
    Our study design, which consists of estimating the effects of candidate rankings across elec-
toral rounds, draws directly on studies measuring the impact of candidate placements across sep-
arate elections. Following Lee (2008), many papers have examined the impact of ranking first
(instead of second) on future elections and shown that winners of close contests generally benefit
from an incumbency advantage when they run again (e.g., Ferreira and Gyourko, 2009; Kendall
and Rekkas, 2012; Eggers et al., 2015; Erikson and Titiunik, 2015; Lopes da Fonseca, 2017; De
Benedictis-Kessner, 2018; Fiva and Smith, 2018).3 This result is generally attributed to the effect
of holding office, but it could also be driven by the pure effect of placing first. Studying two rounds
of the same election enables us to isolate the latter component. Anagol and Fujiwara (2016) fo-
cus on a second discontinuity. They show that ranking second (instead of third) in past elections
also increases a candidate's likelihood to run in the next one and win it ­ effects they attribute to
strategic coordination by voters.4
    Our paper builds on these studies in four important ways. First, we can estimate the effect of
placing second and third, as well as first (independently from incumbency advantage).
    Second, the short time span (one week) between the first and second rounds helps us isolate
the direct effect of rankings from reinforcing mechanisms that are more likely to matter when
considering elections separated by several years, such as increased notoriety of the higher-ranked
candidates and the lower likelihood of being replaced by another candidate of their party.
    Third, we exploit the diversity of races to demonstrate that strategic coordination and the desire
to be on the winning side both contribute to the impact of rankings. To isolate the latter, we focus
on second rounds in which only two candidates qualify and thus there is no need or even possibility
for strategic coordination.
    Fourth, and most importantly, not only do we study the decisions of voters, but we also shed
light on parties' electoral strategies and coordination, on which there is little causal evidence to
date. On a theoretical level, most models of elections assume an exogenous pool of candidates.
Models with endogenous candidate entry (Osborne and Slivinski, 1996; Besley and Coate, 1997;
Solow, 2016; Dal Bo and Finan, 2018) and exit (Indridason, 2008) pinpoint important mechanisms
   2 The bandwagon effect of candidate rankings is akin to the effects measured in other contexts beyond elections,
such as asset rankings on trading behavior (Hartzmark, 2015), hospitals' rankings on their number of patients and
revenues (Pope, 2009), employees' rankings on their sales (Barankay, 2018), and students' rankings on their academic
performance (Murphy and Weinhardt, 2020).
   3 Many papers studied the incumbency advantage before Lee (2008), but using methods different from regression

discontinuity designs (e.g., Erikson, 1971; Gelman and King, 1990; Cox and Katz, 1996; Ansolabehere et al., 2000).
   4 Laboratory experiments have also found that voters tend to coordinate on candidates placed higher in polls or in

previous rounds of an election game played by the participants (Forsythe et al., 1993; Bouton et al., 2016).



                                                         7
affecting the equilibrium number of competitors, but they focus on the point of view of individual
candidates. Yet, candidates' decision to participate in a race or stay out of it is often constrained
by their party. Agreements between parties can lead to candidate dropouts and restrict the set
of options voters can choose from.5 Parties' coordination may be expected to be more effective
than voters', since it requires the cooperation of a smaller number of actors, and parties have
greater stakes in electoral outcomes. This essential aspect of party politics is difficult to study in
general, because one usually only observes candidates who are actually competing, not those who
considered it but decided to stay out. Since qualification for the second round is entirely determined
by first-round results in the elections we study, we can observe the full set of candidates who are
eligible to compete in the runoff, whether or not they actually stay in the race. This enables us to
cleanly estimate and characterize the contribution of party coordination to the effects of rankings.
We find evidence that dropout agreements between parties of similar orientation are motivated by
the desire to avoid the victory of a candidate of a different orientation as well as other motives,
such as following the first-round choice of their supporters.
     Our results on the effects of rankings on party decisions between rounds contribute to a rich
literature exploring the properties of two-round voting systems (e.g., Osborne and Slivinski, 1996;
Piketty, 2000; Bouton, 2013; Bordignon et al., 2016; Bouton et al., 2019; Cipullo, 2019), and they
echo recent work showing that parties tend to promote candidates ranked higher by voters in open-
list elections (Folke et al., 2016; Meriläinen and Tukiainen, 2016; Cirone et al., 2020) and that their
likelihood to appoint a government increases when they receive more seats or votes (Fujiwara and
Sanz, 2020).
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We provide more details on our setting and
empirical strategy in Section 2. Section 3 presents our main results and Section 4 discusses the
underlying mechanisms. Section 5 concludes.


2        Empirical strategy

2.1      Setting
Our sample includes 14 parliamentary elections and 12 local elections: all parliamentary elections
of the Fifth Republic from 1958 to 2017 except for the 1986 election (which used proportionality
rule), and all local elections from 1979 to 2015.6 Each of these 26 elections took place at a different
    5A  small set of empirical studies emphasize the importance of electoral alliances between parties and examine
factors conducive to such coordination, but the evidence they present is only correlational (e.g., Golder, 2005, 2006;
Blais and Indridason, 2007; Blais and Loewen, 2009).
    6 We do not include local elections held before 1979 as the electoral rule allowed any candidate to run in the second

round, irrespective of their vote share in the first and even if they were absent from the first.



                                                           8
date.7
     Every five years, parliamentary elections elect the National Assembly, the lower house of the
French Parliament. In these elections, each of 577 constituencies elects a Member of Parliament.
Local elections determine the members of the departmental councils, which have authority over
transportation, education, and social assistance, among other areas. France is divided into 101
départements, each of which is further divided into cantons. Until a 2013 reform, local elections
took place every three years. In each département, half of the cantons elected their council member
in any given election, for a length of six years, and the other half of cantons participated in the next
election. After the reform, all cantons participated in elections held every six years and each
canton elected a ticket composed of a man and a woman.8 This new rule applied to the 2015 local
elections. In our analysis, we consider each ticket as a single candidate, since the two candidates on
the ticket organize a common electoral campaign and get elected or defeated together. Henceforth,
we define both assembly constituencies and local cantons as "districts."
     Parliamentary and local elections both use a two-round plurality voting rule. A candidate can
only win directly in the first round if they obtain more than 50 percent of the candidate votes and
if their number of votes is also greater than 25 percent of the registered citizens. In most races,
no candidate wins in the first round, the first round results are publicized, and the second round
takes place one week later. In that case, the candidate who receives the largest vote share in the
second round wins the election. This type of voting rule is not uncommon: next to plurality voting,
uninominal elections with two rounds are among the most common electoral systems in the world
(Farrell, 2011; Bormann and Golder, 2013). The specific conditions required to qualify for the
second round of French local and parliamentary elections are more unusual.
     The set of candidates who qualify for the second round includes the two candidates with the
highest vote share in the first round, independently of their exact vote share, as well as any other
candidate with a vote share higher than a certain threshold. This rule is essential for our study
design, as it enables us to estimate the impact of placing first instead of second, second instead of
third, and third instead of fourth. The qualification threshold changed over time: the required vote
share was 10 percent of the registered citizens in local elections, until 2011, when it was increased
to 12.5 percent.9 In parliamentary elections, the required vote share was 5 percent of the voters in
1958 and 1962, it was changed to 10 percent of the registered citizens in 1966, and to 12.5 percent
   7 In 1988, both parliamentary and local elections were held, but in different months. The 2001 and 2008 local
elections took place at the same date as mayoral elections, and the 1992, 1998, and 2004 local elections at the same
date as regional elections. Our results remain very similar and, if anything, only increase in magnitude and statistical
significance, when we exclude these elections (see Appendix Tables E6 and E7).
   8 The 2013 reform further reduced the number of cantons from 4035 to 2054, to leave the total number of council

members roughly unchanged.
   9 In the 2011 local elections, the threshold remained at 10 percent in the 9 cantons belonging to Mayotte départe-

ment.



                                                           9
of the registered citizens in 1976.
    Importantly, all qualifying candidates can decide to drop out of the race between rounds. This
allows us to estimate the impact of first-round rankings both on voters' choice of candidate in the
second round and on candidates' decision to stay in the second round. Candidates who choose to
stay in the race do not have to pay any extra administrative fee. In the second round, voters can
only cast a ballot for a candidate who stayed in. In polling booths, paper ballots bearing the names
of these candidates are ordered by alphabetical order (in municipalities below 1,000 inhabitants) or
by random order (in municipalities above 1,000 inhabitants), independently of first-round rankings.


2.2       Data
After excluding races with a unique candidate in the first round and those with no second round, our
sample comprises 16,222 races from local elections and 6,335 races from parliamentary elections,
for a total of 22,557. We obtained official electoral results from the French Ministry of the Interior
for the 1993 to 2017 parliamentary elections and the 1992 to 2015 local elections, and digitized
results from printed booklets for the 1958 to 1988 parliamentary elections and the 1979 to 1988
local elections.10 Appendix Table A1 gives the breakdown of the number of races by election type
and year.
     To measure the impact of ranking first instead of second (henceforth "1vs2"), we further ex-
clude races in which two of the top three candidates obtain an identical number of votes in the
first round (sample 1).11 Indeed, we do not have any way to choose which candidate to treat as
first, when the top two obtained the same number of votes, and which candidate to compare to the
first, when the two candidates ranked below her obtained the same number of votes. To measure
the impact of ranking second instead of third (henceforth "2vs3"), we restrict our sample to races
where at least three candidates compete in the first round and the third qualifies for the second
round, and we exclude races in which two of the top four candidates receive an identical number
of votes in the first round (sample 2). To measure the impact of ranking third instead of fourth
(henceforth "3vs4"), we restrict our sample to races where at least four candidates compete in the
first round and the third and fourth qualify for the second round, and we exclude races in which
two candidates among the second, third, fourth, and fifth obtain an identical number of votes in the
first round (sample 3).
  10 We  had to digitize electoral results prior to 1988 because these results were only available from the website of the
CDSP (Centre de Données Socio-Politiques, https://cdsp.sciences-po.fr/en/), in a format aggregating the vote shares
of all candidates sharing the same political label and without candidates' names. Instead, our identification strategy
requires knowing the exact vote share and rank of each candidate. In addition, we use the names of candidates to infer
their gender and to identify candidates who were already present in previous elections.
   11 By "two of the top three candidates", we mean two of the top-two candidates (i.e. the top two) if two candidates

only competed in the first round, and two of the top three candidates if three or more candidates competed in the first
round. The same applies to the next restrictions.


                                                           10
    Thanks to the large set of local and parliamentary elections we consider, and to the large number
of races in each election, our sample includes many close races: the vote share difference between
the candidates ranked first and second (resp. second and third, and third and fourth) is lower than
2 percentage points in 2,581 races in sample 1, in 1,874 races in sample 2, and in 758 races in
sample 3.
    Table 1 shows descriptive statistics on the full sample. In the average race, 6.5 candidates
competed in the first round, 63.6 percent of registered citizens participated in it, and 61.3 percent
cast a valid vote for one of the candidates (henceforth "candidate votes"), as opposed to casting
a blank or null vote. In the second round, the number of competing candidates ranged from 1 to
6, with an average of 2.1. Turnout was slightly higher than in the first round (62.8 percent on
average) but the fraction of candidate votes was slightly lower (59.5 percent). Overall, as shown
by the descriptive statistics reported in Appendix Tables A2, A3, and A4, close races in samples 1,
2, and 3 are very similar to other races in these samples.

                                            Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                  Mean           Sd       Min         Max          Obs.
                 Panel A. 1st round
                 Registered voters    28,2954                 28,157       258      200,205 22,557
                 Turnout               0.636                   0.125      0.094      0.921  22,557
                 Candidate votes       0.613                   0.122      0.093      0.914  22,557
                 Number of candidates   6.5                     3.1         2         48    22,557

                 Panel B. 2nd round
                 Turnout                          0.628       0.134       0.117      0.968       22,557
                 Candidate votes                  0.595       0.138       0.103      0.963       22,557
                 Number of candidates              2.1         0.4          1          6         22,557


    The statistics shown in Table 1 are at the race level. By contrast, the analysis below is conducted
at the candidate level and uses exactly two observations per race, for the higher- and lower-ranked
candidates. We allocate candidates to six political orientations (far-left, left, center, right, far-right,
and other) based on labels attributed to them by the Ministry of the Interior.12
  12 To attribute political labels to candidates, the French Ministry of the Interior takes into account their self-reported
political affiliation, party endorsement, past candidacies, and public declarations, among other indicators. Appendix
G shows our mapping between these political labels and the six orientations, for each election.




                                                            11
2.3     Evaluation framework
We exploit close races to estimate the impact of candidates' first-round rankings on their second-
round outcomes. To measure the impact of ranking 1vs2, we use two observations per race, corre-
sponding to the candidates placed first and second in the first round, and define the running variable
X1 as the difference between each candidate's vote share and the vote share of the other top-two
candidate. For the candidate ranked first, the running variable is equal to her vote share minus the
vote share of the candidate ranked second. For the candidate ranked second, it is equal to her vote
share minus the vote share of the candidate ranked first:
                                   
                                   voteshare - voteshare                 i f ranked 1st
                                            1            2
                              X1 =
                                   voteshare - voteshare                 i f ranked 2nd
                                                    2                1

    Similarly, for 2vs3 and 3vs4, we define the running variables X2 and X3 as:
                                   
                                   voteshare - voteshare                 i f ranked 2nd
                                            2            3
                              X2 =
                                   voteshare - voteshare                 i f ranked 3rd
                                                    3                2
                                   
                                   voteshare - voteshare                 i f ranked 3rd
                                            3            4
                              X3 =
                                   voteshare - voteshare                 i f ranked 4th
                                                    4                3

    We define the treatment variable T as a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate had a higher rank
in the first round (X > 0) and 0 otherwise, and we evaluate the impact of placing higher with the
following specification:
                                Yi = 1 +  Ti + 1 Xi + 2 Xi Ti + µi ,                          (1)

where Yi is the outcome of interest for candidate i. We run this specification separately for 1vs2,
2vs3, and 3vs4. It estimates the impact of rankings at the limit, when both candidates have an
identical vote share. Therefore, it enables us to isolate the impact of ranking from the difference in
vote shares.
    The specification in equation [1] uses a non-parametric approach, following Imbens and Lemieux
(2008) and Calonico et al. (2014). It amounts to fitting two linear regressions on, respectively, can-
didates close to the left of the threshold, and close to the right. In Appendix C, we show the
robustness of the results to a quadratic specification, which includes Xi2 and its interaction with Ti
as regressors. In all regressions, we cluster our standard errors at the district level.13
  13 Calonico et al. (2014)'s "rdrobust" command only allows us to cluster separately on each side of the discontinuity,

implying that the higher- and lower-ranked candidates competing in the same race fall in separate clusters. We check
that our main results are robust to using the conventional estimation procedure (with the command "ivreg2") and
clustering the standard errors at the district level, with clusters encompassing observations located on both sides of the



                                                           12
    Our main specification uses Calonico et al. (2014)'s estimation procedure, which provides
robust confidence interval estimators, and the MSERD bandwidths developed by Calonico et al.
(2019), which reduce potential bias the most. We test the robustness of our results to using a wide
range of other bandwidths, including the optimal bandwidths computed according to Imbens and
Kalyanaraman (2012) and tighter bandwidths corresponding to half of the MSERD bandwidths.
All these bandwidths are data-driven and, therefore, vary with the samples and outcomes used in
the regressions.


2.4     Identification assumption
Our identification assumption is that all candidate characteristics change continuously around the
threshold and, therefore, that the only discrete change occurring at this threshold is the shift in
candidate rankings. Sorting of candidates across the discontinuity only threatens the validity of
this assumption if it occurs exactly at the cutoff, with candidates of a particular type pushed just
above or just below it (de la Cuesta and Imai, 2016). This would require some candidates to be
able to predict election outcomes and deploy campaign resources with extreme accuracy, which
is unlikely for at least two reasons. First, unpredictable factors including weather conditions on
Election Day make the outcome of the election uncertain (Eggers et al., 2015). Second, very
limited information is available about voters' intentions in the first round of French parliamentary
or local races. Polls specific to a given district are very rare during parliamentary elections, and
nonexistent during local ones.
     To bring empirical support for the identification assumption, it is customary for RDDs to check
if there is a jump in the density of the running variable at the threshold, using a test designed by
McCrary (2008). In our setting, this test is satisfied by construction since we consider the same set
of races on both sides of the threshold and, in each race, the higher- and lower-ranked candidates
are equally distant to the cutoff (see Appendix Figure A1).
     Similarly, first-round variables such as district size, the total number of candidates, voter
turnout, or the candidate's vote share are smooth by construction at the threshold.14
     To provide additional support for the identification assumption, we consider variables whose
distribution at the threshold is not mechanically symmetric: the candidate's gender; whether she
ran in the previous election, in the same département and then in the exact same district; whether
she won a race in the previous election, in the same département and then in the exact same
threshold (see Appendix Table C5).
   14 Appendix Figure A2 plots the candidate's vote share in the first round against the running variable. We observe

that in sample 1, the candidates ranked marginally first and second in the first round received around 30 percent of
candidate votes at the threshold, on average. In sample 2 (resp. 3), the first-round vote share of candidates ranked
marginally second and third (resp. third and fourth) was 20 percent (resp. 18 percent) at the threshold.



                                                         13
district; whether she runs with or without the label of a political party;15 a set of six dummies
indicating her political orientation; whether this orientation is the same as the incumbent's; the
number of candidates of her orientation who were present in the first round; her strength in the
first round, defined as the sum of first-round vote shares of all candidates of the same orientation;
and the average strength of her orientation at the national level in the first round. We conduct the
following general test for imbalance. We regress the treatment variable T on these variables, use
the coefficients from this regression to predict treatment status for each candidate, and test whether
the predicted value jumps at the threshold. To avoid dropping observations, for each regressor, we
include a dummy equal to one when the variable is missing and replace missings by 0s.
     Figure 1 shows the lack of any jump at the cutoff for predicted assignment to first rank (instead
of second), second rank (instead of third), and third rank (instead of fourth). In this graph as
well as all the graphs showing the effects of rankings, each dot indicates the average value of the
outcome within a certain bin of the running variable. Observations corresponding to higher-ranked
candidates are on the right of the threshold, and those corresponding to lower-ranked ones are on
the left. We fit a quadratic polynomial on each side of the threshold, to facilitate visualization. As
shown in Table 2, the coefficients are close to 0 and nonsignificant.
     We also examine whether there is a discontinuity in any of the variables used to predict treat-
ment, taken individually. The corresponding graphs and tables are included in Appendix B, along
with a more detailed description of the placebo variables. Overall, one coefficient out of 48 is sig-
nificant at the 1 percent level, 3 are significant at the 5 percent level, and 4 at the 10 percent level.
Since the general balance test shows no discontinuity, we are confident that there is no systematic
sorting of candidates at the threshold. In addition, the results shown in the rest of the paper are
robust in sign, magnitude, and statistical significance to controlling for all the baseline variables
(see Appendix Table C4).
  15 Weconstructed this dummy variable based on the political labels attributed by the Ministry of the Interior (see
Appendix G).




                                                        14
                                                                                                  Figure 1: General balance test

                                                         1vs2                                                                                                                             2vs3
                              1                                                                                                                           1



                              .8                                                                                                                          .8
 Predicted treatment status




                                                                                                                             Predicted treatment status
                              .6                                                                                                                          .6



                              .4                                                                                                                          .4



                              .2                                                                                                                          .2



                              0                                                                                                                           0
                                   -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                                .2          .3                                       -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                                  Running variable 1vs2                                                                                                            Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                                           3vs4
                                                                                       1



                                                                                       .8
                                                          Predicted treatment status




                                                                                       .6



                                                                                       .4



                                                                                       .2



                                                                                       0
                                                                                            -.3     -.2        -.1         0            .1                                 .2       .3
                                                                                                                  Running variable 3vs4


Notes: Dots represent the local averages of the predicted treatment status (vertical axis). Averages are
calculated within quantile-spaced bins of the running variable (horizontal axis). The running variable (the
vote share difference between the two candidates in the first round) is measured as percentage points. The
graph is truncated at 30 percentage points on the horizontal axis to accommodate for outliers. Continuous
lines are a quadratic fit.




                                                                                                                       15
                                      Table 2: General balance test

                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)
                   Outcome                               Predicted treatment
                                                   1vs2         2vs3         3vs4
                                                (sample 1) (sample 2) (sample 3)
                   Treatment                       0.000        0.001        0.009
                                                  (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.007)
                   Robust p-value                  0.798        0.985        0.312
                   Observations left              11,915        5,170        1,205
                   Observations right             11,915        5,170        1,205
                   Polyn. order                      1            1            1
                   Bandwidth                       0.106        0.065        0.037
                   Mean, left of threshold         0.476        0.486        0.491
Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. The outcome is the value of the treatment predicted
by the baseline variables listed in the text. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate
placed higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1
on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean,
left of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.



3     Main results

3.1    Impact on winning
We first measure the impact of candidates' first-round rankings on their unconditional likelihood
to win the race: an outcome defined whether the candidate participates in the second round or not,
and equal to 1 if the candidate wins, and 0 if she stays in the second round and loses or if she drops
out between rounds.
    Figure 2 plots the likelihood that the higher- and lower-ranked candidates win the election
against the running variable, for each of the three discontinuities. We observe a clear jump at the
cutoff in the first plot: ranking 1vs2 in the first round has a large and positive impact on winning
the second. The jump is even larger for the impact of ranking 2vs3 and it remains visible for the
impact of ranking 3vs4, but it is smaller: very few candidates ranked third and fourth in the first
round are in a position to win the second round, limiting the scope for impact.




                                                     16
                                                                                                      Figure 2: Impact on winning

                                1                                                                                                                             1



                                .8                                                                                                                            .8
 Probability to win 2nd round




                                                                                                                               Probability to win 2nd round
                                .6                                                                                                                            .6



                                .4                                                                                                                            .4



                                .2                                                                                                                            .2



                                0                                                                                                                             0
                                     -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                                 .2          .3                                        -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                                    Running variable 1vs2                                                                                                              Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                           1



                                                                                           .8
                                                            Probability to win 2nd round




                                                                                           .6



                                                                                           .4



                                                                                           .2



                                                                                           0
                                                                                                -.3    -.2        -.1         0            .1                                  .2       .3
                                                                                                                     Running variable 3vs4



Notes: Dots represent the local averages of the probability that the candidate wins the second round (vertical
axis). Averages are calculated within quantile-spaced bins of the running variable (horizontal axis). The
running variable (the vote share difference between the two candidates in the first round) is measured as
percentage points. The graph is truncated at 30 percentage points on the horizontal axis to accommodate for
outliers. Continuous lines are a quadratic fit.


    Table 3 presents the formal estimates of the effects. On average, ranking 1vs2 in the first round
increases the likelihood to win the election by 5.8 percentage points (column 1), which represents
a 12.7 percent increase compared to the average chance of victory of close second candidates at
the threshold. Ranking 2vs3 has an even larger effect, of 9.9 percentage points (column 2): it more
than triples the likelihood of victory of close third candidates. The effect of ranking 3vs4 is smaller
in magnitude (2.2 percentage points, column 3), but it amounts to a fifth-fold increase compared
to the very small fraction of races won by close fourth candidates. The effects of ranking 1vs2
and 2vs3 are significant at the 1 percent level and the effect of ranking 3vs4 is significant at the 10
percent level.


                                                                                                                          17
                                          Table 3: Impact on winning

                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)
                     Outcome                                                 nd
                                                         Probability to win 2 round
                                                       1vs2          2vs3        3vs4
                                                    (sample 1) (sample 2) (sample 3)
                     Treatment                       0.058*** 0.099***          0.022*
                                                      (0.017)      (0.013)      (0.011)
                     Robust p-value                    0.004        0.000        0.052
                     Observations left                 8,027        4,398        1,116
                     Observations right                8,027        4,398        1,116
                     Polyn. order                        1             1           1
                     Bandwidth                         0.066        0.052        0.033
                     Mean, left of threshold           0.458        0.048        0.005
Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. The outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate
wins the second round. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher in
the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of
the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the
threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.


    To check the robustness of the results to alternative specifications and bandwidth choices, we
estimate the treatment impacts using a quadratic specification (Appendix Table C1), the optimal
bandwidths computed according to Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) (Appendix Table C2), tighter
bandwidths obtained by dividing the MSERD bandwidths by 2 (Appendix Table C3), and con-
trolling for baseline variables (Appendix Table C4).16 All these regressions use Calonico et al.
(2014)'s estimation procedure. The estimates obtained using these different specifications are very
close in magnitude and they remain statistically significant. Appendix Table C5 shows that our
results are also robust to using district-level clusters encompassing observations located on both
sides of the threshold, with the conventional estimation procedure. Finally, the effects of ranking
2vs3 are robust to excluding races in which the second candidate is less than 2 percentage points
behind the first in the first round, and the effects of ranking 3vs4 to excluding races in which the
third candidate is less than 2 percentage points behind the second. This indicates that our estimates
are not driven by cases in which several vote share discontinuities overlap (Appendix Tables C6
and C7).
  16 Appendix  Figure C1 shows the robustness of the effects to a large set of bandwidth choices, using both a polyno-
mial of order 1 and 2.


                                                         18
    The effects of rankings on winning the race can result both from an increased likelihood to stay
in the second round, as any qualifying candidate can decide to drop out, and from an increased
likelihood to win the election conditional on staying in, if voters rally behind higher-ranked candi-
dates. We now use our RDD framework to estimate the effects of rankings on both outcomes and
disentangle these two channels. We also estimate the impact on vote shares conditional on staying
in the race, to determine which fraction of the electorate drives the impact on winning conditional
on staying.


3.2       Impact on staying in the race
Figure 3 plots both the likelihood of staying in the second round (in blue) and the likelihood of
winning (in red, replicating Figure 2) against the running variable, for each discontinuity. The
quadratic polynomial fit for staying in the second round indicates a large upward jump at the cutoff
for ranking first instead of second (1vs2). The jump is even more dramatic for ranking 2vs3 and
3vs4, and in both cases it is larger than the discontinuity observed for winning.
    Consistent with the graphical analysis, the estimates reported in Table 4 indicate that ranking
1vs2 increases qualifying candidates' likelihood to run in the second round by 5.6 percentage
points (6.0 percent of the mean at the threshold on the left): while 5.9 percent of close second
candidates decide not to enter the second round, almost all first place candidates do (column 1).
Ranking 2vs3 and 3vs4 have larger effects: they increase running in the second round by 23.5
percentage points (41.1 percent) and 14.6 percentage points (48.7 percent), respectively (columns
3 and 5). All three effects are significant at the 1 percent level.
    Once again, these effects have a similar magnitude and remain statistically significant when
using alternative specifications, bandwidths, or estimation procedures, and when excluding races
with overlapping discontinuities (see Appendix C).
    There is ample anecdotal evidence that political parties endorsing candidates often have a say
in their decision to stay in the race or drop out. The effects of rankings on this outcome could
therefore reflect in part choices that were made by parties. We find some support for this view by
comparing the effects on running in the second round for candidates with and without party labels.
As shown in Appendix Table A5, effects of ranking 2vs3 on these two types of candidates are
of similar magnitude, but ranking 1vs2 and ranking 3vs4 increase the likelihood of staying in by
about twice and thrice as much for party candidates as for non-affiliated candidates, respectively.
Interestingly, Appendix Table A6 shows that incumbents are less likely to drop out of the race as
a result of having a lower rank in the first round, suggesting that they are more able to withstand
outside pressure to do so, including from their party.17 We discuss the role of parties and the
  17 In   Appendix Tables A5 and A6, the samples are restricted to candidates with a specific characteristic (running



                                                          19
motivations underlying their choices at greater length in Sections 4.2 through 4.4.


                                    Figure 3: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning

                                           1vs2                                                                                               2vs3
  1                                                                                              1


  .8                                                                                             .8


  .6                                                                                             .6


  .4                                                                                             .4


  .2                                                                                             .2


  0                                                                                              0
       -.3       -.2          -.1            0            .1             .2              .3            -.3          -.2          -.1            0            .1           .2         .3
                                    Running variable 1vs2                                                                              Running variable 2vs3

             Probability to run in 2nd round         Probability to win 2nd round                              Probability to run in 2nd round        Probability to win 2nd round



                                                                                              3vs4
                                               1


                                               .8


                                               .6


                                               .4


                                               .2


                                               0
                                                    -.3         -.2           -.1            0            .1              .2             .3
                                                                                    Running variable 3vs4

                                                            Probability to run in 2nd round           Probability to win 2nd round




Notes: Triangles (resp. circles) represent the local averages of the probability that the candidate runs (resp.
wins) in the second round (vertical axis). Other notes as in Figure 2.
under a party label or not, and being an incumbent or not). The number of candidates satisfying these criteria varies
across races. Therefore, the regressions shown in these tables include different numbers of observations on the two
sides of the threshold, unlike our main regressions using exactly two observations per race. In Table A6, we define
as incumbent any candidate who won a race in the same département in the last election. The results are robust to
restricting the definition to candidates who won the last race in the exact same district (Table A7). We do not show
the effects of ranking 3vs4 separately for incumbents and non-incumbents because the number of incumbents among
close third and fourth candidates is very low.




                                                                                          20
                          Table 4: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning

                                   (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)       (5)            (6)
      Outcome                              1vs2                            2vs3                     3vs4
                                        (sample1)                       (sample 2)             (sample 3)
                                  Run              Win             Run             Win        Run           Win
      Treatment                 0.056***      0.058***           0.235***     0.099***      0.146***       0.022*
                                 (0.005)          (0.017)        (0.018)          (0.013)   (0.040)        (0.011)
      Robust p-value              0.000           0.004           0.000           0.000      0.003         0.052
      Observations left          12,272           8,027           5,347           4,398      1,169         1,116
      Observations right         12,272           8,027           5,347           4,398      1,169         1,116
      Polyn. order                  1               1               1                1         1             1
      Bandwidth                   0.109           0.066           0.068           0.052      0.036         0.033
      Mean, left of threshold     0.941           0.458           0.572           0.048      0.300         0.005

Notes: In columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs
(resp. wins) in the second round. Other notes as in Table 3.


3.3      Impact on winning and vote shares conditional on staying in the second
         round
We now turn to the second channel which might underlie the impacts of rankings on winning: an
increased vote share and likelihood of winning conditional on staying in the second round, either
because active voters rally behind higher-ranked candidates or because these candidates manage to
mobilize a larger fraction of their supporters.

Bounds on the conditional effects of rankings

To estimate these effects, we cannot simply run an RDD on elections in which both the lower-
and higher-ranked candidates decide to remain in the second round. Indeed, the fact that close
candidates qualifying for the second round are similar at the threshold does not imply that close
candidates who decide to stay in the second round are similar as well.
    To address this selection issue, we follow Anagol and Fujiwara (2016), who adapt Lee (2009)'s
bounds method to RDDs. To estimate the impact of ranking 1vs2 on the likelihood of winning con-
ditional on staying in the race, we first decompose it mathematically into observed and unobserved
components.
    Using the potential outcomes framework, we define R0 and R1 as binary variables indicating
if the candidate runs in the second round when T = 0 (the candidate ranked second in the first

                                                            21
round) and T = 1 (the candidate ranked first), respectively. In the data, we only observe R =
T R1 + (1 - T )R0 : we know whether the candidate placed first decides to stay in the second round
but not whether she would have stayed if placed second, and conversely. Next, we define W0 and
W1 as binary variables indicating if the candidate wins in the second round conditional on staying
in when T = 0 and T = 1, respectively. We only observe W = R [TW1 + (1 - T )W0 ]: when the
candidate does not stay in the second round (R = 0), she does not win (W = 0) and we do not
observe whether she would have won if she had stayed in. When she runs in the second round
(R = 1), we observe whether the candidate ranked first in the first round wins the election but not
whether she would have won if ranked second, and conversely.
    We further define four types of candidates: "always takers," who always run in the second
round, whether they ranked first or second in the first round; "never takers," who never run
in the second round; "compliers," who run in the second round if ranked first but not second;
and "defiers," who run in the second round if ranked second but not first. To derive bounds,
we assume that there are no defiers: all candidates who ranked second and stay in the sec-
ond round would also have stayed if ranked first. Under this assumption, we have that R1 
R0 and we can write the impact on the unconditional likelihood of winning (estimated in Sec-
tion 3.1) as the sum of the impact on running in the second round (estimated in Section 3.2),
multiplied by the likelihood that close second-place compliers would win if they entered the
race; and the impact on the likelihood of winning conditional on staying (for compliers and al-
ways takers), multiplied by the probability of staying of first-place candidates at the threshold:

 E (W1 R1 - W0 R0 |x = 0) =                   Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0)·E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 )
       RD e f f ect on W                            RD e f f ect on R                 Unobservable


                                      E f f ect on win cond on being always-taker or complier

                                    +             E [W1 - W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1]                      · E (R1 |x = 0)
                                                                                                      limx0 E [R|x]

From this expression, we get:

 E f f ect on win cond on being always-taker or complier
                                                                               1
            E [W1 - W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1]                     =                              [E (W1 R1 - W0 R0 |x = 0)
                                                                        E (R1 |x = 0)
                                                                                                RD e f f ect on W     (2)
                                                                          limx0 E [R|x]

                                                                -Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0)·E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 )]
                                                                         RD e f f ect on R             Unobservable


    E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) is the likelihood that close compliers would win if they remained in the
race, absent treatment (i.e., when they rank second). By definition, compliers do not stay in when

                                                               22
they rank second (but only when they rank first). This term is thus unobservable. Since all the
other terms on the right-hand side of equation [2] are observed, we can derive bounds on the effect
on winning conditional on staying in by making assumptions about this term.
    To obtain an upper bound, we set E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) = 0, as the largest possible effect of
ranking 1vs2 on winning conditional on running occurs if we assume that close second-ranked
compliers would never win the second round if they decided to run. To obtain a lower bound, we
replace the unobservable term by the probability that close first-ranked candidates who do choose
to stay in the race win the election: 51.8 percent. The choice of this high probability (which is
higher than the probability of victory of close second-ranked candidates who actually stay in, 48.6
percent) makes our lower bound conservative.
    We use the same method to derive bounds on the impact of ranking 2vs3 and 3vs4 on the like-
lihood of winning conditional on staying in. The probabilities that close higher-ranked compliers
win the election, which we use to replace the unobservable term when computing the lower bounds
of both impacts, are 18.3 and 6.1 percent, respectively, which is much higher than the probability
of victory of close lower-ranked candidates who do stay in the second round: 8.5 percent (resp.
1.8 percent).
    To derive bounds on the effects on second-round vote shares conditional on staying in, we
replace the effect on the unconditional likelihood of winning by the effect on unconditional vote
shares (an outcome equal to 0 if the candidate drops out between rounds), in equation [2]. This
effect corresponds to the jumps observed on Appendix Figure A3, which plots unconditional vote
shares of the lower- and higher-ranked candidates against the running variable. In addition, to
derive the lower bound 1vs2, we replace the unobservable term by the vote share obtained in the
second round by close first-ranked compliers: 48.6 percent. Again, we use the same method for
2vs3 and 3vs4. The second-round vote share of close higher-ranked compliers, which we use to
compute their lower bounds, are 36.9 and 23.1 percent respectively.
    Finally, we use a bootstrapping procedure to estimate the standard errors of the bounds: we
draw a sample from our districts with replacement, compute the lower and upper bounds as indi-
cated above, repeat these two steps 10,000 times, and estimate the empirical standard deviation of
both bounds.
    Table 5 provides the resulting bounds and bootstrapped standard errors of the effects of ranking
1vs2, 2vs3, and 3vs4 on conditional vote shares and likelihood of winning.




                                                23
       Table 5: Bounds on the impact on winning and vote shares, conditional on staying in

                         (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)       (5)             (6)
    Outcome                      1vs2                          2vs3                         3vs4
                               (sample1)                     (sample 2)                   (sample 3)
                        Win         Vote share        Win          Vote share      Win         Vote share
    Upper bound        0.059            0.040        0.122            0.147        0.050           0.100
    Boot. std error   (0.024)**     (0.004)***     (0.018)***      (0.013)***    (0.026)*      (0.023)***
    Lower bound        0.029            0.013        0.069            0.040        0.030           0.025
    Boot. std error    (0.023)      (0.003)***     (0.015)***      (0.005)***     (0.020)      (0.012)**
    Mean               0.486            0.473        0.085            0.311        0.018           0.196

Notes: We indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *, respectively. The mean, left of the
threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold, conditional on
running in the second round.


    As shown in column 1, conditional on running in the second round, ranking 1vs2 in the first
round increases the likelihood of winning by 2.9 to 5.9 percentage points (6.0 to 12.1 percent of
the mean for candidates ranked second who run in the second round at the threshold). The upper
bound is significant at the 5 percent level, but the lower bound is not. The effect on vote share
conditional on running is 1.3 to 4.0 percentage points, where both the upper and lower bounds are
significant at the 1 percent level (column 2).
    Ranking 2vs3 has larger effects, conditional on staying in the race. First, it increases the
likelihood of winning by 6.9 to 12.2 percentage points, which roughly corresponds to a doubling
of this outcome, compared to the mean at the threshold on the left (column 3). Second, it increases
the conditional second-round vote share by 4.0 to 14.7 percentage points (column 4). The upper
and lower bounds of both effects are significant at the 1 percent level.
    Finally, ranking 3vs4 increases the conditional likelihood of winning by 3.0 to 5.0 percentage
points, which corresponds to a three-fold or four-fold increase (column 5). The upper bound
is significant at the 10 percent level, but not the lower bound. Ranking 3vs4 also increases the
second-round vote share by 2.5 to 10.0 percentage points (12.8 to 51.0 percent), conditional on
running, with the upper and lower bounds significant at the 1 and 5 percent level, respectively
(column 6) .
    These results indicate that effects of rankings on winning and on vote shares are very unlikely
to be fully explained by their impact on staying in the race. To corroborate this conclusion, we
check which value of E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ), the unobserved likelihood that close lower-ranked
compliers would win if they stayed in, would make the effects of rankings conditional on running
in the second round null or statistically nonsignificant. Setting conditional effects to 0, in equation

                                                    24
                                                         W1 R1 -W0 R0 |x=0)
[2], gives us the equality E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) = E (rob (R1 >R0 |x=0) , where the right-hand side is the
ratio of rankings' effects on winning and on running. We report the corresponding point estimates
in Appendix Table A8, Panel A.18 They are well above the probability of winning and the vote
share of close lower-ranked as well as close higher-ranked candidates who actually stay in the
race.19
    We then ask which assumptions we would need to make on E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) for the
conditional effects of rankings to be nonsignificant. Let us define  as a variable equal to E (W0 |x =
0, R1 > R0 ), so that the numerator on the right-hand side of equation [2] is equal to the impact of
rankings on W - R . Then, the conditional effect of rankings, which is on the left-hand side of that
equation, is nonsignificant if and only if the impact on W - R is nonsignificant. Table A8 Panel
B reports the lowest values of  for which this is the case. For most outcomes and discontinuities,
these values are again higher than the probability of winning and the vote share of lower- and
higher-ranked candidates who stay in the race, close to the threshold.
    In sum, one would need to assume that compliers would win with an implausibly high likeli-
hood if they remained in the race and that they would obtain an implausibly high vote share for the
conditional effects of rankings to be null or nonsignificant.

Effects on election outcomes outside the threshold

Since our effects are measured at the threshold, for elections in which the higher- and lower-ranked
candidates obtained nearly identical vote shares in the first round, one may wonder whether voters
also tend to rally higher-ranked candidates in races further away from the discontinuity. The RDD
does not allow us to test this, by construction, but we do not see any clear reason to expect the
contrary, especially since close races are descriptively similar to other races, as shown in Appendix
Tables A2 to A4.
    Another possible concern is that the conditional effects we measure on winning may be arti-
ficially large because they are estimated in close races. To see this, imagine an election in which
the top-two candidates in the first round would obtain very close vote shares and finish first and
second in the second round, absent effects of rankings. Then, even a modest effect of ranking 1vs2
  18 The   standard errors shown in Table A8, Panel A are estimated using the same bootstrapping procedure as the one
used to estimate the standard errors of the bounds, in Table 5. Column 1 shows that the likelihood that close compliers
would win if they remained in the race would need to be larger than 1 for the effect of ranking 1vs2 on winning
conditional on staying in to be null, which is of course impossible. This comes from the fact that ranking 1vs2 has a
lower impact on running (5.6pp) than on winning (5.8pp). The former effect could therefore not explain the latter even
if all close compliers always won if they stayed in the race.
   19 The actual probability of winning and vote share of close lower-ranked candidates who stay in the race are 48.6

and 47.3 percent (for ranking 1vs2); 8.5 and 31.1 percent (for ranking 2vs3); and 1.8 and 19.6 percent (for ranking
3vs4). The winning probability and vote share of close higher-ranked candidates who stay in are 51.8 and 48.6 percent;
18.3 and 36.9; and 6.1 and 23.1.



                                                         25
on vote shares would translate into a large effect on winning. In a less close election, a vote share
effect of the same magnitude would be much less likely to affect the outcome of the race.
    However, it is important to note that the level of closeness in the first round is not a perfect
predictor of second-round closeness. Indeed, the set of candidates present on the ballot and the
pool of voters participating in each round are different. In addition, the same voter may cast
different ballots in the two rounds. It follows that elections which are close in the first round
may be less close in the second round, and vice versa. In the full sample, the correlation between
closeness in the first and second rounds is far from perfect: the coefficient of correlation, computed
using all races with more than one candidate in the second round, is equal to 0.55.
    Furthermore, we provide direct evidence that our estimation strategy does not generate artifi-
cially large conditional effects on winning. We identify all races in which the distance between the
second-round vote shares of the candidates who were first and second in the first round is lower
than the average effect of ranking 1vs2, examine how far from the threshold these races are located,
and estimate their total fraction. We restrict our attention to races in which both top-two candidates
competed in the second round. Appendix Table A9 presents results obtained when considering ei-
ther the upper or lower bound of the effects of ranking 1vs2 on vote shares. Conservatively, we
only discuss the results obtained with the lower bound, equal to 1.3 percentage points (Table 5). In
the second round, the vote share of the first candidate was higher than the vote share of the second
but by a margin lower than this lower bound in 3.1 percent of the races. As one would expect, this
fraction is larger in elections that were close in the first round, but it remains important even for
elections located more than 5 percentage points away from the threshold.
    We repeat the same exercise for ranking 2vs3 and 3vs4 and find that the higher-ranked candi-
date finishes the race ahead of the lower-ranked one but with a lead narrower than the lower bound
of rankings' effects in 8.5 percent and 10.6 percent of the races, respectively. Once again, these
fractions are smaller but remain substantial in races that were not close in the first round.
    These results suggest that first-round placements affect the ordering of candidates in the second
round and the identity of the winner in many races, including outside of the discontinuity. We do
not compute the exact fraction of elections whose outcome changed as a result, since this would
require disregarding possible variations in rankings' effects on voter behavior across different types
of races. However, we reject the possibility that effects on vote shares measured at the threshold
translated into artificially large effects on winning due to the focus on close first-round races.

Types of voters driving rankings' unconditional effects

The effects of rankings on winning and on vote shares, conditional on candidates staying in the
race, might be driven by different types of voters. Focusing on the impact of ranking 1vs2, we
distinguish voters who cast a ballot for one of the top-two candidates in the first round (type 1);

                                                 26
those who voted for a lower-ranked candidate (type 2); and non-voters and people who voted blank
or null (type 3). We exploit the fact that rankings are assigned at the district level and that the split
of voters between these three groups varies within districts. If the first candidate gains an edge
by stealing voters away from the second, then the effects of rankings should be relatively larger in
parts of the district in which these two candidates received more votes in the first round. In contrast,
if the first candidate attracts a disproportionate number of supporters of lower-ranked candidates
(including candidates eliminated after the first round), effects should increase with the fraction of
such voters. Finally, ranking first instead of second may be consequential because it facilitates the
mobilization of non-voters. In that case, the effects of rankings should be larger in areas with a
larger fraction of non-voters.
     We test these rival predictions using electoral results at the municipality or precinct level, de-
pending on data availability. The average precinct (or municipality) counts 669 citizens, allowing
us to study the behavior of relatively small groups of voters. We collected results for a total of
475,501 precincts. We first split all precincts within each district and race into terciles defined
based on the fraction of type 1 voters, and compare effects on vote share across terciles. By
construction, each race is equally represented in each tercile, facilitating the interpretation of the
results: differences between terciles cannot result from differences across races. We then repeat
the exercise by defining terciles based on the fraction of type 2 and type 3 voters. Appendix D
includes additional details on these tests, and Appendix Table D1 presents the results. The effects
of rankings on vote share decrease with the fraction of non-voters (columns 8 to 10) and increase
with the fraction of people who voted for the top-two candidates in the first round (columns 2 to
4). In both cases, the effects in the first and third tercile are significantly different from each other.
The pattern is less clear for terciles defined based on the fraction of votes received by lower-ranked
candidates (columns 5 to 7). Overall, the results suggest that the effects of rankings on voter be-
havior do not solely or even primarily come from the differential mobilization of non-voters, but
that candidate placements mainly influence the choice of active voters hesitating between the top
two.


4    Mechanisms
Our main results indicate that the effects of first-round rankings on candidates' likelihood to win
the second round are driven both by higher-ranked candidates' higher likelihood to stay in the race
and by voters rallying behind them. These two effects may be linked: lower-ranked candidates'
more frequent dropouts may reflect in part the (accurate) anticipation of being disadvantaged by
their rank in the second round.
    To the extent that candidates adjust their decisions to their expectations about voter behavior,

                                                   27
any mechanism affecting voters' response to rankings may help explain candidates' own response.
Therefore, in this section, we discuss the mechanisms underlying the behavior of candidates and
voters jointly.


4.1       Impact depending on the electoral context
To investigate the mechanisms underlying the large effects of ranking 1vs2, 2vs3, and 3vs4, we first
check whether the results are specific to certain electoral contexts. The answer is negative: rankings
matter in both local and parliamentary elections, their effects are as large in recent elections as in
previous decades, and they affect the likelihood to stay in the second round and win it for candidates
both on the left and on the right. All tables and figures presenting these results are in Appendix E.
    Local and parliamentary elections differ on many dimensions. Parliamentary elections are
much more salient: their average district size is more than five times as large, they feature more
candidates (9.1 against 5.5, on average, in the first round), and they are characterized by higher
turnout, as shown in Appendix Table E1. The latter difference implies that voters participating in
local elections are likely to be more interested in and informed about politics. Yet, as shown in
Appendix Tables E2 and E3, the effects of rankings on staying in the race are of very similar size
in both types of elections. Effects on winning are larger in parliamentary elections, for ranking
1vs2, and in local elections, for ranking 3vs4, but they are similar in both types of elections for
ranking 2vs3.
    Our sample spans nearly 60 years, starting with the 1958 parliamentary elections. Changes in
the French party system have been many since then, including the slow demise of the Communist
Party, the creation of the far-right Front National and of the Green Party in the 1970s and 1980s,
and the consolidation of these two parties in the last decades. The overwhelming victory of candi-
dates affiliated with Emmanuel Macron's new centrist party En Marche at the 2017 parliamentary
elections is the latest significant change in this political landscape. Appendix Figure E1 shows
the impact of ranking 1vs2 and 2vs3 on winning in four distinct time periods, each including ap-
proximately 25 percent of the elections in the sample.20 Despite all the aforementioned changes,
rankings' effects have been remarkably stable over time.
    Finally, we check whether the effects vary across political orientations. We measure effects
on running and winning separately for candidates on the left and right, which collectively account
for 81.6, 76.8, and 62.6 percent of the observations used to measure the effects of ranking 1vs2,
2vs3, and 3vs4. As shown in Appendix Tables E4 and E5, effects in these subsamples lose a bit of
statistical significance, but, overall, they are substantial for both orientations. Effects on winning
  20 We  cannot show the same split by time period for the impact of ranking 3vs4 because the sample size is too
small for this discontinuity, and most races in which four candidates qualify for the second round occurred in the early
elections in the sample, when the qualification threshold was relatively lower.


                                                          28
are larger for left-wing candidates, when ranking 1vs2, for right-wing candidates, when ranking
3vs4, and of similar magnitude for candidates of both orientations, when ranking 2vs3.


4.2    Impact depending on the difference between candidates' political orien-
       tations
The difference between the political orientations of the higher- and lower-ranked candidates may
determine the response of voters and candidates to rankings more than their orientations them-
selves, since it may directly affect the level of coordination between them. We now compare
rankings' effect size when the two candidates have the same orientation or, instead, distinct orien-
tations.
     As shown on Figure 4, the effects of rankings on staying in the second round and winning are
much larger in races where candidates have the same orientation. When the first and second can-
didates have the same orientation, ranking 1vs2 increases the likelihood of staying in and winning
by 35.2 and 30.5 percentage points (Appendix Table A10, columns 2 and 5). Both estimates are
significant at the 1 percent level. Instead, the effects are close to zero and nonsignificant when
they have distinct orientations (columns 3 and 6). We find a similar difference for ranking 2vs3:
its effects on staying in the race and winning are 62.7 and 22.3 percentage points, significant at the
1 percent level, when the second and third candidates have the same orientation. When they have
distinct orientations, the effects remain significant at the 5 percent level but decrease to 5.2 and 4.1
percentage points (Appendix Table A11). Finally, when the third and fourth candidates have the
same orientation, the effect of ranking 3vs4 on staying in is 40.1 percentage points and significant
at the 1 percent level, and the effect on winning 4.0 percentage points and nonsignificant. Both
point estimates are lower and nonsignificant when they have distinct orientations (Appendix Table
A12).
     A possible interpretation is that the effects of rankings are driven by strategic coordination.
Shared political orientation makes coordination more desirable: it increases the value that the two
candidates, their parties, and their supporters place on defeating ideologically distant candidates.
When two candidates have the same orientation, rankings may be used as a coordination device
both by strategic voters, to coordinate on the same candidate, and by parties, to decide which
candidate should drop out of the race.
     However, other interpretations are possible. Shared orientation also makes it less costly for
voters to rally behind the higher-ranked candidate, whatever their underlying motive is. Similarly,
ideological proximity and the habit to govern together make it easier for sister parties to reach
dropout agreements (Pons and Tricaud, 2018). In doing so, their objective may not necessarily be
to prevent the victory of a third candidate.


                                                  29
Figure 4: Impact of rankings depending on the difference between candidates' political orientations

                             Same orientation 1vs2                                                               Distinct orientations 1vs2
  1                                                                                    1


  .8                                                                                   .8


  .6                                                                                   .6


  .4                                                                                   .4


  .2                                                                                   .2


  0                                                                                    0
       -.3       -.2          -.1            0           .1           .2         .3         -.3         -.2          -.1            0           .1           .2           .3
                                    Runnig variable 1vs2                                                                   Runnig variable 1vs2

             Probability to run in 2nd round      Probability to win 2nd round                    Probability to Run in 2nd round       Probability to Win in 2nd round



                             Same orientation 2vs3                                                               Distinct orientations 2vs3
  1                                                                                    1


  .8                                                                                   .8


  .6                                                                                   .6


  .4                                                                                   .4


  .2                                                                                   .2


  0                                                                                    0
       -.3       -.2          -.1            0           .1           .2         .3         -.3         -.2          -.1            0           .1           .2           .3
                                    Runnig variable 2vs3                                                                   Runnig variable 2vs3

             Probability to run in 2nd round      Probability to win 2nd round                    Probability to Run in 2nd round       Probability to Win in 2nd round



                             Same orientation 3vs4                                                               Distinct orientations 3vs4
  1                                                                                    1


  .8                                                                                   .8


  .6                                                                                   .6


  .4
                                                                                       .4

  .2
                                                                                       .2

  0
                                                                                       0
       -.3       -.2          -.1            0           .1           .2         .3         -.3         -.2          -.1            0           .1           .2           .3
                                    Runnig variable 3vs4                                                                   Runnig variable 3vs4

             Probability to run in 2nd round      Probability to win 2nd round                    Probability to Run in 2nd round       Probability to Win in 2nd round




Notes: The three graphs on the left-hand side (resp. right-hand side) consider only races where the two
candidates have the same orientation (resp. distinct orientations). Other notes as in Figure 3.


    In the next two sections, we focus on the impact of ranking 1vs2 and consider separately races
in which a third candidate qualifies or fails to qualify, to disentangle the role of coordination from


                                                                                  30
other possible mechanisms.


4.3    The role of coordination
To investigate the extent to which coordination explains the effects of ranking 1vs2, we focus on
elections in which three or more candidates qualify for the second round. In these elections, the
top-two candidates and their supporters might want to coordinate against lower-ranked candidates
and use rankings to do so. We conduct two distinct tests.
    First, the top-two candidates and their supporters should be more willing to coordinate when
the candidate who came in third is stronger and more likely to challenge the victory of one of the
top two. If coordination against the third candidate drives our results, we should thus expect the
second candidate to be more likely to drop out of the race and voters to be more likely to rally
behind the first when the third candidate's vote share is closer to the second's. Consistent with this
prediction, Table 6 shows that the effects of ranking 1vs2 on entering the second round and winning
are larger when the gap in first-round vote shares between the second and third candidates is below
5 percentage points than in the full sample (columns 1 to 4). Effect size further increases when the
gap is narrower than 2.5 percentage points (columns 5 and 6). We observe the same patterns when
we restrict the sample to races in which the top-two candidates have the same orientation, making
incentives to coordinate against the third candidate particularly strong (see Appendix Table A13).
    Second, the top-two candidates and their supporters should be more likely to coordinate to-
gether (as opposed to coordinating with other candidates and groups of voters) when their ideolog-
ical distance is relatively lower than their distance with the third candidate. To the extent that our
results are driven by coordination, we should expect the effects to be larger when the third candi-
date has a different orientation than both top two than when she has the same orientation, in races
where the top-two candidates have the same political orientation. The results shown in Appendix
Table A14 are consistent with this prediction: ranking 1vs2 increases the likelihood of staying in
the race by thrice as much when the third candidate has a different orientation than when she has
the same orientation (columns 3 and 5), and its effects on the likelihood of winning are only present
in the former case (columns 4 and 6). When the top-two candidates have distinct orientations, we
should expect larger effects on staying in and winning when the third candidate is on the right or
on the left of both of them, on the left-right axis, than when she has the same orientation as one
of them or is located in between. Support for this prediction is weaker as none of these effects is
statistically significant (Appendix Table A15).




                                                 31
                  Table 6: Impact of ranking 1vs2 depending on the strength of the 3rd

                                   (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
      Outcome                                                           rd
                                                                1vs2 - 3 qualifies
                                          Full                  Gap 2nd -3rd <5%     Gap 2nd -3rd <2.5%
                                  Run             Win             Run       Win        Run       Win
      Treatment                 0.096***         0.053          0.130***   0.099*    0.185***   0.150**
                                 (0.010)         (0.025)        (0.017)    (0.040)   (0.030)    (0.046)
      Robust p-value              0.000          0.119           0.000     0.062      0.000      0.011
      Observations left           4,464          3,550           1,951     1,497       808       1,074
      Observations right          4,464          3,550           1,951     1,497       808       1,074
      Polyn. order                  1              1               1         1          1          1
      Bandwidth                   0.086          0.065           0.090     0.066      0.064      0.089
      Mean, left of threshold     0.899          0.446           0.864     0.393      0.808      0.352

Notes: The sample only includes the races where the third candidate qualifies for the second round. In
columns 3 and 4 (resp. 5 and 6), the sample is further restricted to elections where the vote share difference
between the candidates ranked second and third in the first round is lower than 5 (resp. 2.5) percentage
points. In columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs
(resp. wins) in the second round. Other notes as in Table 3.


     Overall, the heterogeneity of effect size in races where three or more candidates qualify for
the second round supports the interpretation that strategic coordination by candidates and voters
explains at least part of the effects of ranking 1vs2. To test whether it can explain them entirely,
we now turn to races in which the third candidate does not qualify for the second round (races of
sample 1 where the third candidate received a vote share below the qualification threshold in the
first round).


4.4    Party norms and the bandwagon effect
When the third candidate does not qualify for the second round, there is not the need ­ or even
the possibility ­ for the top-two candidates and their voters to coordinate against a lower-ranked
candidate. Nonetheless, as shown in Table 7, ranking 1vs2 increases candidates' likelihood of
winning by 5.9 percentage points overall (column 4), which is significant at the 5 percent level
and almost exactly the same size as the point estimate in the full sample (Table 3). This effect
is present but slightly smaller and at the limit of statistical significance when the first and second
candidates have distinct orientations (p-value 0.103), and it is much larger (16.4 percentage points)
and significant at the 5 percent level when their orientation is the same (columns 5 and 6).


                                                           32
              Table 7: Impact of ranking 1vs2 in races where the 3rd does not qualify

                                   (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
       Outcome                                                 rd
                                                      1vs2 - 3 does not qualify
                                     Probability to run 1vs2             Probability to win 1vs2
                                   Full       Same        Distinct      Full       Same     Distinct
       Treatment                 0.018***   0.186***      -0.000      0.059**     0.164**    0.049
                                 (0.004)     (0.031)      (0.000)     (0.021)     (0.055)   (0.022)
       Robust p-value             0.000       0.000        0.270       0.031       0.022     0.103
       Observations left          7,554        767         3,133       5,130       652       4,791
       Observations right         7,554        767         3,133       5,130       652       4,791
       Polyn. order                 1           1            1           1          1          1
       Bandwidth                  0.122       0.127        0.051       0.078       0.106     0.081
       Mean, left of threshold    0.982       0.814        1.000       0.471       0.418     0.476

Notes: The sample only includes the races where the third candidate does not qualify for the second round.
In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6) the sample is further restricted to elections where the two candidates
have the same orientation (resp. distinct orientations). In columns 1, 2, and 3 (resp. 4, 5, and 6), the
outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs (resp. wins) in the second round. Other notes as in
Table 3.

    In this configuration too, effects on winning are partly driven by effects on running in the sec-
ond round. When the top-two candidates have distinct orientations and the third does not qualify,
none of them drops out between rounds, at the threshold, and the effect on running is null (col-
umn 3). In contrast, when the top-two candidates have the same orientation, the first candidate
almost always stays in the second round but the second drops out in 18.6 percent of the races at the
threshold, a difference significant at the 1 percent level (column 2).
    This result is puzzling: absent a third candidate, a dropout by one of the top-two candidates
means the race will be uncontested and won with certainty by the only remaining candidate. In
this case, the benefit of dropping out is far from obvious, and the cost seems high. As shown
in Appendix Table A16, dropouts of the second candidate are rare when the top-two candidates
are on the right, but very frequent when they are on the left. In that case, they often stem from
agreements between left-wing parties, which contend that they want to follow the first-round choice
of their supporters instead of allowing the supporters of candidates eliminated after the first round
to decide of the outcome of the race between the two remaining candidates. In other words, many
dropouts are motivated by the enforcement of a deliberative ideal among parties and voters on
the left. Plausible complementary explanations for dropouts when the top-two candidates have
the same orientation and the third is absent include avoiding a campaign where negative arguments


                                                     33
could hurt the reputation of both competitors, and enforcing regional or national agreements which
allocate a certain number of seats to each of the allied parties. Indeed, in areas where they are
enforced, dropout agreements ensure that roughly half of the races are won by the candidates of
either of the competing parties, at the threshold.
    To test whether voters respond to the first-round placements of the top-two candidates as well,
in races where the third candidate does not qualify for the second round, Table 8 derives bounds
for the effects on winning and on vote share conditional on staying in. We find that ranking 1vs2
increases candidates' likelihood of winning conditional on remaining by 4.9 to 5.9 percentage
points overall (column 1). The lower and upper bounds are significant at the 10 and 5 percent
levels, respectively. In these races, the behavior of voters moved by rankings cannot be explained
by the desire to coordinate against lower-ranked candidates (who, again, are not present, as they
did not qualify). Instead, the most likely interpretation is that these voters get on the bandwagon
because they derive intrinsic value from siding with the winner of the first round, or that they desire
to vote for the winner of the race and rightly anticipate that the candidate ranked first in the first
round has increased chances of also winning the second round.


Table 8: Bounds on the impact of ranking 1vs2, conditional on running, in races where the 3rd does
not qualify

                           (1)          (2)      (3)          (4)           (5)                  (6)
    Outcome                                           rd
                                              1vs2 - 3 does not qualify
                                       Win                             Vote share
                          Full         Same    Distinct       Full         Same               Distinct
    Upper bound          0.059         0.164    0.049        0.019        0.186                0.002
    Boot. std error    (0.029)**     (0.091)* (0.029)*    (0.004)*** (0.035)***               (0.003)
    Lower bound          0.049         0.056    0.049        0.010        0.075                0.002
    Boot. std error     (0.028)*      (0.076) (0.029)*    (0.003)*** (0.015)***               (0.003)
    Mean                 0.480         0.526    0.476        0.500        0.500                0.499
Notes: We indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *, respectively. The mean, left of the
threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold, conditional on
running in the second round. In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the sample is restricted to elections where
the two candidates have the same orientation (resp. distinct orientations).

    Interestingly, the fraction of voters whose choice of candidate is based on these psychological
motives is relatively small on average: the effect on vote share is between 1.0 and 1.9 percentage
points (column 4), where both the lower and upper bounds are significant at 1 percent. This fraction
is sufficient to sway a larger fraction of close elections.
    We observe an effect on winning conditional on staying in the race not only when the top-two

                                                    34
candidates have the same orientation (column 2), but also when they have distinct orientations (col-
umn 3). This result indicates that the bandwagon effect affects electoral outcomes in a substantial
number of races, even when the ideological distance between candidates is important. However,
the lower and upper bounds on the effects on vote share are small and nonsignificant in that case
(column 6). In contrast, the conditional effect on vote share is very large when both candidates
have the same orientation, with lower and upper bounds of 7.5 and 18.6 percentage points, both
significant at the 1 percent level (column 5).
    An alternative interpretation for the effect of ranking first on voter behavior is that preferences
include a common value component and voters update their beliefs on candidate quality based on
the choices of others (e.g., Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani et al., 1992; Feddersen and Pesendorfer,
1997). Knight and Schiff (2010) and Deltas et al. (2016) have shown in the context of U.S. pres-
idential primaries that voters learn from past vote shares and adjust their choice accordingly. So
it may seem natural to assume that voters also learn from past candidate rankings. However, our
effects are estimated at the threshold, when the first and second candidates received exactly the
same vote share in the first round and their placements do not contain any additional information
on the private signals of other voters. For this mechanism to explain our effects would assume that
voters lack information on vote shares and wrongly believe that the first candidate received sub-
stantially more votes. But information on vote shares is readily available: as shown in Section 4.5
below, the media tend not to stop at simply reporting candidate rankings, but also provide detailed
information on race closeness. Thus, one could perhaps expect voters who update their beliefs on
candidate quality in a sophisticated way, based on the behavior of others, to also gather precise
information on election results and pay attention to it, making this interpretation less likely.
    To assess the actual explanatory power of this alternative interpretation, we test the following
prediction. If voters use candidates' placements to learn about their quality, obtaining a higher
rank should have lower effects for candidates whom voters already know and on whom their pri-
ors should therefore be more precise, including incumbents and candidates who competed in the
previous election. In Appendix Table A17, we compare the effects of ranking 1vs2 for candidates
present versus absent in the last election. The magnitude of the effect on winning and of its bounds,
conditional on staying in, is similar for both types of candidates and, if anything, slightly larger for
the former. As shown in Appendix Table A19, effects on winning and their bounds are also very
similar for incumbents and non-incumbent candidates. We obtain qualitatively identical results
for the heterogeneous effect of ranking 2vs3 (columns 4 to 6 in Tables A17 and A19) and 3vs4
(columns 7 to 9 in Table A19).21
  21 The number of candidates of a certain type varies across races. Therefore, the regressions shown in Tables A17
and A19 include different numbers of observations on the two sides of the threshold. In Table A17, we consider that
the candidate competed in the previous election if she competed in any race in the département. In Table A19, we
define as incumbent any candidate who won a race in the same département in the last election. The results are robust


                                                         35
     Because these tests are indirect, they do not suffice to entirely rule out the possibility that social
learning contributes to the bandwagon effects of rankings, but they do suggest that this mechanism
is less plausible than the desire to be on the winning side.


4.5     Alternative mechanisms
So far, we have attributed the effects of rankings on a candidate's likelihood of winning and on
their vote shares conditional on running to choices made solely by voters. We now discuss three
alternative factors which could also explain these effects.

Campaign expenditures and contributions

First, we examine whether these effects might be driven by campaign choices made by the higher-
and lower-ranked candidates between the first and second rounds.22
    We collected systematic data on candidates' campaign expenditures for all elections since 1992,
the date in which the French National Commission on Campaign Accounts and Political Financing
(CNCCFP) started recording them systematically.23 We do not know the amount of money spent
by candidates between rounds separately, only the total amounts of money they received and spent
over the entire course of the campaign. We measure the impact of rankings on these two outcomes
divided by the number of registered citizens in the district. The effects, shown in Table 9, are
small overall and nonsignificant, even though higher-ranked candidates are more likely to run in
the second round. The lack of systematic impact of rankings on total campaign expenditures and
contributions is perhaps not very surprising, since the first and second rounds are separated by only
one week. We conclude that candidates' rankings do not affect their campaign efforts.
to restricting these definitions to candidates who competed in the last race in the exact same district or candidates who
won in the same exact same district (Tables A18 and A20). We do not show the effects of ranking 3vs4 separately for
incumbents and non-incumbents (in Tables A19 and A20), because the number of incumbents among close third and
fourth candidates is very low. We do not show the effects of ranking 3vs4 separately for candidates who competed in
the last race in the exact same district versus others (in Table A18) because the number of non-missing observations is
too low and the standard errors of the bounds cannot be computed.
   22 Denter and Sisak (2015) show that campaign spending may strategically respond to past results, for instance from

polls, and there is comprehensive evidence that higher expenditures and advertising can increase vote shares (e.g.,
da Silveira and de Mello, 2011; Spenkuch and Toniatti, 2018; Bekkouche and Cage, 2019).
   23 All data come from the CNCCFP. Data on campaign expenditures for recent years are available in a digital

format on the Commission's website (http://www.cnccfp.fr/index.php?art=584). We collected and digitized the data
for the 1992, 1994, 1998, 2001, and 2004 local elections. Data on campaign expenditures for the 1993, 1997, and
2002 parliamentary elections were collected and digitized by Fauvelle-Aymar and François (2005) and Foucault and
François (2005), and shared with us by these authors. Data are only available for cantons above the 9,000 inhabitants
threshold, in local elections. In the 2012 and 2017 parliamentary elections and in the 2015 local elections, data are
missing for candidates who received less than 1 percent of the candidate votes in the first round and did not receive any
donation (as they were not required to submit their campaign accounts), but they are always available for all candidates
qualifying for the second round.



                                                          36
                    Table 9: Impact on campaign expenditures and contributions

                                   (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)
      Outcome                          1vs2                      2vs3                     3vs4
                                Expend. Contrib.          Expend. Contrib.         Expend. Contrib.
      Treatment                  -0.009    -0.015          0.033      0.033         0.017      0.007
                                (0.012) (0.014)           (0.022) (0.023)          (0.079) (0.082)
      Robust p-value             0.367      0.210          0.128      0.149         0.782      0.935
      Observations left          5,163      4,928          1,546      1,573           92         92
      Observations right         5,163      4,928          1,546      1,573           92         92
      Polyn. order                  1         1              1          1              1         1
      Bandwidth                  0.085      0.081          0.053      0.055         0.018      0.018
      Mean, left of threshold    0.583      0.611          0.432      0.446         0.353      0.364
Notes: The sample only includes the elections for which campaign expenditure data are available. In
columns 1 and 2 (resp. 3 and 4, and 5 and 6), we further restrict the analysis to races where campaign
expenditures and contributions are available both for the candidate ranked first and the candidate ranked
second (resp. second and third, and third and forth). In columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the outcome
is the candidate's total expenditures (resp. contributions) spent (resp. received) during the electoral
campaign. Other notes as in Table 3.


Dropout decisions of lower-ranked candidates

Second, we check whether the effects might be driven by choices made by a third political actor,
different from voters and the higher- and lower-ranked candidates: other candidates qualifying
for the second round. The decision of these candidates to stay in the race or drop out between
rounds might depend on the rankings of top candidates and it might in turn affect the higher- and
lower-ranked candidates' vote shares and likelihood of winning. For instance, if third candidates
are more likely to drop out of the race when the candidate ideologically closest to them among the
top two is ranked first than when she is ranked second, then that candidate should receive more
votes by the third candidate's supporters when ranked first.
    To examine this mechanism in a systematic way, we define two outcomes at the candidate level:
a dummy equal to 1 if a lower-ranked candidate of the same orientation is present in the second
round, and the number of such candidates. Both outcomes directly reflect dropout decisions of
lower-ranked candidates. For ranking 1vs2 (resp. 2vs3 and 3vs4), we consider candidates ranked
third and below (resp. fourth and below, and fifth and below).
    The effects are shown in Appendix Tables A21, A22, and A23: ranking 1vs2, 2vs3, or 3vs4
does not have any significant effect on the presence of lower-ranked candidates of the same orienta-
tion in the second round (columns 1 and 3). We test the robustness of this result in the subsample of
races in which such effects are most likely to occur: races where the two candidates of interest have
distinct political orientations and where at least one lower-ranked candidate qualifies (columns 2

                                                     37
and 4 of each table). Again, we do not find any significant impact.

Press analysis

Third, voters may rally behind higher-ranked candidates as a result of larger or more positive cov-
erage of these candidates by the media. To test for differential media coverage, we used Factiva's
research tool and collected all newspaper articles released between the two rounds of all local and
parliamentary elections since 1997 and covering the elections. In total, these elections account
for 51.2 percent of our sample.24 We obtain a total of 76,679 articles (more information on the
selection of articles and the methods used to derive the results described below in Appendix F).
    We first measure the impact of ranking 1vs2, 2vs3, or 3vs4 on three different outcomes: the
total number of articles mentioning the candidate's first and last names at least once; the total
number of mentions (counting twice the articles in which the candidate is mentioned twice, thrice
the articles in which they are mentioned thrice, etc.); and the total number of articles mentioning
the candidate in the title. As shown in Table 10, ranking 1vs2, 2vs3, or 3vs4 does not have any
significant effect on any of these outcomes. Appendix Figure F1 corroborates this conclusion.
As one would expect, the number of articles mentioning a candidate increases with the running
variable, meaning that candidates with higher vote shares are cited more often. However, this
outcome does not jump at any of the three discontinuities.
    We complement this quantitative analysis with a more qualitative approach, to check if there
is any difference between the actual content of newspaper articles on higher- and lower-ranked
candidates. We read and annotated manually the full text of a random selection of 517 articles
covering races with a vote share difference of less than 2 percentage points between the two candi-
dates of the discontinuity, and citing at least one of them. The results of this analysis are presented
in Appendix Table F2, column 1. We find that newspaper articles are equally likely to be centered
on the higher- and lower-ranked candidates and to include quotes or report the vote share of either
candidate. Furthermore, the fraction of articles mentioning support of a public figure for the candi-
dates, positive expectations by the candidates about their likelihood to win the election, or positive
expectations by someone else were very similar for both candidates. We obtain similar results
when focusing on articles covering even closer races (with a first-round vote share difference of
less than one percentage point) and those covering the top-two candidates (columns 2 and 3).
    In addition to giving equal coverage to the higher- and lower-ranked candidates, we find that
newspaper articles citing first-round results generally report candidates' vote shares, not just their
  24 Press articles are only available on Factiva from the end of the 1990s onward. The number of newspapers covered
and the total number of articles are much lower in the earlier years. Since a disproportionate fraction of races of sample
3, used to measure the impact of ranking 3vs4, come from these earlier elections, the average number of citations for
these candidates is very low.



                                                           38
ranking. Less than 10 percent of articles indicate rankings alone. Out of all articles reporting
electoral results, 80 percent also (or only) mention the vote shares of candidates, the gap between
them, or the closeness of the election. This proportion is even higher in particularly close races (83
percent) and when focusing on the top-two candidates (82 percent).
    In sum, newspaper articles do not cover candidates with a higher ranking more often, or more
favorably, and they rarely draw readers' attention to their placement, making media coverage un-
likely to explain the effects of rankings on vote shares and winning, conditional on staying in the
race.
    We conclude that rankings' effects on electoral outcomes are driven neither by differential
campaign expenditures, nor by differential press coverage, nor by dropout decisions of other can-
didates.

                                    Table 10: Impact on press coverage

                (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)
 Outcome                   1vs2                              2vs3                            3vs4
              Articles   Mentions    Titles    Articles     Mentions    Titles   Articles   Mentions    Titles
 Treatment    -0.155      -0.013     0.035      0.055        0.184      0.048     0.085      0.111     -0.009
              (0.558)    (0.995)    (0.048)    (0.593)      (1.009)    (0.035)   (0.138)    (0.263)    (0.008)
 R. p-value    0.793       0.981     0.472      0.925        0.921      0.280     0.620      0.669      0.266
 Obs left      5,136       5,182     6,398      1,371        1,453      1,462      131        126        280
 Obs right     5,136       5,182     6,398      1,371        1,453      1,462      131        126        280
 Polyn.          1           1         1          1            1          1         1          1          1
 Bdw           0.085       0.086     0.113      0.043        0.046      0.046     0.019      0.019      0.130
 Mean          4.449       7.296     0.234      2.037        3.143      0.041     0.108      0.186      0.009
Notes: The sample only includes the elections for which newspaper articles are available. In columns 1, 4,
and 7, the outcome is the total number of articles mentioning the candidate at least once. In columns 2, 5,
and 8, the outcome is the total number of mentions. In columns 3, 6, and 9, the outcome is the total number
of articles mentioning the candidate in the title. Other notes as in Table 3.



5    Conclusion
This paper shows that candidate rankings in past contests have large effects on future electoral
outcomes. Using a regression discontinuity design in French two-round parliamentary and local
elections since 1958, we find that placing first rather than second in the first round increases a
candidate's likelihood to stay in the second round by 5.6 percentage points, and coming in second
rather than third and third rather than fourth increases such likelihood even more. Higher-ranked
candidates also obtain a larger vote share and they are more likely to win, conditional on staying in.
These conditional effects only reflect choices made by voters: they do not result from differences


                                                       39
in campaign expenditures, press coverage, or dropout decisions by other qualifying candidates.
     Overall, the combined response of candidates and voters to rankings generates large effects on
a candidate's likelihood to win. Remarkably, we observe effects of similar magnitude in local and
parliamentary elections, which vary in salience, and from 1958 to today, despite the many changes
in the French party system since the beginning of the Fifth Republic.
     The effect of ranking first is larger when the third candidate is more likely to challenge the top-
two candidates and when the top-two candidates have the same political orientation, suggesting
that coordination by parties and voters against other candidates who qualify for the second round
drives part of the effects. Our evidence first indicates that rankings help strategic voters focus
on the same subset of candidates ­ and do so in a decentralized way that requires no organizing
or communicating. This is an important result, given that multiple strategic equilibria usually
exist when there are three or more candidates (Myerson and Weber, 1993). Second, rankings also
facilitate coordination among parties, leading to a decrease in the number of candidates. This result
bridges a gap in the literature on the selection of elected officials, which to date has offered little
rigorous evidence on the strategies of political parties and candidates and has mostly focused on
voter choice. The effects of rankings on parties are at least as important as on strategic voters,
given the propensity of many people to vote expressively when choosing between more than two
candidates, raising the risk of suboptimal electoral outcomes such as a defeat of the Condorcet
winner (Pons and Tricaud, 2018). Dropout agreements based on rankings can help address this
issue and increase the representativeness of elected leaders by reducing the number of alternatives.
They offer a partial solution to Arrow (1951)'s impossibility theorem.
     But the effects of ranking first instead of second remain large in elections where the third
candidate does not qualify, showing that strategic coordination cannot explain everything. In this
case, party-level agreements lead the second candidate to drop out in one fifth of the races, when
she has the same orientation as the first, a result driven mainly by left-wing parties and candidates
opting to go with voters' preferences in the first round. In addition, voters rallying behind the
first increase her likelihood of winning by 4.9 to 5.9 percentage points on average, conditional on
staying in the second round. This bandwagon effect is most likely driven by a behavioral motive:
the desire to vote for the winner.
     This last result is perhaps more unsettling. Mainstream political economy models predict that
election outcomes and policies implemented by elected leaders correspond to voter preferences.
In citizen-candidate models, the candidate proposing the platform preferred by the largest group
of voters gets elected (Osborne and Slivinski, 1996; Besley and Coate, 1997); and in the voter
median theorem, competing parties align their platforms with the policy preference of the voter
most representative of the electorate by virtue of being located in the median (Downs, 1957).
Instead, we find that many elections are swayed by a relatively small fraction of voters following


                                                  40
their preference to be on the winning side, rather than substantive differences between candidates.
    This result also has implications for the choice of an optimal voting rule. A large literature
compares voter incentives to misrepresent true preferences and strategically adjust choices to the
expected behavior of others under different voting rules (e.g., Laslier, 2009; Balinski and Laraki,
2011; Dasgupta and Maskin, 2019). Our findings indicate that voters' actual preferences may
themselves depend on others' behavior. This phenomenon affects the outcome of many races and
adds a new layer of complexity to the problem of preference aggregation. It should be taken into
account when debating voting rules and regulating the provision of electoral information.




                                                41
References
Agranov, M., Goeree, J. K., Romero, J., and Yariv, L. (2018). What Makes Voters Turn Out: The
  Effects of Polls and Beliefs. Journal of the European Economic Association, 16(3):825­856.
Alvarez, R. M. and Nagler, J. (2000). A New Approach for Modeling Strategic Voting in Multiparty
  Elections. British Journal of Political Science, 30(1):57­75.
Anagol, S. and Fujiwara, T. (2016). The Runner-Up Effect. Journal of Political Economy,
  124(4):927­991.
Ansolabehere, S., Snyder, J. M., and Stewart, C. (2000). Old Voters, New Voters, and the Personal
  Vote: Using Redistricting to Measure the Incumbency Advantage. American Journal of Political
  Science, 44(1):17.
Arrow, K. J. (1951). Social Choice and Individual Values. Wiley, New York.
Atkeson, L. R. (1999). Sure, I Voted for the Winner! Overreport of the Primary Vote for the Party
  Nominee in the National Election Studies. Political Behavior, 21(3):197­215.
Balinski, M. and Laraki, R. (2011). Majority judgment: measuring, ranking, and electing. MIT
  press, Cambridge, MA.
Banerjee, A. V. (1992). A Simple Model of Herd Behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  107(3):797­817.
Barankay, I. (2018). Rank incentives: Evidence from a randomized workplace experiment.
Bartels, L. M. (1985). Expectations and Preferences in Presidential Nominating Campaigns. Amer-
  ican Political Science Review, 79(3):804.
Bartels, L. M. (1988). Presidential Primaries and the Dynamics of Public Choice. Princeton
  University Press.
Bekkouche, Y. and Cage, J. (2019). The Heterogeneous Price of a Vote: Evidence from France,
  1993-2014.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1997). An Economic Model of Representative Democracy. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 112(1):85­114.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., and Welch, I. (1992). A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
  Cultural Change as Informational Cascades. Journal of Political Economy, 100(5):992­1026.
Blais, A. and Indridason, I. H. (2007). Making Candidates Count: The Logic of Electoral Alliances
  in Two-Round Legislative Elections. Journal of Politics, 69(1):193­205.
Blais, A. and Loewen, P. J. (2009). The French Electoral System and its Effect. West European
  Politics, 32(2):345­359.
Bordignon, M., Nannicini, T., and Tabellini, G. (2016). Moderating Political Extremism: Single
  Round versus Runoff Elections under Plurality Rule. American Economic Review, 106(8):2349­
  2370.
Bormann, N. C. and Golder, M. (2013). Democratic Electoral Systems Around the World, 1946-
  2011. Electoral Studies, 32(2):360­369.
Bouton, L. (2013). A theory of strategic voting in runoff elections. American Economic Review,
  103(4):1248­1288.

                                               42
Bouton, L., Castanheira, M., and Llorente-Saguer, A. (2016). Divided Majority and Information
  Aggregation: Theory and Experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 134:114­128.
Bouton, L., Gallego, J., Llorente-Saguer, A., and Morton, R. (2019). Runoff Elections in the
  Laboratory.
Callander, S. (2007). Bandwagons and momentum in sequential voting. Review of Economic
  Studies, 74(3):653­684.
Callander, S. (2008). Majority rule when voters like to win. Games and Economic Behavior,
  64(2):393­420.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Farrell, M. H., and Titiunik, R. (2019). Regression Discontinuity
  Designs Using Covariates. Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(3):442­451.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., and Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals
  for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6):2295­2326.
Cipullo, D. (2019). Voting Systems, Incentives and Fiscal Policy : Evidence from Runoff and
  Plurality.
Cirone, A., Cox, G. W., and Fiva, J. H. (2020). Seniority-based Nominations and Political Careers.
  American Political Science Review.
Cox, G. W. (1997). Making votes count: Strategic coordination in the world's electoral systems.
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cox, G. W. and Katz, J. N. (1996). Why Did the Incumbency Advantage in U.S. House Elections
  Grow? American Journal of Political Science, 40(2):478­497.
da Silveira, B. S. and de Mello, J. M. (2011). Campaign Advertising and Election Outcomes:
  Quasi-natural Experiment Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections in Brazil. Review of Economic
  Studies, 78(2):590­612.
Dal Bo, E. and Finan, F. (2018). Progress and Perspectives in the Study of Political Selection.
  Annual Review of Economics, 10:541­575.
Dasgupta, P. and Maskin, E. (2019). Elections and Strategic Voting: Condorcet and Borda.
De Benedictis-Kessner, J. (2018). Off-Cycle and Out of Office: Election Timing and the Incum-
  bency Advantage. Journal of Politics, 80(1):119­132.
de la Cuesta, B. and Imai, K. (2016). Misunderstandings about the Regression Discontinuity
  Design in the Study of Close Elections. Annual Review of Political Science, 19:375­396.
Deltas, G., Herrera, H., and Polborn, M. K. (2016). Learning and Coordination in the Presidential
  Primary System. Review of Economic Studies, 83(4):1544­1578.
Denter, P. and Sisak, D. (2015). Do Polls Create Momentum in Political Competition? Journal of
  Public Economics, 130:1­14.
Dewan, T. and Myatt, D. P. (2007). Leading the Party: Coordination, Direction, and Communica-
  tion. American Political Science Review, 101(4):827­845.
Downs, A. (1957). An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy. Journal of Political
  Economy, 65(2):135­150.
Duverger, M. (1954). Political Parties. Wiley.


                                                 43
Eggers, A. C. (2015). Proportionality and Turnout: Evidence From French Municipalities. Com-
  parative Political Studies, 48(2):135­167.
Eggers, A. C., Fowler, A., Hainmueller, J., Hall, A. B., and Snyder, J. M. (2015). On the Validity
  of the Regression Discontinuity Design for Estimating Electoral Effects: New Evidence from
  Over 40,000 Close Races. American Journal of Political Science, 59(1):259­274.
Eggers, A. C. and Vivyan, N. (2020). Who Votes More Strategically? American Political Science
  Review, 114(2):470­485.
Erikson, R. S. (1971). The Advantage of Incumbency in Congressional Elections. Polity, 3(3):395­
  405.
Erikson, R. S. and Titiunik, R. (2015). Using Regression Discontinuity to Uncover the Personal
  Incumbency Advantage. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 10(1):101­119.
Farrell, D. (2011). Electoral Systems: A Comparative Introduction. Red Globe Press.
Fauvelle-Aymar, C. and François, A. (2005). Campaigns, Political Preferences and Turnout: An
  Empirical Study of the 1997 French Legislative Elections. French Politics, 3(1):49­72.
Feddersen, T. and Pesendorfer, W. (1997). Voting Behavior and Information Aggregation in Elec-
  tions With Private Information. Econometrica, 65(5):1029­1058.
Ferreira, F. and Gyourko, J. (2009). Do Political Parties Matter? Evidence from U.S. Cities. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1):399­422.
Fey, M. (1997). Stability and Coordination in Duverger's Law : A Formal Model of Preelection
  Polls and Strategic Voting. American Political Science Review, 91(1):135­147.
Fiva, J. H. and Smith, D. M. (2018). Political Dynasties and the Incumbency Advantage in Party-
  Centered Environments. American Political Science Review, 112(3):706­712.
Fleitas, D. W. (1971). Bandwagon and Underdog Effects in Minimal-Information Elections. The
  American Political Science Review, 65(2):434­438.
Folke, O., Persson, T., and Rickne, J. (2016). The primary effect: Preference votes and political
  promotions. American Political Science Review, 110(3):559­578.
Forsythe, R., Myerson, R. B., Rietz, T. A., and Weber, R. J. (1993). An experiment on coordination
  in multi-candidate elections: The importance of polls and election histories. Social Choice and
  Welfare, 10(3):223­247.
Foucault, M. and François, A. (2005). Le rendement des dépenses électorales en France. Revue
  Economique, 56(5):1125­1143.
Fujiwara, T. (2011). A Regression Discontinuity Test of Strategic Voting and Duverger's Law.
  Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 6:197­233.
Fujiwara, T. and Sanz, C. (2020). Rank Effects in Bargaining: Evidence from Government Forma-
  tion. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(3):1261­1295.
Gelman, A., Goel, S., Rivers, D., and Rothschild, D. (2016). The Mythical Swing Voter. Quarterly
  Journal of Political Science, 11(1):103­130.
Gelman, A. and King, G. (1990). Estimating Incumbency Advantage without Bias. American
  Journal of Political Science, 34(4):1142­1164.


                                               44
Golder, S. N. (2005). Pre-electoral Coalitions in Comparative Perspective: A Test of Existing
  Hypotheses. Electoral Studies, 24(4):643­663.
Golder, S. N. (2006). Pre-Electoral Coalition Formation in Parliamentary Democracies. British
  Journal of Political Science, 36(2):193­212.
Hall, A. B. and Snyder, J. M. (2015). Information and Wasted Votes: A Study of U.S. Primary
  Elections. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 10(4):433­459.
Hartzmark, S. M. (2015). The Worst, the Best, Ignoring All the Rest: The Rank Effect and Trading
  Behavior. Review of Financial Studies, 28(4):1024­1059.
Hinich, M. J. (1981). Voting as an act of contribution. Public Choice, 36(1):135­140.
Hung, A. A. and Plott, C. R. (2001). Information Cascades: Replication and an Extension to Ma-
  jority Rule and Conformity-Rewarding Institutions. American Economic Review, 91(5):1508­
  1520.
Imbens, G. and Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression disconti-
  nuity estimator. Review of Economic Studies, 79(3):933­959.
Imbens, G. and Lemieux, T. (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice. Journal
  of Econometrics, 142(2):615­635.
Indridason, I. H. (2008). When to Run and When to Hide: Electoral Coordination and Exit.
  Economics and Politics, 20(1):80­105.
Kawai, K. and Watanabe, Y. (2013). Inferring strategic voting. American Economic Review,
  103(2):624­662.
Kendall, C. and Rekkas, M. (2012). Incumbency advantages in the Canadian Parliament. Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 45(4):1560­1585.
Kiss, Á. and Simonovits, G. (2014). Identifying the bandwagon effect in two-round elections.
  Public Choice, 160(3-4):327­344.
Knight, B. and Schiff, N. (2010). Momentum and Social Learning in Presidential Primaries. Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 118(6):1110­1150.
Laslier, J.-F. (2009). The Leader Rule: A Model of Strategic Approval Voting in a Large Electorate.
  Journal of Theoretical Politics, 21(1):113­136.
Le Pennec, C. and Pons, V. (2019). How do Campaigns Shape Vote Choice? Multi-Country
  Evidence from 62 Elections and 56 TV Debates. NBER Working Paper 26572.
Lee, D. S. (2008). Randomized experiments from non-random selection in US House elections.
  Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):675­697.
Lee, D. S. (2009). Training,Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
  Effects. Review of Economic Studies, 76(3):1071­1102.
Lopes da Fonseca, M. (2017). Identifying the Source of Incumbency Advantage through a Consti-
  tutional Reform. American Journal of Political Science, 61(3):657­670.
McAllister, I. and Studlar, D. T. (1991). Bandwagon, Underdog, or Projection? Opinion Polls and
 Electoral Choice in Britain, 1979-1987. The Journal of Politics, 53(3):720­741.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design:
 A density test. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):698­714.

                                                45
Meriläinen, J. and Tukiainen, J. (2016). Primary Effect in Open-List Elections.
Morton, R. B., Muller, D., Page, L., and Torgler, B. (2015). Exit Polls, Turnout, and Bandwagon
 Voting: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. European Economic Review, 77:65­81.
Morton, R. B. and Ou, K. (2015). What Motivates Bandwagon Voting Behavior: Altruism or a
 Desire to Win? European Journal of Political Economy, 40:224­241.
Morton, R. B. and Williams, K. C. (1999). Information Asymmetries and Simultaneous versus
 Sequential Voting. The American Political Science Review, 93(1):51­67.
Murphy, R. and Weinhardt, F. (2020). Top of the Class: The Importance of Ordinal Rank. The
 Review of Economic Studies, pages 1­50.
Myatt, D. P. (2007). On the Theory of Strategic Voting. Review of Economic Studies, 74(1):255­
 281.
Myerson, R. B. and Weber, R. J. (1993). A Theory of Voting Equilibria. American Political Science
 Review, 87(1):102­114.
Osborne, M. and Slivinski, A. (1996). A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-Candidates.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1):65­96.
Palfrey, T. R. (1989). A mathematical proof of Duverger's law. In Ordeshook, P. C., editor, Models
  of Strategic Choice in Politics, pages 69­92. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Piketty, T. (2000). Voting as Communicating. Review of Economic Studies, 67(1):169­191.
Pons, V. and Tricaud, C. (2018). Expressive Voting and Its Cost: Evidence from Runoffs with Two
  or Three Candidates. Econometrica, 86(5):1621­1649.
Pope, D. G. (2009). Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from "America's Best Hospitals". Journal of
  Health Economics, 28(6):1154­1165.
Simon, H. A. (1954). Bandwagon and Underdog Effects and the Possibility of Election Predictions.
  The Public Opinion Quarterly, 18(3):245­253.
Solow, B. (2016). Aggregate Uncertainty in Runoff Elections.
Spenkuch, J. (2018). Expressive vs. Strategic Voters: An Empirical Assessment. Journal of Public
  Economics, 165:73­81.
Spenkuch, J. L. (2015). Please Don't Vote for Me : Voting in a Natural Experiment with Perverse
  Incentives. Economic Journal, 125(585):1025­1052.
Spenkuch, J. L. and Toniatti, D. (2018). Political Advertising and Election Results. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 133(4):1981­2036.
Wright, G. C. (1993). Errors in Measuring Vote Choice in the National Election Studies, 1952-88.
 American Journal of Political Science, 37(1):291­316.




                                               46
Appendix (for Online Publication only)




Appendix A. Additional tables and figures                              2


Appendix B. Placebo tests on individual outcomes                      24


Appendix C. Robustness tests                                          33


Appendix D. Analysis at the subdistrict level                         39


Appendix E. Additional analyses of the impact depending on the context 41


Appendix F. Press analysis                                            46


Appendix G. Political orientations                                    50




                                      1
Appendix A. Additional tables and figures
Table A1: Number of races by election type and year


      Election type                Year     Nb of races         Election type      Year    Nb of races
      Parliamentary elections      1958        433             Local elections     1979      1,086
                                   1962        374                                 1982      1,062
                                   1967        405                                 1985      1,230
                                   1968        319                                 1988      1,177
                                   1973        430                                 1992      1,425
                                   1978        423                                 1994      1,369
                                   1981        334                                 1998      1,513
                                   1988        455                                 2001      1,301
                                   1993        497                                 2004      1,516
                                   1997        565                                 2008      1,074
                                   2002        519                                 2011      1,564
                                   2007        467                                 2015      1,905
                                   2012        541
                                   2017        573
                                   Total      6,335                                Total      16,222
                                   Total                              22,557
Notes: Parliamentary elections take place every five years. Until a 2013 reform, local elections were held
every three years. In a given election, in each département, only half of the cantons were electing their
representative, for a length of six years. Since 2013, local elections are held every six years and all cantons
participate in each election. Our sample excludes races with a unique candidate in the first round and those
with no second round, explaining the important variations in the number of races across election years shown
in the table.




                                                      2
Table A2: Summary statistics - Sample 1


                                        Sample 1 (N=22,532)          Close races (N=2,581)
                                        Mean        Sd               Mean          Sd
             Panel A. 1st round
             Registered voters    28,313             28,161          28,768        28,268
             Turnout               0.636              0.125           0.638         0.124
             Candidate votes      0.613              0.122            0.616         0.122
             Number of candidates   6.5                3.1             6.5           3.0

             Panel B. 2nd round
             Turnout                     0.628        0.134           0.647         0.132
             Candidate votes             0.595        0.138           0.616         0.137
             Number of candidates         2.1          0.4             2.2           0.5
Notes: Sample 1 is used to measure the impact of ranking first instead of second. Compared to the full
sample (see Table 2), sample 1 excludes races in which two of the top three candidates obtained an identical
number of votes in the first round (25 races out of 22,557). Close races are defined as races in which the
vote share difference between the first and second candidates is lower than 2 percentage points.




                                                     3
Table A3: Summary statistics - Sample 2


                                         Sample 2 (N=8,865)          Close races (N=1,874)
                                         Mean        Sd              Mean          Sd
              Panel A. 1st round
              Registered voters    26,349             27,339         27,798        27,978
              Turnout               0.711              0.092          0.690         0.099
              Candidate votes      0.688              0.092           0.667         0.099
              Number of candidates   5.6                2.1            6.3           2.3

              Panel B. 2nd round
              Turnout                     0.709       0.100           0.685         0.106
              Candidate votes             0.679       0.103           0.656         0.107
              Number of candidates         2.4         0.5             2.5           0.6
Notes: Sample 2 is used to measure the impact of ranking second instead of third. Sample 2 is restricted
to races where at least three candidates compete in the first round and the third candidate qualifies for the
second round, and excludes races in which two of the top four candidates obtain an identical number of votes
in the first round. Close races are defined as races in which the vote share difference between the second
and third candidates is lower than 2 percentage points.




                                                     4
Table A4: Summary statistics - Sample 3


                                         Sample 3 (N=1,978)          Close races (N=758)
                                         Mean        Sd              Mean         Sd
              Panel A. 1st round
              Registered voters    40,727               29,148       36,951       29,852
              Turnout               0.749               0.073         0.742        0.076
              Candidate votes      0.728                0.074         0.721        0.077
              Number of candidates   5.9                  1.8          6.1          1.8

              Panel B. 2nd round
              Turnout                     0.752         0.073         0.743       0.078
              Candidate votes             0.726         0.075         0.716       0.079
              Number of candidates         2.6           0.7           2.6         0.7
Notes: Sample 3 is used to measure the impact of ranking third instead of fourth. Sample 3 is restricted to
races where at least four candidates compete in the first round and the third and fourth candidates qualify
for the second round, and excludes races in which two candidates among the second, third, fourth, and fifth
obtain an identical number of votes in the first round. Close races are defined as races in which the vote
share difference between the third and fourth candidates is lower than 2 percentage points.




                                                    5
Table A5: Impact on running in the 2nd round depending on whether the candidate has a
party label


                   (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
    Outcome                 1v2                               2vs3                          3vs4
                   Full     Party    W/out        Full       Party     W/out      Full     Party     W/out
    Treatment    0.056*** 0.061*** 0.034***      0.235*** 0.235*** 0.233***      0.146*** 0.169*** 0.051
                 (0.005)   (0.006)   (0.009)     (0.018)     (0.020)   (0.039)   (0.040)   (0.042)   (0.100)
    R. p-value    0.000    0.000     0.001       0.000       0.000     0.000     0.003     0.001     0.809
    Obs. left    12,272    8,974     2,090       5,347       4,305     1,063     1,169      987       200
    Obs. right   12,272    9,054     1,970       5,347       4,267     1,092     1,169     1,003      183
    Polyn.          1         1        1            1          1         1         1         1         1
    Bdw           0.109    0.094     0.105       0.068       0.069     0.067     0.036     0.039     0.029
    Mean          0.941    0.937     0.961       0.572       0.571     0.575     0.300     0.275     0.406

Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. In columns 2, 5, and 8 (resp. 3, 6, and 9) the analysis
is restricted to candidates running under the label of a political party (resp. without party label). The
outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs in the second round. The independent variable is a
dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions:
we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according
to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the
lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




                                                         6
Table A6: Impact on running in the 2nd round depending on whether the candidate is an
incumbent

                           (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)
          Outcome                       1v2                                     2vs3
                           Full         Inc.       Non Inc.          Full        Inc.     Non Inc.
          Treatment     0.056***     0.045***     0.056***        0.235***     0.154*     0.239***
                         (0.005)      (0.010)      (0.006)         (0.018)     (0.072)     (0.020)
          R. p-value      0.000        0.000        0.000           0.000       0.080       0.000
          Obs. left      12,272        1,822        8,427           5,347        268        4,080
          Obs. right     12,272        2,833        6,208           5,347        364        3,899
          Polyn.            1            1            1               1           1           1
          Bdw             0.109        0.071        0.111           0.068       0.048       0.072
          Mean            0.941        0.953        0.943           0.572       0.642       0.582

Notes: In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the analysis is restricted to incumbent candidates, who won an
election in the same département in the last election (resp. non-incumbent candidates). Other notes as in
Table A5.




Table A7: Impact on running in the 2nd round depending on whether the candidate is the
district incumbent

                           (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)
          Outcome                       1v2                                     2vs3
                           Full         Inc.       Non Inc.          Full        Inc.     Non Inc.
          Treatment     0.056***     0.048***     0.062***        0.235***      0.019     0.273***
                         (0.005)      (0.013)      (0.007)         (0.018)     (0.103)     (0.021)
          R. p-value      0.000        0.001        0.000           0.000       0.869       0.000
          Obs. left      12,272        1,306        5,598           5,347        163        3,600
          Obs. right     12,272        2,124        4,223           5,347        245        3,391
          Polyn.            1            1            1               1           1           1
          Bdw             0.109        0.073        0.098           0.068       0.045       0.086
          Mean            0.941        0.948        0.936           0.572       0.682       0.548

Notes: In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the analysis is restricted to incumbent candidates, who won an
election in the same district in the last election (resp. non-incumbent candidates). Other notes as in Table
A5.



                                                      7
Table A8: Additional tests on the impact on winning and vote shares conditional on staying
in

                        (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)                (6)
   Outcome                      1vs2                       2vs3                         3vs4
                        Win      Vote share       Win       Vote share       Win          Vote share
   Panel A. Value of E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) that would bring E [W1 - W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1] to 0
    Point estimate     1.038       0.708          0.420       0.507         0.152               0.306
    Boot. std error   (0.434)      (0.047)       (0.073)      (0.025)      (0.155)          (0.111)


   Panel B. Lowest value of E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) for which E [W1 - W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1] is nonsignificant
    Value               0.31           0.61       0.30            0.47       0.00               0.23

Notes: Panel A reports the value of E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) for which there would be no effect on winning
(columns 1, 3, and 5) or on vote shares (columns 2, 4, and 6), conditional on staying in the race. We report
the point estimate and its bootstrapped standard error. Panel B reports the lowest value of
E (W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ) for which the impact on winning or on vote shares conditional on staying in is not
statistically significant at the 5% level. See Section 3.3 for more information.




Table A9: Effects on election outcomes outside the threshold

                          (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)
        Outcome                       nd
                           % races, 2 round vote share gap < conditional effect
                               Lower bound                  Upper Bound
                         1vs2       2vs3    3vs4      1vs2      2vs3        3vs4
         Full sample     0.031     0.085   0.106      0.108     0.385      0.386
         Margin 2pp      0.049     0.118   0.121      0.169     0.411      0.355
         2pp< Margin 5pp 0.051     0.101   0.118      0.158     0.450      0.513
         Margin >5pp     0.024     0.054   0.063      0.087     0.323      0.286
Notes: We estimate the fraction of races in which the higher-ranked candidate finishes the second round
ahead of the lower-ranked one and in which the distance between the second-round vote shares of the
higher- and lower-ranked candidates is lower than the average effect of ranking on vote share, conditional
on staying in. We restrict our attention to races in which the two candidates at the threshold remained in the
second round. Columns 1 to 3 (resp. 4 to 6) consider the lower bound (resp. upper bound) of rankings'
effects. The second line of the results (resp. third and fourth line) only considers races in which the vote
share difference between the two candidates was lower than 2 percentage points in the first round (resp.
between 2 and 5 percentage points, and strictly higher than 5 percentage points).




                                                      8
Table A10: Impact of ranking 1vs2 depending on the difference between candidates' political
orientations

                                  (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
    Outcome                         Probability to run 1vs2                Probability to win 1vs2
                                  Full        Same         Distinct      Full         Same      Distinct
    Treatment                  0.056***     0.352***       0.002      0.058***     0.305***      0.017
                                (0.005)      (0.023)       (0.002)     (0.017)      (0.039)      (0.018)
    Robust p-value               0.000        0.000        0.686        0.004        0.000       0.624
    Observations left           12,272        2,059        7,283        8,027        1,399       7,242
    Observations right          12,272        2,059        7,283        8,027        1,399       7,242
    Polyn. order                   1            1             1            1            1            1
    Bandwidth                    0.109        0.122        0.072        0.066        0.076       0.072
    Mean, left of threshold      0.941        0.647        0.996        0.458        0.317       0.482

Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. In columns 1 to 3 (resp. 4 to 6), the outcome is a
dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs (resp. wins) in the second round. In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and
6), the two candidates have the same orientation (resp. distinct orientations). The independent variable is a
dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions:
we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according
to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the
lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




                                                       9
Table A11: Impact of ranking 2vs3 depending on the difference between candidates' political
orientations

                                 (1)            (2)               (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)
   Outcome                         Probability to run 2vs3                       Probability to win 2vs3
                                 Full          Same             Distinct       Full       Same       Distinct
   Treatment                   0.235***     0.627***            0.052**      0.099***   0.223***     0.041**
                               (0.018)       (0.029)            (0.021)      (0.013)     (0.027)     (0.013)
   Robust p-value               0.000         0.000              0.045        0.000       0.000       0.012
   Observations left            5,347         1,493              3,720        4,398       1,343       3,497
   Observations right           5,347         1,493              3,720        4,398       1,343       3,497
   Polyn. order                   1              1                 1            1              1           1
   Bandwidth                    0.068         0.055              0.073        0.052       0.048       0.066
   Mean, left of threshold      0.572         0.286              0.704        0.048       0.023       0.060

                                            Notes as in Table A10.




Table A12: Impact of ranking 3vs4 depending on the difference between candidates' political
orientations

                                      (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)
     Outcome                            Probability to run 3vs4                 Probability to win 3vs4
                                   Full          Same             Distinct      Full     Same      Distinct
     Treatment                   0.146***      0.401***            0.029      0.022*     0.040      0.014
                                  (0.040)       (0.065)           (0.050)     (0.011)   (0.027)    (0.009)
     Robust p-value               0.003          0.000             0.726       0.052     0.127      0.155
     Observations left            1,169           349               824        1,116     325         847
     Observations right           1,169           349               824        1,116     325         847
     Polyn. order                      1              1                 1        1         1          1
     Bandwidth                    0.036          0.038             0.036       0.033     0.034      0.037
     Mean, left of threshold      0.300          0.231             0.332       0.005     0.011      0.002

                                            Notes as in Table A10.




                                                           10
Table A13: Impact of ranking 1vs2 depending on the strength of the 3rd - Same orientation


                               (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)
 Outcome                                                                          rd
                                                     1vs2 - Same orientation and 3 qualifies
                                       Full                      Gap 2nd -3rd <5%         Gap 2nd -3rd <2.5%
                               Run             Win               Run         Win           Run        Win
 Treatment                  0.421***      0.369***             0.481***   0.487***       0.587***   0.492***
                             (0.036)          (0.046)          (0.045)     (0.049)        (0.055)    (0.066)
 Robust p-value               0.000           0.000             0.000       0.000         0.000       0.000
 Observations left             880             840               452         495           277         283
 Observations right            880             840               452         495           277         283
 Polyn. order                   1                1                1           1              1          1
 Bandwidth                    0.072           0.067             0.085       0.093         0.098       0.102
 Mean, left of threshold      0.579           0.270             0.522       0.177         0.413       0.167

Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. The sample only includes the races where the third
candidate qualifies for the second round and where the top-two candidates have the same orientation. In
columns 3 and 4 (resp. 5 and 6), the sample is further restricted to elections where the vote share difference
between the candidates ranked second and third in the first round is lower than 5 (resp. 2.5) percentage
points. In columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs
(resp. wins) in the second round. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed
higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on
each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left
of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




                                                          11
Table A14: Impact of ranking 1vs2 depending on the political orientation of the 3rd - Same
orientation

                                 (1)              (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)
   Outcome                                                                      rd
                                                   1vs2 - Same orientation and 3 qualifies
                                         Full                         3rd same            3rd different
                                 Run             Win            Run          Win        Run          Win
   Treatment                  0.420***      0.369***           0.128**     -0.033    0.480***      0.451***
                               (0.036)          (0.046)        (0.049)     (0.122)    (0.042)       (0.045)
   Robust p-value               0.000           0.000           0.023       0.514      0.000         0.000
   Observations left             874             841            177          136        708           799
   Observations right            874             841            177          136        708           799
   Polyn. order                    1               1              1              1        1            1
   Bandwidth                    0.072           0.067           0.088       0.063      0.070         0.081
   Mean, left of threshold      0.580           0.270           0.872       0.506      0.521         0.220

Notes: The sample only includes the races where the third candidate qualifies for the second round and did
not obtain an identical number of votes as the fourth candidate in the first round, and where the top-two
candidates have the same political orientation. In columns 3 and 4 (resp. 5 and 6), the sample is further
restricted to elections where the third candidate has the same political orientation as the top two (resp. has a
different political orientation). Other notes as in Table A13.




                                                          12
Table A15: Impact of ranking 1vs2 depending on the political orientation of the 3rd - Distinct
orientations

                                   (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)            (6)
     Outcome                                                                       rd
                                                 1vs2 - Distinct orientations and 3 qualifies
                                         Full                3rd same or middle      3rd on the left or right
                                   Run          Win           Run       Win            Run          Win
     Treatment                   0.003      -0.020           -0.006    -0.003         0.028        -0.021
                                 (0.005)    (0.026)          (0.004)   (0.027)       (0.015)      (0.057)
     Robust p-value              0.743          0.283        0.140      0.780         0.120        0.466
     Observations left           2,866          3,171        1,659      2,957          794          647
     Observations right          2,866          3,171        1,659      2,957          794          647
     Polyn. order                   1             1             1         1             1             1
     Bandwidth                   0.069          0.078        0.050      0.101         0.096        0.075
     Mean, left of threshold     0.991          0.488        1.002      0.489         0.962        0.457

Notes: The sample only includes the races where the third candidate qualifies for the second round and did
not obtain an identical number of votes as the fourth candidate in the first round, and where the top-two
candidates have distinct political orientations. In columns 3 and 4 (resp. 5 and 6), the sample is further
restricted to elections where the third candidate has the same political orientation as one of the top two or
has a different orientation and is located in the middle of the top two on the left-right axis (resp. has a
different political orientation and is located either on the right or on the left of both top two). Other notes as
in Table A13.




                                                        13
Table A16: Impact of ranking 1vs2 on running in races where the 3rd does not qualify - Left-
versus right-wing candidates


                                    (1)           (2)           (3)     (4)        (5)               (6)
      Outcome                                                     rd
                                                  Running 1vs2 - 3 does not qualify
                                            Left candidates                       Right candidates
                                    Full         Same         Distinct     Full        Same     Distinct
      Treatment                  0.039***      0.381***       -0.001      0.001        0.012     0.000
                                  (0.008)       (0.056)       (0.001)    (0.003)      (0.021)   (0.001)
      Robust p-value               0.000         0.000        0.264       0.656        0.650     0.784
      Observations left            3,227          342         1,124       1,785        248       1,889
      Observations right           3,049          342         1,111       1,980        248       2,119
      Polyn. order                    1            1             1          1            1           1
      Bandwidth                    0.114         0.124        0.041       0.062        0.071     0.076
      Mean, left of threshold      0.961         0.619        1.001       0.998        0.988     0.999

Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. The sample only includes the races where the third
candidate does not qualify for the second round. Columns 1 to 3 (resp. 4 to 6) include only left-wing
candidates (resp. right-wing candidates). In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the sample is further restricted
to elections where the two candidates have the same orientation (resp. distinct orientations). The outcome
is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs in the second round. The independent variable is a dummy
equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit
separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the
MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked
candidate at the threshold.




                                                        14
Table A17: Impact on winning depending on whether the candidate ran in the last election
in the same département


                     (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)       (8)         (9)
 Outcome                   Winning 1v2                       Winning 2vs3                     Winning 3vs4
                    Full     Present     Absent      Full      Present      Absent     Full     Present   Absent
 Panel A. Impact on winning
 Treatment         0.058*** 0.063**      0.047     0.099*** 0.098*** 0.087***         0.022*     0.015       0.013
                   (0.017)   (0.024)     (0.024)   (0.013)     (0.021)      (0.019)   (0.011)   (0.016)   (0.015)
 R. p-value        0.004      0.048      0.170      0.000       0.000       0.000     0.052      0.310       0.395
 Obs. left         8,027      3,410      4,285      4,398       1,301       2,171     1,116       233        618
 Obs. right        8,027      4,192      3,498      4,398       1,460       2,052     1,116       218        626
 Polyn.              1         1           1          1           1           1         1          1          1
 Bdw               0.066      0.074      0.075      0.052       0.063       0.045     0.033      0.031       0.042
 Mean              0.458      0.442      0.482      0.048       0.041       0.049     0.005      -0.001      0.013
 Panel B. Bounds on the impact on winning conditional on staying in
 Upper bound       0.059      0.063      0.047      0.122       0.123       0.105     0.050      0.037       0.029
 Boot. std error   (0.024)** (0.030)** (0.031)     (0.004)*** (0.030)*** (0.026)***   (0.026)* (0.043)    (0.036)
 Lower bound       0.029      0.036      0.021      0.069       0.070       0.059     0.030      0.022       0.014
 Boot. std error   (0.023)   (0.029)     (0.030)   (0.015)*** (0.024)*** (0.021)***   (0.020)   (0.030)   (0.031)

Notes: The unit of observation is the candidate. In columns 2, 5, and 8 (resp. 3, 6, and 9), the analysis is
restricted to candidates who ran in the same département in the last election (resp. candidates who did not
run in the same département in the last election). The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the
candidate placed higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate
polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD
procedure. Panel A reports the estimate obtained by taking as outcome a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate
wins the second round. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level, and we
compute statistical significance based on the robust p-value. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value
of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold. Panel B reports the lower and upper bounds
of the impact on winning conditional on staying in the second round, obtained using the method described
in Section 3.3. We use a bootstrapping procedure to estimate the standard errors. In both panels we indicate
significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                       15
Table A18: Impact on winning depending on whether the candidate ran in the last election
in the same district

                             (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)
         Outcome                       Winning 1v2                             Winning 2vs3
                             Full        Present      Absent          Full        Present      Absent
         Panel A. Impact on winning
         Treatment         0.058***     0.078**      0.068**       0.099***     0.099***      0.085***
                           (0.017)       (0.025)     (0.026)        (0.013)      (0.024)       (0.020)
         R. p-value         0.004        0.018        0.049          0.000        0.001         0.001
         Obs. left          8,027        2,929        3,676          4,398         896          1,765
         Obs. right         8,027        3,866        2,909          4,398        1,043         1,670
         Polyn.               1            1            1              1            1             1
         Bdw                0.066        0.094        0.087          0.052        0.059         0.046
         Mean               0.458        0.423        0.480          0.048        0.024         0.045
         Panel B. Bounds on the impact on winning conditional on staying in
         Upper bound        0.059         0.078       0.069          0.122         0.128        0.102
         Boot. std error   (0.024)**    (0.033)**    (0.035)**    (0.004)***    (0.033)***    (0.028)***
         Lower bound        0.029         0.050       0.037          0.069         0.079        0.052
         Boot. std error    (0.023)      (0.032)      (0.033)     (0.015)***    (0.026)***    (0.022)**

Notes: In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the analysis is restricted to candidates who ran in the same
district in the last election (resp. candidates who did not run in the same district in the last election). Other
notes as in Table 17.




                                                        16
Table A19: Impact on winning depending on whether the candidate is an incumbent


                              (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
          Outcome                       Winning 1v2                            Winning 2vs3
                              Full          Inc.      Non Inc.      Full           Inc.        Non Inc.
          Panel A. Impact on winning
          Treatment         0.058***       0.054      0.049*     0.099***        0.126*       0.088***
                            (0.017)       (0.031)     (0.021)     (0.013)        (0.052)       (0.015)
          R. p-value         0.004         0.229       0.088       0.000          0.065         0.000
          Obs. left          8,027         1,864       5,476       4,398           292          3,086
          Obs. right         8,027         2,972       4,494       4,398           422          2,985
          Polyn.               1             1           1           1              1             1
          Bdw                0.066         0.073       0.070       0.052          0.056         0.049
          Mean               0.458         0.472       0.460       0.048          0.073         0.043
          Panel B. Bounds on the impact on winning conditional on staying in
          Upper bound        0.059         0.054       0.049       0.122          0.159         0.107
          Boot. std error   (0.024)**     (0.033)*    (0.029)*   (0.018)***     (0.079)**     (0.021)***
          Lower bound        0.029         0.031       0.021       0.069          0.110         0.061
          Boot. std error    (0.023)      (0.032)     (0.027)    (0.015)***      (0.069)      (0.017)***

Notes: In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the analysis is restricted to incumbent candidates, who won an
election in the same département in the last election (resp. non-incumbent candidates). Other notes as in
Table A17.




                                                         17
Table A20: Impact on winning depending on whether the candidate is the district incumbent


                               (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
           Outcome                       Winning 1v2                            Winning 2vs3
                               Full          Inc.      Non Inc.      Full           Inc.        Non Inc.
           Panel A. Impact on winning
           Treatment         0.058***       0.069      0.071**    0.099***         0.108       0.088***
                             (0.017)       (0.034)     (0.023)     (0.013)        (0.054)       (0.017)
           R. p-value         0.004         0.135       0.017       0.000          0.126         0.000
           Obs. left          8,027         1,525       4,735       4,398           171          2,444
           Obs. right         8,027         2,777       3,739       4,398           251          2,353
           Polyn.               1             1           1           1              1             1
           Bdw                0.066         0.093       0.082       0.052          0.048         0.049
           Mean               0.458         0.422       0.467       0.048          0.010         0.040
           Panel B. Bounds on the impact on winning conditional on staying in
           Upper bound        0.059         0.070       0.071       0.122          0.154         0.107
           Boot. std error   (0.024)**     (0.036)*    (0.032)*   (0.018)***      (0.084)*     (0.023)***
           Lower bound        0.029         0.046       0.038       0.069          0.149         0.055
           Boot. std error    (0.023)      (0.035)     (0.031)    (0.015)***      (0.087)*     (0.018)***

Notes: In columns 2 and 5 (resp. 3 and 6), the analysis is restricted to incumbent candidates, who won an
election in the same district in the last election (resp. non-incumbent candidates). Other notes as in Table
A17.




                                                         18
Table A21: Impact of ranking 1vs2 on the presence of same-orientation lower-ranked candi-
dates

                                     (1)       (2)                      (3)         (4)
           Outcome                 Dummy lower-ranked                 Number of lower-ranked
                                     Full  Subsample                    Full    Subsample
           Treatment               -0.002    -0.011                   -0.003      -0.017
                                   (0.005)  (0.013)                   (0.005)     (0.014)
           Robust p-value           0.506     0.396                    0.388       0.222
           Observations left       11,432     2,787                   11,161       2,662
           Observations right      11,433     2,787                   11,161       2,662
           Polyn. order               1         1                        1           1
           Bandwidth                0.100     0.067                    0.097       0.064
           Mean, left of threshold 0.034      0.067                    0.037       0.072
Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. In columns 2 and 4, we only include races where the
third candidate qualifies and the top-two candidates have distinct political orientations. In columns 1 and 2,
the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if a lower-ranked candidate who has the same orientation as the
candidate is running in the second round. In columns 3 and 4, the outcome is the number of lower-ranked
candidates who have the same orientation as the candidate and are running in the second round. The
independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher in the first round. We use local
polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute
the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the
outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




                                                     19
Table A22: Impact of ranking 2vs3 on the presence of same-orientation lower-ranked candi-
dates

                                     (1)       (2)                    (3)         (4)
           Outcome                 Dummy lower-ranked               Number of lower-ranked
                                     Full  Subsample                  Full    Subsample
           Treatment               -0.004    -0.022                 -0.005      -0.024
                                   (0.005)  (0.028)                 (0.006)     (0.030)
           Robust p-value           0.476     0.433                  0.453       0.421
           Observations left        5,097      700                   4,876        694
           Observations right       5,097      700                   4,876        694
           Polyn. order               1         1                      1           1
           Bandwidth                0.064     0.048                  0.060       0.047
           Mean, left of threshold 0.022      0.075                  0.023       0.078
Notes: In columns 2 and 4, we only include races where the fourth candidate qualifies and the candidates
ranked second and third have distinct political orientations. Other notes as in Table A21.




Table A23: Impact of ranking 3vs4 on the presence of same-orientation lower-ranked candi-
dates

                                     (1)      (2)                     (3)         (4)
           Outcome                 Dummy lower-ranked               Number of lower-ranked
                                     Full  Subsample                  Full    Subsample
           Treatment                0.013    0.073                   0.011       0.067
                                   (0.009)  (0.047)                 (0.008)     (0.045)
           Robust p-value           0.112    0.101                   0.162       0.138
           Observations left        1,204     219                    1,319        241
           Observations right       1,204     219                    1,319        241
           Polyn. order               1        1                       1           1
           Bandwidth                0.037    0.047                   0.044       0.054
           Mean, left of threshold 0.009     0.031                   0.009       0.029
Notes: In columns 2 and 4, we only include races where the fifth candidate qualifies and the candidates
ranked third and fourth have distinct political orientations. Other notes as in Table A21.




                                                    20
Figure A1: Density of the running variable - McCrary test

                          1vs2                                                     2vs3




                                                              6
 3




                                                              4
 2




                                                              2
 1
 0




                                                              0
     -1         -.5          0           .5           1           -.4        -.2          0       .2         .4



                                                     3vs4
                             15
                             10
                             5
                             0




                                  -.4         -.2         0             .2          .4


Notes: This figure tests if there is is a jump at the threshold in the density of the running variable (the vote
share difference between the two candidates in the first round), represented by the solid line. The confidence
intervals are represented by thin lines. In our setting, this test is satisfied by construction since we consider
the same set of races on both sides of the threshold and, in each race, the higher- and lower-ranked candidates
are equally distant to the cutoff.




                                                       21
Figure A2: Vote shares in the first round


                                                   1vs2                                                                                                               2vs3
                        1                                                                                                             1



                        .8                                                                                                            .8
 Vote share 1st round




                                                                                                               Vote share 1st round
                        .6                                                                                                            .6



                        .4                                                                                                            .4



                        .2                                                                                                            .2



                        0                                                                                                             0
                             -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                        .2          .3                                 -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                            Running variable 1vs2                                                                                              Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                             3vs4
                                                                           1



                                                                           .8
                                                    Vote share 1st round




                                                                           .6



                                                                           .4



                                                                           .2



                                                                           0
                                                                                -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1                           .2       .3
                                                                                                    Running variable 3vs4



Notes: Dots represent the local averages of the candidate's vote share in the first round (vertical axis).
Averages are calculated within quantile-spaced bins of the running variable (horizontal axis). The running
variable (the vote share difference between the two candidates in the first round) is measured as percentage
points. The graph is truncated at 30 percentage points on the horizontal axis to accommodate for outliers.
Continuous lines are a quadratic fit.




                                                                                                         22
Figure A3: Impact on 2nd round vote shares


                                                   1vs2                                                                                                               2vs3
                        1                                                                                                             1



                        .8                                                                                                            .8
 Vote share 2nd round




                                                                                                               Vote share 2nd round
                        .6                                                                                                            .6



                        .4                                                                                                            .4



                        .2                                                                                                            .2



                        0                                                                                                             0
                             -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                        .2          .3                                 -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                            Running variable 1vs2                                                                                              Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                             3vs4
                                                                           1



                                                                           .8
                                                    Vote share 2nd round




                                                                           .6



                                                                           .4



                                                                           .2



                                                                           0
                                                                                -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1                           .2       .3
                                                                                                    Running variable 3vs4



Notes: Dots represent the local averages of the candidate's vote share in the second round (vertical axis).
The vote share is set to 0 if the candidate does not run in the second round. Other notes as in Figure A2.




                                                                                                         23
Appendix B. Placebo tests on individual outcomes
We conduct placebo tests to examine whether there is a discontinuity at the threshold for any of
the variables used to predict treatment. We first provide information about the construction of each
variable. We then show the results in Tables B1 through B3, and visually for four of the variables
in Figures B1 through B4.
Candidate's gender: dummy equal to 1 if the candidate is a woman, and 0 otherwise.
  · This variable was available in the raw data for most elections. We input it manually based
    on candidates' first name in elections for which it was missing.
  · The variable is set to 0.5 for the 2015 local elections, since each competing ticket was com-
    posed of a man and a woman.
Dummies indicating whether the candidate ran and won the previous election, in the same
département.
   · Constructing these variables required matching candidate names across election years. In
     parliamentary elections, candidates were matched with candidates in t-1. In local elections
     until 2015, candidates were matched with candidates in t-2, since cantons elected their coun-
     cil members only every other election. In the 2015 local election, candidates were matched
     with candidates in both t-1 and t-2, since all cantons participated in that year's election.
   · We did the matching with the Stata command "reclink", after normalizing first and last names
     (for instance we dropped accents, special characters, and aristocratic particles). We matched
     candidates on their first names, last names, and political orientations. We checked all uncer-
     tain matches manually.
   · The variables are mechanically set to missing for the first elections in the sample: the 1958
     parliamentary elections, and the 1979 and 1982 local elections.
   · The variables are averaged over the two candidates in the ticket, for the 2015 local elections.
Dummies indicating whether the candidate ran and won the previous election, in the same
district.
    · These variables were constructed in a similar way as the département-level variables above.
    · These variables are set to missing for districts which were created or whose boundaries
      changed since the last election, including all districts in the 2015 local elections (all districts
      changed boundaries before that election).
Dummy indicating whether the candidate runs with or without the label of a political party.
  · We constructed this variable based on the political labels attributed by the Ministry of the
    Interior (see Appendix G).
Set of six dummies indicating the candidate's political orientation.
    · These variables were constructed by mapping political labels attributed to candidates by the
      Ministry of the Interior to six political orientations: far-left, left, center, right, far-right, and
      other. Appendix G shows the mapping between labels and political orientations for each
      election.
Dummy indicating whether the candidate's orientation is the same as the incumbent's.
  · This variable is set to missing for the first elections in the sample and for districts which
    were created or whose boundaries changed since the last election.
  · This variable is set to 0 if the candidate's orientation or the incumbent's orientation is "other".

                                                    24
Number of candidates of the candidate's orientation in the first round.
  · This variable includes the candidate in the count.
  · This variable is set to 1 if the candidate's orientation is "other": in that case, we consider
    that no other candidate has the same orientation.
Strength of the candidate in the first round: sum of the first-round vote shares of all candidates
of the same orientation.
    · This variable includes the candidate's vote share in the sum.
    · This variable is equal to the candidate's vote share if her orientation is "other".
Average strength of the candidate's orientation at the national level in the first round.
   · This variable is computed using all districts in which at least one first-round candidate had
     this orientation.
   · This variable is set to missing if the candidate's orientation is "other".




                                               25
    Table B1: Placebo tests - 1vs2

                                  (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)
      Outcome                   Gender      Ran         Ran             Won           Won        Party      Right     Left
                                           t-1 dpt     t-1 dis.        t-1 dpt     t-1 dis.
      Treatment                  0.006     0.013       0.003           0.012          0.016      0.008      0.006    0.008
                                (0.008)    (0.015)     (0.017)         (0.013)     (0.016)      (0.010)    (0.013)   (0.013)
      Robust p-value             0.462     0.372       0.985           0.481          0.468      0.428      0.689    0.645
      Observations left         13,351     9,563       7,549           9,798          7,522     13,334     13,112    12,854
      Observations right        13,351     9,563       7,549           9,798          7,522     13,335     13,113    12,855
      Polyn. order                 1         1            1              1               1          1         1         1
      Bandwidth                  0.122     0.096       0.104           0.099          0.104      0.122      0.120    0.117
      Mean, left of threshold    0.159     0.458       0.485           0.277          0.292      0.823      0.455    0.440




Table B1: Placebo tests - 1vs2 (continued)


                       (9)       (10)         (11)             (12)              (13)          (14)         (15)      (16)
 Outcome               Far-     Far-left     Center            Other             Same         # Same      Strength    Nat.
                       right                                                     Inc.                                strength
 Treatment           -0.002     0.000      -0.015***           0.003             0.005        0.021        0.000      0.001
                     (0.007)    (0.001)      (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.018)        (0.029)     (0.004)    (0.002)
 Robust p-value      0.996      0.777        0.003             0.299             0.936        0.547        0.994      0.892
 Obs. left           11,083     12,265       10,042           12,801             6,821        12,461      12,071     11,242
 Obs. right          11,083     12,266       10,042           12,802             6,821        12,462      12,072     11,260
 Polyn. order           1          1               1               1              1             1            1          1
 Bandwidth           0.097      0.109        0.086             0.116             0.092        0.112        0.107      0.099
 Mean, left          0.061      0.002        0.036             0.008             0.524        2.196        0.456      0.416

Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. The outcomes are described in the text and presented
in the same order in the table. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher
in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side
of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the
threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




                                                              26
Table B2: Placebo tests - 2vs3

                                      (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
     Outcome                        Gender          Ran             Ran             Won     Won        Party    Right        Left
                                                   t-1 dpt        t-1 dis.      t-1 dpt    t-1 dis.
     Treatment                      -0.022         0.004          -0.008        -0.012     -0.011     -0.004    0.023      -0.047**
                                    (0.013)        (0.021)        (0.025)       (0.012)    (0.014)    (0.018)   (0.021)    (0.023)
     Robust p-value                 0.102          0.888          0.720          0.380      0.376      0.734    0.332       0.040
     Observations left              4,496          4,150          3,162          4,289      3,448      4,564    4,842       4,391
     Observations right             4,496          4,150          3,162          4,289      3,448      4,564    4,842       4,391
     Polyn. order                     1              1               1                1         1        1        1           1
     Bandwidth                      0.054          0.065          0.064          0.069      0.072      0.055    0.060       0.052
     Mean, left of threshold        0.129          0.311          0.299          0.097      0.091      0.792    0.381       0.486




Table B2: Placebo tests - 2vs3 (continued)


                            (9)             (10)             (11)              (12)        (13)        (14)       (15)        (16)
 Outcome                   Far-         Far-left           Center            Other        Same        # Same    Strength      Nat.
                           right                                                           Inc.                             strength
 Treatment                0.014           0.001             0.007            -0.001       -0.017      -0.030     0.003       -0.007
                          (0.013)       (0.002)            (0.008)         (0.005)        (0.024)     (0.039)    (0.007)     (0.005)
 Robust p-value           0.194           0.389             0.454            0.865        0.479       0.390      0.623       0.105
 Observations left        4,453           4,809             4,868            4,888        3,534       5,360      4,812       4,338
 Observations right       4,453           4,809             4,868            4,888        3,534       5,360      4,812       4,338
 Polyn. order               1                1                1                 1           1           1           1             1
 Bandwidth                0.053           0.059             0.060            0.061        0.075       0.069      0.059       0.052
 Mean, left               0.082           0.001             0.036            0.014        0.398       2.307      0.423       0.411

                                                           Notes as in Table B1.




                                                                          27
Table B3: Placebo tests - 3vs4

                                      (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
     Outcome                        Gender          Ran             Ran             Won     Won        Party    Right       Left
                                                   t-1 dpt        t-1 dis.      t-1 dpt    t-1 dis.
     Treatment                      -0.026         -0.052         -0.048        0.027*      0.020      0.042    -0.052     0.087**
                                    (0.020)        (0.039)        (0.043)       (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.033)   (0.039)    (0.042)
     Robust p-value                 0.158          0.260          0.355          0.098      0.215      0.165    0.208       0.050
     Observations left              1,108           978             801             845      768       1,197    1,198       1,153
     Observations right             1,108           978             801             845      768       1,197    1,198       1,153
     Polyn. order                     1              1               1                1         1        1        1          1
     Bandwidth                      0.033          0.049          0.045          0.037      0.042      0.037    0.037       0.035
     Mean, left of threshold        0.069          0.327          0.312          0.020      0.020      0.780    0.357       0.426




Table B3: Placebo tests - 3vs4 (continued)


                            (9)             (10)             (11)              (12)        (13)        (14)       (15)        (16)
 Outcome                   Far-         Far-left           Center            Other        Same        # Same    Strength      Nat.
                           right                                                           Inc.                             strength
 Treatment                -0.013          0.001            -0.019            -0.010       0.038       0.057      0.010       0.005
                          (0.018)       (0.006)            (0.022)         (0.014)        (0.048)     (0.079)    (0.014)    (0.009)
 Robust p-value           0.420           0.966             0.418            0.419        0.512       0.421      0.569       0.589
 Observations left        1,279             956             1,411            1,187         756        1,254      1,271       1,256
 Observations right       1,279             956             1,411            1,187         756        1,254      1,271       1,264
 Polyn. order               1                1                1                 1           1           1           1            1
 Bandwidth                0.042           0.027             0.050            0.037        0.039       0.040      0.041       0.043
 Mean, left               0.070           0.005             0.110            0.036        0.287       2.264      0.392       0.391

                                                           Notes as in Table B1.




                                                                          28
Figure B1: Placebo tests - Candidate's gender


                                               1vs2                                                                                                       2vs3
                    .4                                                                                                    .4




                    .3                                                                                                    .3
 Female candidate




                                                                                                       Female candidate
                    .2                                                                                                    .2




                    .1                                                                                                    .1




                    0                                                                                                     0
                         -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                    .2          .3                             -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                        Running variable 1vs2                                                                                      Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                     3vs4
                                                                   .4




                                                                   .3
                                                Female candidate




                                                                   .2




                                                                   .1




                                                                   0
                                                                        -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1                       .2       .3
                                                                                            Running variable 3vs4



Notes: Dots represent the local averages of the candidate's characteristic (vertical axis). Averages are cal-
culated within quantile-spaced bins of the running variable (horizontal axis). The running variable (the vote
share difference between the two candidates in the first round) is measured as percentage points. The graph
is truncated at 30 percentage points on the horizontal axis to accommodate for outliers. Continuous lines
are a quadratic fit.




                                                                                                 29
Figure B2: Placebo tests - The candidate won the last election in the same district


                                                              1vs2                                                                                                                                      2vs3
                                   1                                                                                                                                    1



                                   .8                                                                                                                                   .8
 Won in the same district in t-1




                                                                                                                                      Won in the same district in t-1
                                   .6                                                                                                                                   .6



                                   .4                                                                                                                                   .4



                                   .2                                                                                                                                   .2



                                   0                                                                                                                                    0
                                        -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                                    .2          .3                                            -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                                       Running variable 1vs2                                                                                                                     Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                                                    3vs4
                                                                                                 1



                                                                                                 .8
                                                               Won in the same district in t-1




                                                                                                 .6



                                                                                                 .4



                                                                                                 .2



                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                      -.3   -.2         -.1         0            .1                                      .2       .3
                                                                                                                           Running variable 3vs4



                                                                                                                  Notes as in Figure B1.




                                                                                                                                30
Figure B3: Placebo tests - Left-wing candidate


                                                  1vs2                                                                                                              2vs3
                       1                                                                                                            1



                       .8                                                                                                           .8
 Left-wing candidate




                                                                                                              Left-wing candidate
                       .6                                                                                                           .6



                       .4                                                                                                           .4



                       .2                                                                                                           .2



                       0                                                                                                            0
                            -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                        .2          .3                                -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                           Running variable 1vs2                                                                                             Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                            3vs4
                                                                         1



                                                                         .8
                                                   Left-wing candidate




                                                                         .6



                                                                         .4



                                                                         .2



                                                                         0
                                                                              -.3   -.2         -.1         0            .1                          .2       .3
                                                                                                   Running variable 3vs4



                                                                                          Notes as in Figure B1.




                                                                                                        31
Figure B4: Placebo tests - Number of candidates of the same orientation in the first round


                                                                     1vs2                                                                                                                                                  2vs3
                                          3                                                                                                                                                3
 # candidates same orientation round 1




                                                                                                                                                  # candidates same orientation round 1
                                         2.5                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                          2                                                                                                                                                2




                                         1.5                                                                                                                                              1.5




                                          1                                                                                                                                                1
                                               -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                                          .2         .3                                                   -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                                              Running variable 1vs2                                                                                                                                 Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                                                                3vs4
                                                                                                              3
                                                                     # candidates same orientation round 1




                                                                                                             2.5




                                                                                                              2




                                                                                                             1.5




                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                   -.3   -.2         -.1         0            .1                                            .2      .3
                                                                                                                                        Running variable 3vs4



                                                                                                                               Notes as in Figure B1.




                                                                                                                                            32
Appendix C. Robustness tests
Table C1: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Quadratic specification


                               (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)       (5)             (6)
 Outcome                               1vs2                            2vs3                      3vs4
                               Run             Win             Run             Win        Run            Win
 Treatment                  0.055***      0.050***           0.220***     0.095***      0.144***    0.026**
                             (0.006)          (0.016)        (0.023)          (0.015)   (0.047)         (0.013)
 Robust p-value               0.000           0.005           0.000           0.000      0.008          0.041
 Observations left           15,067           16,700          6,229           6,277      1,531          1,510
 Observations right          15,067           16,700          6,229           6,277      1,531          1,510
 Polyn. order                    2               2              2                2         2              2
 Bandwidth                    0.144           0.166           0.088           0.089      0.058          0.057
 Mean, left of threshold      0.942           0.461           0.582           0.050      0.312          0.005

Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. In columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the
outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs (resp. wins) in the second round. The independent
variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher in the first round. We use a quadratic
specification: we fit separate polynomials of order 2 on each side of the threshold and compute the
bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the
outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




                                                        33
Table C2: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - IK bandwidths


                               (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)       (5)             (6)
 Outcome                                1vs2                              2vs3                      3vs4
                               Run              Win              Run              Win        Run            Win
 Treatment                   0.056***      0.059***            0.240***      0.100***      0.153***        0.022**
                             (0.004)           (0.016)         (0.016)           (0.012)   (0.034)         (0.010)
 Robust p-value               0.000            0.004            0.000            0.000      0.002           0.037
 Observations left            13,520           8,282            6,310            5,487      1,491           1,282
 Observations right           13,520           8,282            6,310            5,487      1,491           1,282
 Polyn. order                   1                 1               1                 1         1               1
 Bandwidth                    0.124            0.069            0.090            0.071      0.055           0.042
 Mean, left of threshold      0.941            0.458            0.568            0.048      0.288           0.006

Notes: We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the
threshold. We compute the bandwidths according to the IK procedure. Other notes as in Table C1.




Table C3: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - MSERD bandwidths divided
by 2


                                 (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)       (5)            (6)
   Outcome                               1vs2                             2vs3                      3vs4
                                Run              Win             Run               Win       Run           Win
   Treatment                  0.053***         0.055**         0.214***      0.091***      0.130**     0.027*
                               (0.006)          (0.023)         (0.025)          (0.018)   (0.056)     (0.016)
   Robust p-value               0.000           0.026           0.000             0.000     0.026          0.087
   Observations left            6,775           4,205           3,065             2,421      693           656
   Observations right           6,775           4,205           3,065             2,421      693           656
   Polyn. order                     1              1               1                1         1             1
   Bandwidth                    0.055           0.033           0.034             0.026     0.018          0.017
   Mean, left of threshold      0.945           0.460           0.588             0.051     0.325          0.005

Notes: We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the
threshold. We compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure, and then divide them by 2.
Other notes as in Table C1.




                                                          34
Figure C1: Impact on winning depending on bandwidth choices

                                                    Win 1vs2 - Poly. Order 1                                                                          Win 1vs2 - Poly. Order 2
               .1




                                                                                                                .1
                            .05
Treatment effect - Win 1vs2




                                                                                                 Treatment effect - Win 1vs2
                                                                                                                           0
                   0




                                                                                                            -.1
      -.05




                                                                                                -.2
               -.1
               -.15




                                                                                                                -.3
                                  .01   .02   .03    .04   .05     .06   .07   .08   .09   .1                                       .01   .03   .05   .07   .09    .11     .13   .15   .17   .19
                                                            Bandwidth                                                                                          Bandwidth
                                                    Win 2vs3 - Poly. Order 1                                                                          Win 2vs3 - Poly. Order 2
               .15




                                                                                                                .15            .1
                         .1
Treatment effect - Win 2vs3




                                                                                                   Treatment effect - Win 2vs3
                                                                                                                     .05
           .05




                                                                                                          0
0




                                                                                                -.05            -.1
               -.05




                                  .01   .02   .03    .04   .05     .06   .07   .08   .09   .1                                       .01   .03   .05   .07   .09    .11     .13   .15   .17   .19
                                                            Bandwidth                                                                                          Bandwidth
                                                    Win 3vs4 - Poly. Order 1                                                                          Win 3vs4 - Poly. Order 2
               .08




                                                                                                                .15
                          .06




                                                                                                                         .1
Treatment effect - Win 3vs4




                                                                                                Treatment effect - Win 3vs4
              .04




                                                                                                           .05
   .02




                                                                                                0
               0




                                                                                                                -.05




                                  .01   .02   .03    .04   .05     .06   .07   .08   .09   .1                                       .01   .03   .05   .07   .09    .11     .13   .15   .17   .19
                                                            Bandwidth                                                                                          Bandwidth


Notes: We show the sensitivity of the impact on winning to bandwidth choice, using a linear (left-hand side
graphs) or quadratic specification (right-hand side graphs). Dots represent the estimated treatment effect
using different bandwidths (horizontal axis). Dotted lines represent the 95% robust confidence interval.
When using a polynomial order 1 (resp. 2), we report all estimates for values of the bandwidth from 1 to 10
percentage points (resp. 20pp), in steps of 0.2 percentage points (resp. 0.4pp). The vertical red (resp. blue)
line gives the value of the MSERD (resp. IK) optimal bandwidth.


                                                                                           35
Table C4: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Including controls


                                (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)       (5)             (6)
  Outcome                               1vs2                            2vs3                      3vs4
                                Run             Win             Run             Win        Run            Win
  Treatment                  0.056***      0.054***           0.238***     0.101***      0.145***        0.022*
                              (0.005)          (0.016)        (0.017)          (0.013)   (0.037)         (0.011)
  Robust p-value               0.000           0.005           0.000           0.000      0.001          0.054
  Observations left           12,368           8,008           4,757           4,448      1,122          1,106
  Observations right          12,368           8,008           4,757           4,448      1,122          1,106
  Polyn. order                    1               1              1                1         1              1
  Bandwidth                    0.111           0.066           0.058           0.053      0.034          0.033
  Mean, left of threshold      0.941           0.335           0.575           0.048      0.303          0.005

Notes: We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the
threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. We added in the regressions
the same baseline variables used to perform the placebo tests (see Appendix B): the candidate's gender;
whether she ran in the previous election, in the same département and then in the same district; whether she
won a race in the previous election, in the same département and then in the same district; whether she runs
with or without the label of a political party; a set of six dummies indicating her political orientation;
whether this orientation is the same as the incumbent's; the number of candidates of her orientation who
were present in the first round; her strength in the first round, defined as the sum of first-round vote shares
of all candidates of the same orientation; and the average strength of her orientation at the national level in
the first round. To avoid dropping observations, for each control variable, we include a dummy equal to one
when the variable is missing and replace missings by 0s. Other notes as in Table C1.




                                                         36
Table C5: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Using the "ivreg2" command
and clustering on both sides of the threshold


                                (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)       (5)             (6)
 Outcome                               1vs2                            2vs3                      3vs4
                               Run             Win             Run             Win        Run            Win
 Treatment                  0.058***      0.061***           0.242***     0.103***      0.162***    0.022**
                             (0.004)          (0.021)        (0.019)          (0.013)   (0.033)         (0.010)
 Observations left            12,272          8,027           5,347           4,398      1,169          1,116
 Observations right           12,272          8,027           5,347           4,398      1,169          1,116
 Polyn. order                    1               1              1                1         1              1
 Bandwidth                    0.109           0.066           0.068           0.052      0.036          0.033
 Mean, left of threshold       0.941          0.458           0.572           0.048      0.300          0.005

Notes: We run the regressions using the "ivreg2" command, instead of "rdrobust". Standard errors, shown
in parentheses, are clustered at the district level, with each cluster encompassing observations on both sides
of the threshold. We indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *, respectively. The unit of
observation is the candidate. In columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the outcome is a dummy equal to 1
if the candidate runs (resp. wins) in the second round. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if
the candidate placed higher in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate
polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD
procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at
the threshold.




                                                        37
Table C6: Impact of ranking 2vs3 - Excluding races in which the 2nd is close to the 1st

                                             (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)
              Outcome                       Full sample 2vs3                    st nd
                                                                          Gap 1 -2 > 2pp
                                             Run        Win                Run         Win
              Treatment                   0.235*** 0.099***             0.254*** 0.086***
                                           (0.018)    (0.013)            (0.019)     (0.013)
              Robust p-value                0.000      0.000              0.000       0.000
              Observations left             5,347      4,398              4,825       3,894
              Observations right            5,347      4,398              4,825       3,894
              Polyn. order                    1           1                 1           1
              Bandwidth                     0.068      0.052              0.071       0.052
              Mean, left of threshold       0.572      0.048              0.555       0.039
Notes: Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the district level. We compute statistical
significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *,
respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. In columns 3 and 4, the sample is restricted to
elections where the vote share difference between the first and the second candidates in the first round is
strictly higher than 2 percentage points. In columns 1 and 3 (resp. 2 and 4), the outcome is a dummy equal
to 1 if the candidate runs (resp. wins) in the second round. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1
if the candidate placed higher in the first round. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the
outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.



Table C7: Impact of ranking 3vs4 - Excluding races in which the 3rd is close to the 2nd

                                                (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)
                Outcome                       Full sample 3vs4          Gap 2nd -3rd > 2pp
                                                Run       Win             Run        Win
                Treatment                    0.146*** 0.022*            0.142** 0.020**
                                              (0.040) (0.011)           (0.046) (0.009)
                Robust p-value                 0.003     0.052           0.012      0.049
                Observations left              1,169     1,116            852        929
                Observations right             1,169     1,116            852        929
                Polyn. order                     1          1               1         1
                Bandwidth                      0.036     0.033           0.035      0.040
                Mean, left of threshold        0.300     0.005           0.266     -0.001
Notes: In columns 3 and 4, the sample is restricted to elections where the vote share difference between the
second and the third candidates in the first round is strictly higher than 2 percentage points. Other notes as
in Table C6.

                                                     38
Appendix D. Analysis at the subdistrict level
As discussed in Section 3.3 of the paper, we use within-district variation to identify which types
of voters drive the unconditional effects of rankings. The finest level of aggregation of electoral
results is the precinct (or polling station). Results at the precinct level are available for all local
elections beginning in 2001, and all parliamentary elections beginning in 2002. An intermediate
level of aggregation between the precinct and the district is the municipality. We collected results
at the municipality level for the 1993 and 1997 parliamentary elections, for the 1992, 1994, and
1998 local elections, and for a few districts for which precinct-level results could not be used in
the 2001, 2008, and 2011 local elections. All disaggregate results were obtained from the French
Ministry of the Interior. Disaggregate results at the level of the precinct or the municipality are
unavailable before 1992.
    We ran quality checks on the precinct- and municipality-level data, to verify their internal
consistency as well as their consistency with district-level results. We dropped 2 percent of the
observations which failed these checks and could not be corrected.
    Overall, we have disaggregate results for 14,511 races, accounting for 64.4 percent of all races
used to measure the effects of ranking 1vs2. There are 33 precinct- or municipality-level results
for the average race, totaling up to 475,501 subdistrict-level results.
    In each district and race, we divide precincts or municipalities into terciles. Terciles are defined
based on the first-round total vote share of candidates placed first and second in the district; on the
total vote share of lower-ranked candidates; and on the share of non-candidate votes (encompassing
non-voters and blank and null votes), respectively. These three fractions are computed using the
number of registered citizens in the first round as denominator, and their sum is equal to 1. On
average, the vote share of the top-two candidates is equal to 31.3 percent, 38.3 percent, and 45.9
percent in the first, second, and third terciles, in the first set of terciles. In the second set of terciles,
the average vote share of lower-ranked candidates per tercile is equal to 15.9 percent, 20.8 percent,
and 27.1 percent, respectively. In the last set of terciles, the average share of non-voters and blank
and null votes per tercile is equal to 34.1 percent, 40.6 percent, and 47.1 percent, respectively.
    All regressions use candidates' unconditional vote shares in the precinct or in the municipality
as outcome. The running variable is defined at the district race level.




                                                     39
Table D1: Impact of ranking 1vs2 on vote share - Subdistrict level analysis


                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)       (7)               (8)       (9)      (10)

   Outcome                                    Vote share in the second round 1vs2 - subdistrict level analysis

                      Full Sample           Vote share top2                  Vote share lower-ranked              Share non-candidate votes

                                      T1          T2           T3            T1        T2        T3                T1        T2        T3

   Treatment          0.022***      0.016*** 0.023*** 0.024***             0.026*** 0.014*** 0.024***            0.025*** 0.023*** 0.018***

                       (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)          (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)           (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)

   Robust p-val.        0.000       0.000       0.000         0.000        0.000     0.000      0.000            0.000     0.000      0.000

   P-val.   T1 = T3                                           0.000                             0.213                                 0.000

   Obs. left            40,966      22,121      20,926    46,031           24,412    32,916    24,771            24,542    22,062    20,692

   Obs. right           40,966      22,121      20,926    46,031           24,412    32,916    24,771            24,542    22,062    20,692

   Polyn. order           1           1           1            1             1.        1          1                1         1          1

   Bandwidth            0.015       0.025       0.024         0.056        0.027     0.038      0.029            0.027     0.025      0.025

   Mean                 0.468       0.462       0.465         0.469        0.468     0.468      0.457            0.463     0.464      0.467

Notes: The outcome is defined at the subdistrict race level (precinct or municipality) and the analysis run at
this level. The running variable is defined at the district race level, and standard errors are clustered at that
level. We compute statistical significance based on the robust p-value and indicate significance at 1, 5, and
10% with ***, **, and *, respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. The outcome is the vote
share of the candidate in the second round, equal to 0 if the candidate does not stay in the second round. In
each district and race, we divide precincts into terciles. In column 2 (resp. 3 and 4), the sample is restricted
to precincts for which the share of non-candidate votes in the first round falls in the first tercile (resp.
second and third terciles). In column 5 (resp. 6 and 7), the sample is restricted to precincts where the vote
share of the top-two candidates in the first round falls in the first tercile (resp. second and third terciles). In
column 8 (resp. 9 and 10), the sample is restricted to precincts where the vote share of the lower-ranked
candidates in the first round falls in the first tercile (resp. second and third terciles). All heterogeneity
variables are expressed in terms of the number of registered citizens. We use local polynomial regressions:
we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according
to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the threshold gives the value of the outcome for the
lower-ranked candidate at the threshold. Below the robust p-value, we provide the result of a test of the
hypothesis that the coefficients computed in the first and third terciles are equal to each other.




                                                                      40
Appendix E. Rankings' effects depending on the context
Table E1: Summary statistics on parliamentary versus local elections


                                        Parliamentary (N=6,335)          Local (N=16,222)
                                        Mean           Sd                Mean       Sd
             Panel A. 1st round
             Registered voters    69,560                 16,843          12,178      8,181
             Turnout               0.682                  0.116           0.617      0.123
             Candidate votes      0.664                   0.114          0.593       0.119
             Number of candidates   9.1                    4.3             5.5        1.6

             Panel B. 2nd round
             Turnout                     0.680           0.131            0.608      0.130
             Candidate votes             0.650           0.138            0.573      0.132
             Number of candidates         2.2             0.5              2.1        0.4
Notes: This table presents some descriptive statistics on races with two rounds and at least two candidates
in the first round, separately for parliamentary and local elections.




                                                    41
Table E2: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Parliamentary elections


                                (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)        (5)                (6)
  Outcome                                1vs2                             2vs3                       3vs4
                                Run              Win             Run               Win        Run             Win
  Treatment                   0.064***      0.094***           0.240***      0.113***      0.185***          0.006
                              (0.009)           (0.025)         (0.035)          (0.023)    (0.052)          (0.012)
  Robust p-value               0.000            0.002           0.000             0.000      0.001           0.676
  Observations left            3,598            3,434           1,487             1,696       633             682
  Observations right           3,598            3,434           1,487             1,696       633             682
  Polyn. order                   1                 1               1                1            1                 1
  Bandwidth                    0.114            0.107           0.064             0.078      0.038           0.042
  Mean, left of threshold      0.934            0.438           0.542             0.057      0.241           0.010

Notes: The sample is restricted to parliamentary elections. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are
clustered at the district level. We compute statistical significance based on the robust p-value and indicate
significance at 1, 5, and 10% with ***, **, and *, respectively. The unit of observation is the candidate. In
columns 1, 3, and 5 (resp. 2, 4, and 6), the outcome is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate runs (resp.
wins) in the second round. The independent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the candidate placed higher
in the first round. We use local polynomial regressions: we fit separate polynomials of order 1 on each side
of the threshold and compute the bandwidths according to the MSERD procedure. The mean, left of the
threshold gives the value of the outcome for the lower-ranked candidate at the threshold.




Table E3: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Local elections


                                  (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)       (5)             (6)
    Outcome                              1vs2                             2vs3                       3vs4
                                 Run              Win            Run              Win       Run             Win
    Treatment                  0.053***          0.044         0.231***      0.094***      0.105        0.047**
                                (0.005)         (0.020)        (0.021)           (0.016)   (0.059)      (0.021)
    Robust p-value               0.000           0.111          0.000            0.000     0.181            0.033
    Observations left            9,042           5,473          3,798            2,903      542             423
    Observations right           9,042           5,473          3,798            2,903      542             423
    Polyn. order                     1             1              1                 1        1               1
    Bandwidth                    0.114           0.063          0.069            0.048     0.034            0.024
    Mean, left of threshold      0.944           0.467          0.586            0.043     0.360        -0.003

Notes: The sample is restricted to local elections. Other notes as in Table E2.


                                                          42
Figure E1: Impact on winning across time


                                             Win 1vs2                                                                                     Win 2vs3
                  .25                                                                                   .25


                    .2                                                                                    .2


                  .15                                                                                   .15
 Point estimate




                                                                                       Point estimate
                    .1                                                                                    .1


                  .05                                                                                   .05


                    0                                                                                     0


                  -.05                                                                                  -.05
                         1958to1985   1988to1994      1997to2007     2008to2017                                    1958to1985      1988to1994    1997to2007     2008to2017



Notes: We divided the sample into four time periods (horizontal axis). Dots represent the estimated impact
on winning using only elections from the given period (vertical axis). Vertical lines represent the 95% robust
confidence interval. The red dotted horizontal line represents the value of the estimate on the full sample.




Table E4: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Left-wing candidates


                                                     (1)              (2)                                  (3)                   (4)               (5)            (6)
        Outcome                                              1vs2                                                     2vs3                               3vs4
                                                     Run             Win                                  Run                   Win               Run            Win
        Treatment                                  0.091***        0.084***                    0.298***                    0.134***             0.203***        -0.001
                                                   (0.008)          (0.024)                             (0.025)              (0.020)            (0.053)         (0.014)
        Robust p-value                              0.000           0.004                               0.000                   0.000            0.001          0.976
        Observations left                           5,945           3,822                               2,950                   2,507             587            549
        Observations right                          5,624           3,711                               2,864                   2,453             634            589
        Polyn. order                                   1               1                                       1                  1                  1             1
        Bandwidth                                   0.118           0.071                               0.080                   0.064            0.037          0.034
        Mean, left of threshold                     0.908           0.588                               0.495                   0.058            0.230          0.013

Notes: The sample is restricted to left-wing candidates. Other notes as in Table E2.




                                                                                  43
Table E5: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Right-wing candidates


                                 (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)               (6)
   Outcome                             1vs2                            2vs3                          3vs4
                                Run            Win             Run             Win        Run               Win
   Treatment                 0.030***         0.034          0.202***     0.091***       0.116         0.068***
                              (0.006)         (0.023)        (0.035)          (0.021)    (0.073)        (0.025)
   Robust p-value              0.000          0.355           0.000           0.000      0.248              0.008
   Observations left           4,296          3,726           1,462           1,592       315               364
   Observations right          4,729          4,047           1,620           1,783       307               376
   Polyn. order                   1              1              1                1         1                 1
   Bandwidth                   0.083          0.070           0.047           0.053      0.030              0.038
   Mean, left of threshold     0.967          0.396           0.601           0.045      0.331              0.000

Notes: The sample is restricted to right-wing candidates. Other notes as in Table E2.




Table E6: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Excluding local elections which
took place on the same date as regional or municipal elections


                               (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)               (6)
  Outcome                              1vs2                             2vs3                         3vs4
                               Run             Win              Run             Win         Run               Win
  Treatment                  0.056***     0.073***           0.274***         0.121***    0.161***           0.024*
                             (0.005)          (0.019)         (0.022)          (0.015)     (0.045)           (0.012)
  Robust p-value              0.000           0.002            0.000           0.000       0.003             0.095
  Observations left           8,652           6,048            3,574           3,756        912               926
  Observations right          8,652           6,048            3,574           3,756        912               926
  Polyn. order                   1               1               1                1              1                 1
  Bandwidth                   0.108           0.070            0.070           0.075       0.036             0.037
  Mean, left of threshold     0.943           0.452            0.525           0.049       0.240             0.007

Notes: We exclude from the sample the 1992, 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2008 local elections, which took
place on the same date as regional or municipal elections. Other notes as in Table E2.




                                                        44
Table E7: Impact on running in the 2nd round and winning - Local elections, excluding those
which took place on the same date as regional or municipal elections


                                 (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)       (5)           (6)
   Outcome                              1vs2                            2vs3                     3vs4
                                 Run            Win             Run             Win       Run           Win
   Treatment                  0.051***         0.058*         0.300***     0.128***      0.057      0.061**
                               (0.007)         (0.025)        (0.031)          (0.021)   (0.083)    (0.027)
   Robust p-value               0.000          0.081           0.000           0.000     0.763          0.042
   Observations left            5,231          3,457           1,916           1,756      208           301
   Observations right           5,231          3,457           1,916           1,756      208           301
   Polyn. order                   1               1              1                1        1             1
   Bandwidth                    0.110          0.066           0.066           0.059     0.022          0.037
   Mean, left of threshold      0.948          0.462           0.513           0.042     0.277          0.000

Notes: The sample is restricted to local elections and excludes the 1992, 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2008 local
elections, which took place on the same date as regional or municipal elections. Other notes as in Table E2.




                                                         45
Appendix F. Newspaper articles analysis
We used Factiva's research tool (https://www.dowjones.com/products/factiva) to collect all news-
paper articles released between the two rounds of all parliamentary elections since 1997 and con-
taining the entities élection*, électoral*, législative*, candidat*, or circonscription*, as well as all
articles released between the two rounds of all local elections since 1998 and containing the entities
élection*, électoral*, cantonale*, or candidat*, or the word "canton" or "cantons".1 For the 2015
local elections, we also collected articles containing the entity départementale* since these elec-
tions were called "départementales" instead of "cantonales" as the previous ones. Articles ranked
by Factiva under the "sport" category were discarded. Table F1 displays the number of articles
collected for each election.


Table F1: Number of newspaper articles by election type and year


    Election type                  Year     Nb of articles         Election type        Year Nb of articles
    Parliamentary elections        1997         378                Local elections      1998     370
                                   2002         766                                     2001     511
                                   2007        6,396                                    2004    3,832
                                   2012       11,789                                    2008   10,313
                                   2017       14,434                                    2011    9,561
                                                                                        2015   18,329
                                   Total        33,763                                  Total  42,916
                                   Total                                   76,679



To identify articles mentioning candidates' names and to count the number of mentions, we pro-
ceeded in two steps. First, we normalized the first and last names of all candidates ranked first to
fourth in the first round of each race, in the election results. This required a lot of cleaning and
manual checking. For instance, we dropped accents, special characters, and aristocratic particles,
and we completed compound first names to the extent possible when one of the components was
only indicated by its first letter. In the 2015 local elections, where the names of both candidates in
each ticket were concatenated in a single field, we separated the two names and, for each candidate,
the first and last name. Second, we harmonized the text of all newspaper articles in Python. For
instance, we separated words wrongly tied together and removed accents, aristocratic particles, and
extra blank spaces. We then counted the total number of articles mentioning the candidate's first
and last names at least once; the total number of mentions (counting twice the articles in which
the candidate is mentioned twice, thrice the articles in which they are mentioned thrice, etc.); and
the total number of articles mentioning the candidate in the title. For the 2015 local elections, we
   1 Looking for the entity canton* instead of the specific words "canton" or "cantons" would have generated false

positives since several French words unrelated to cantonal elections begin with this entity, including "cantonade" and
"cantonner".


                                                         46
computed the average number of mentions of the two candidates of each ticket. The results are
reported in Table 10 (Section 4.5 of the main text) and shown graphically for the number of articles
mentioning the candidate in Figure F1.


Figure F1: Impact on the number of articles mentioning the candidate


                                                 1vs2                                                                                                          2vs3
                      10                                                                                                       6




                      8                                                                                                        4
 Number of articles




                                                                                                          Number of articles
                      6                                                                                                        2




                      4                                                                                                        0




                      2                                                                                                        -2
                           -.3   -.2   -.1         0            .1                      .2         .3                               -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1   .2   .3
                                          Running variable 1vs2                                                                                         Running variable 2vs3


                                                                                                        3vs4
                                                                       1




                                                                      .5
                                                 Number of articles




                                                                       0




                                                                      -.5


                                                                            -.3   -.2        -.1         0            .1                        .2       .3
                                                                                                Running variable 3vs4



Notes: Dots represent the local averages of the number of articles mentioning the candidate at least once (vertical
axis). Averages are calculated within quantile-spaced bins of the running variable (horizontal axis). The running
variable (the vote share difference between the two candidates in the first round) is measured as percentage points.
The graph is truncated at 30 percentage points on the horizontal axis to accommodate for outliers. Continuous lines
are a quadratic fit.



Articles read and annotated manually were chosen as follows. We identified all races with a vote
share difference between the top-two candidates lower than 2 percentage points and in which the
first or second candidate was cited in at least one article collected through Factiva. We selected
a random subset of 201 of these races and, out of all articles covering these races, up to two
articles. Before selecting articles, we removed outliers: articles citing candidates who were cited
in a total of 50 articles or more. Using the same process, we selected a random subset of 104
races for the 2vs3 discontinuity and 20 races for the 3vs4 discontinuity and again, for each of these

                                                                                                    47
races, up to two articles. The proportion of close races selected from each discontinuity (201, 104,
and 20 races) corresponds to their proportion in the full sample of races starting with the 1997
parliamentary election (1,347, 697, and 134). Races and articles were drawn independently for
each discontinuity, meaning that the same race or the same article could be drawn multiple times.
The final dataset includes 613 entries (race*discontinuity*article). We dropped 66 entries after
reading the corresponding article and realizing that it did not cover the race or did not cover the
candidate but an homonym, leaving us with 547 entries, 517 unique articles, and 296 unique races.
    For most of the race*discontinuities, our sample includes two articles. For 55 race*discontinuities,
only one article was available. To give equal weight to each race*discontinuity, this article receives
a weight of two in all statistics reported in Table F2. This table reports the fractions of articles
which:
    · mostly cover the higher-ranked (resp. lower-ranked) candidate,
    · report speech from the higher-ranked (resp. lower-ranked) candidate,
    · report the vote share of the higher-ranked (resp. lower-ranked) candidate,
    · mention that a public figure supports the higher-ranked (resp. lower-ranked) candidate for
       the second round,
    · express positive expectations from the higher-ranked (resp. lower-ranked) candidate about
       their likelihood to win the second round,
    · express positive expectations from someone else (e.g., the journalist, a public figure, or
       another candidate) about the likelihood that the higher-ranked (resp. lower-ranked) candidate
       wins the second round,
    · and mention only candidate rankings (either the ranking of one of the two candidates or
       both); only the vote shares of both candidates, the gap between them, or the closeness of the
       race; or both.




                                                 48
Table F2: Newspaper articles analysis


 Variables                                      Full Sample           Running variable            Sample 1vs2
                                                 (N=547)               1 pp (N=271)                 (N=348)

 Panel A. Coverage of the higher- and lower-ranked candidates
 Coverage centered
   On the higher-ranked                      16.0                             15.4                     15.3
   On the lower-ranked                       16.1                             14.1                     17.5
 Reported speech
   Of the higher-ranked                      14.6                             15.4                     12.2
   Of the lower-ranked                       14.5                             14.1                     11.9
 Vote share mentioned
   Of the higher-ranked                      27.6                             27.5                     25.9
   Of the lower-ranked                       27.4                             27.2                     24.9
 Support from a public figure
   In favor of the higher-ranked              5.0                             5.4                      5.3
   In favor of the lower-ranked               5.0                             4.4                      6.6
 Positive expectations
   From the higher-ranked                     0.7                             0.7                      0.8
   From the lower-ranked                      1.8                             0.7                      1.6
 Positive expectations from s.o else
   In favor of the higher-ranked              5.2                             5.0                      7.4
   In favor of the lower-ranked               5.0                             3.7                      6.9

 Panel B. Reporting of first-round results
   Only ranking                                      9.5                      8.7                      9.0
   Only vote shares, gap, or closeness               17.8                     18.8                     17.5
   Both                                              20.6                     22.8                     24.1

Notes: The numbers reported in the table are percentages.                    The level of analysis is the
race*discontinuity*article. For race*discontinuities for which only one article was available, this article
receives a weight of two in all statistics. The first column reports the statistics on the full sample, the sec-
ond column focuses on races where the vote share difference between the two candidates is smaller than
1 percentage point, and the third column focuses on races of sample1 where we compare close first and
close second candidates. Information on the sampling procedure and on the statistics reported in the table is
provided in the text above.




                                                      49
Appendix G. Political orientations
We allocate candidates to six political orientations (far-left, left, center, right, far-right, and other)
based on labels attributed to them by the Ministry of the Interior. The following tables show
our mapping between political labels and orientations, for each election. The third column also
indicates whether the political label corresponds to a specific political party. We use this variable
to classify candidates as "party" or "non-party" candidates. The 1978 and 1981 parliamentary
elections, as well as the 1982 and 1985 local elections are shown together because the sets of
political parties competing in both elections were identical.


                                  1958 parliamentary elections
        Political label                                    Political orientation           Party
        Centre National des Indépendants                           Right                     1
        Centre de la Réforme Républicains                           Left                     1
        Démocratie chrétienne de France                            Right                     1
        Divers Extrême Droite                                    Far-right                   0
        Divers Gaullistes                                          Right                     0
        Modérés                                                    Other                     0
        Mouvement Républicain Populaire                           Center                     1
        Non Classés                                                Other                     0
        Parti Communiste                                            Left                     1
        Parti Poujadiste                                         Far-right                   1
        Parti Socialiste Autonome                                   Left                     1
        Radicaux du Centre                                        Center                     1
        Radicaux Socialistes                                        Left                     1
        Radicaux - Union des Forces Démocratiques                   Left                     1
        Rassemblement des Gauches Républicaines                   Center                     1
        Section Française de l'Internationale Ouvrière              Left                     1
        Union Démocratique et Socialiste de la Résistance           Left                     1
        Union des Forces Démocratiques                              Left                     1
        Union de la gauche socialiste                               Left                     1
        Union pour la Nouvelle République                          Right                     1




                                                   50
                             1962 parliamentary elections
Political label                                         Political orientation   Party
Centre National des Indépendants                                Right             1
Divers Extrême Droite                                         Far-right           0
Divers Extrême Gauche                                          Far-left           0
Divers Gaullistes                                               Right             0
Indépendants                                                    Other             0
Indépendants - Vème République                                  Other             0
Modérés                                                         Other             0
Mouvement Républicain Populaire                                Center             1
Mouvement Républicain Populaire - Vème République              Centre             1
Non Classés                                                     Other             0
Parti Communiste                                                 Left             1
Parti Poujadiste                                              Far-right           1
Parti Socialiste Unifié                                        Far-left           1
Radicaux du Centre                                             Center             1
Radicaux Socialistes                                             Left             1
Section Française de l'Internationale Ouvrière                   Left             1
Union pour la Nouvelle République                               Right             1




                                         51
                      1967 parliamentary elections
Political label                          Political orientation   Party
Alliance Républicaine                            Center            1
Apparentés Parti Communiste                       Left             0
Centre Démocrate                                 Center            1
Divers Extrême Droite                           Far-right          0
Divers Gaullistes                                 Right            0
Extrême Gauche                                   Far-left          0
Modérés                                           Other            0
Parti Communiste                                  Left             1
Parti Socialiste Unifié                          Far-left          1
Radicaux de Droite                                Right            1
Ralliés Gaullistes                                Right            0
Régionalistes                                     Other            0
Républicains Indépendants                         Right            1
Parti Socialiste et Fédération de Gauche          Left             1
Union pour la Nouvelle République                 Right            1




                                 52
                           1968 parliamentary elections
Political label                                           Political orientation   Party
Alliance Républicaine                                            Center             1
Apparentés Parti Communiste et Parti Communiste                    Left             1
Centre Démocrate                                                 Center             1
Centre Démocrate/Centre Progrès et Démocratie Moderne            Center             1
Centre Progrès et Démocratie Moderne                             Center             1
Divers Extrême Droite                                           Far-right           0
Divers Gaullistes                                                 Right             0
Divers Gaulliste/Union pour la Nouvelle République                Right             1
Extrême Gauche                                                   Far-left           0
Indépendants                                                      Other             0
Modérés                                                           Other             0
Modérés/Centre Progrès et Démocratie Moderne                     Center             1
Modérés/Radicaux Socialistes                                       Left             1
Modérés/Républicains Indépendants                                 Right             1
Mouvement pour la Réforme                                        Center             1
Non Classés                                                       Other             0
Parti Communiste Français                                          Left             1
Parti Socialiste Unifié                                          Far-left           1
Radicaux de Droite                                                Right             1
Radicaux de Droite/Républicains Indépendants                      Right             1
Radicaux Socialistes                                               Left             1
Radicaux Socialistes/Républicains Indépendants                    Right             1
Régionalistes                                                     Other             0
Républicains Indépendants (RI)                                    Right             1
RI /Divers Gaulliste                                              Right             1
RI/Union des Démocrates pour la République (UDR)                  Right             1
RI/UDR/Union pour la Nouvelle République                          Right             1
Parti Socialiste et Fédération de Gauche                           Left             1
Technique et Démocratie                                           Other             1
Union pour la Nouvelle République                                 Right             1




                                       53
                          1973 parliamentary elections
Political label                                  Political orientation   Party
Centre Démocratie et Progrès (CDP)                       Right             1
CDP/Union des Républicains de Progrès (URP)              Right             1
Divers Gaullistes                                        Right             0
Groupe des Réformateurs Démocrates Sociaux              Center             1
Divers Droite                                            Right             0
Divers Gauche                                             Left             0
Extrême Droite                                         Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                                          Far-left           0
Indépendants                                             Other             0
Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire                        Far-left           1
Lutte Ouvrière                                          Far-left           1
Union de la Gauche                                        Left             1
Non Classés                                              Other             0
Organisation Communiste Internationale                  Far-left           1
Parti Communiste Français                                 Left             1
Parti Socialiste Unifié                                 Far-left           1
Parti Socialiste Unifié - Gauche Sociale Unifiée          Left             1
Radicaux Réformateurs                                   Center             1
Républicains Indépendants                                Right             1
Républicains Indépendants/URP                            Right             1
Union des Démocrates pour la République                  Right             1
Union des Démocrates pour la République/URP              Right             1
Union des Républicains de Progrès                        Right             1




                                     54
                      1978 and 1981 parliamentary elections
       Political label                      Political orientation   Party
       Divers Droite                                Right             0
       Divers Gauche                                 Left             0
       Ecologistes                                  Other             1
       Extrême Droite                             Far-right           0
       Extrême Gauche                              Far-left           0
       Indépendants                                 Other             0
       Non Classés                                  Other             0
       Parti Communiste Français                     Left             1
       Parti Socialiste                              Left             1
       Rassemblement Pour la République             Right             1
       Union pour la Démocratie Française           Right             1




                              1979 local elections
Political label                                  Political orientation      Party
Communistes                                               Left                1
"DMF": Divers Droite - Républicains Indépendants         Right                0
Divers Droite                                            Right                0
Divers Gauche                                             Left                0
Ecologistes                                              Other                1
Extrême Gauche                                          Far-left              0
Radicaux De Gauche                                        Left                1
Rassemblement Pour la République                         Right                1
Socialistes                                               Left                1
Union pour la Démocratie Française                       Right                1




                                      55
                 1982 and 1985 local elections
Political label                    Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                 Left             1
Divers Droite                               Right            0
Divers Gauche                               Left             0
Ecologistes                                 Other            1
Extrême Droite                            Far-right          0
Extrême Gauche                             Far-left          0
Radicaux De Gauche                          Left             1
Rassemblement Pour la République            Right            1
Socialistes                                 Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française          Right            1




                  1988 parliamentary elections
Political label                    Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                 Left             1
Divers Droite                               Right            0
Ecologistes                                 Other            1
Extrême Droite                            Far-right          0
Extrême Gauche                             Far-left          0
Front National                            Far-right          1
Majorité Présidentielle                     Left             0
Radicaux De Gauche                          Left             1
Régionalistes                               Other            0
Rassemblement Pour la République            Right            1
Socialistes                                 Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française          Right            1




                              56
                      1988 local elections
Political label                      Political orientation     Party
Divers Droite                                Right               0
Divers Gauche                                 Left               0
Ecologistes                                  Other               1
Extrême Droite                             Far-right             0
Extrême Gauche                              Far-left             0
Front National                             Far-right             1
Parti Communiste                              Left               1
Parti Socialiste                              Left               1
Radicaux De Gauche                            Left               1
Régionalistes                                Other               0
Rassemblement Pour la République             Right               1
Sans Etiquette                               Other               0
Union pour la Démocratie Française           Right               1




                        1992 local elections
Political label                        Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                     Left             1
Divers Droite                                  Right             0
Extrême Droite                               Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                                Far-left           0
Front National                               Far-right           1
Génération Ecologie                            Other             1
Majorité Présidentielle                         Left             0
Radicaux De Gauche                              Left             1
Régionalistes                                  Other             0
Rassemblement Pour la République               Right             1
Socialistes                                     Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française             Right             1
Les Verts                                       Left             1




                                57
                  1993 parliamentary elections
Political label                    Political orientation     Party
Communistes                                 Left               1
Divers                                      Other              0
Divers Droite                               Right              0
Extrême Droite                            Far-right            0
Extrême Gauche                             Far-left            0
Front National                            Far-right            1
Génération Ecologie                         Other              1
Majorité Présidentielle                     Left               0
Radicaux De Gauche                          Left               1
Régionalistes                               Other              0
Rassemblement Pour la République            Right              1
Socialistes                                 Left               1
Union pour la Démocratie Française          Right              1
Les Verts                                   Left               1




                      1994 local elections
Political label                      Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                   Left             1
Divers                                       Other             0
Divers Droite                                Right             0
Divers Gauche                                 Left             0
Extrême Droite                             Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                              Far-left           0
Front National                             Far-right           1
Génération Ecologie                          Other             1
Radicaux De Gauche                            Left             1
Régionalistes                                Other             0
Rassemblement Pour la République             Right             1
Socialistes                                   Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française           Right             1
Les Verts                                     Left             1



                               58
                   1997 parliamentary elections
Political label                     Political orientation    Party
Communistes                                  Left              1
Divers                                       Other             0
Divers Droite                                Right             0
Divers Gauche                                Left              0
Ecologistes                                  Other             1
Extrême Droite                             Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                              Far-left           0
Front National                             Far-right           1
Parti Radical Socialiste                     Left              1
Rassemblement Pour la République             Right             1
Socialistes                                  Left              1
Union pour la Démocratie Française           Right             1




                      1998 local elections
Political label                      Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                   Left             1
Divers                                       Other             0
Divers Droite                                Right             0
Divers Gauche                                 Left             0
Ecologistes                                  Other             0
Extrême Droite                             Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                              Far-left           0
Front National                             Far-right           1
Mouvement Des Citoyens                        Left             1
Radicaux De Gauche                            Left             1
Rassemblement Pour la République             Right             1
Socialistes                                   Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française           Right             1
Les Verts                                     Left             1




                               59
                       2001 local elections
Political label                       Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                    Left             1
Chasse, Pêche, Nature et Traditions           Right             1
Divers                                        Other             0
Démocratie Libérale                           Right             1
Divers Droite                                 Right             0
Divers Gauche                                  Left             0
Ecologistes                                   Other             0
Extrême Gauche                               Far-left           0
Front National                              Far-right           1
Mouvement Des Citoyens                         Left             1
Mouvement National Républicain              Far-right           1
Parti Radical de Gauche                        Left             1
Régionalistes                                 Other             0
Rassemblement du Peuple Français              Right             1
Rassemblement Pour la République              Right             1
Socialistes                                    Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française           Center             1
Les Verts                                      Left             1




                                60
                  2002 parliamentary elections
Political label                     Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                  Left             1
Chasse, Pêche, Nature et Traditions         Right             1
Divers                                      Other             0
Démocratie Libérale                         Right             1
Divers Droite                               Right             0
Divers Gauche                                Left             0
Ecologistes                                 Other             0
Extrême Droite                            Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                             Far-left           0
Front National                            Far-right           1
Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire           Far-left           1
Lutte Ouvrière                             Far-left           1
Mouvement National Républicain            Far-right           1
Mouvement Pour la France                    Right             1
Pôle Républicain                             Left             1
Radicaux De Gauche                           Left             1
Régionalistes                               Other             0
Rassemblement Pour la France                Right             1
Socialistes                                  Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française         Center             1
Union pour un Mouvement Populaire           Right             1
Les Verts                                    Left             1




                               61
                        2004 local elections
Political label                        Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                     Left             1
Chasse, Pêche, Nature et Traditions            Right             1
Divers                                         Other             0
Divers Droite                                  Right             0
Divers Gauche                                   Left             0
Ecologistes                                    Other             0
Extrême Droite                               Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                                Far-left           0
Front National                               Far-right           1
Radicaux De Gauche                              Left             1
Régionalistes                                  Other             0
Socialistes                                     Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française            Center             1
Union pour un Mouvement Populaire              Right             1
Les Verts                                       Left             1




                                62
                            2007 parliamentary elections
Political label                                            Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                                         Left             1
Chasse, Pêche, Nature et Traditions                                Right             1
Divers                                                             Other             0
Divers Droite                                                      Right             0
Divers Gauche                                                       Left             0
Ecologistes                                                        Other             0
Extrême Droite                                                   Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                                                    Far-left           0
Front National                                                   Far-right           1
Majorité présidentielle                                            Right             0
Mouvement Pour la France                                           Right             1
Radicaux De Gauche                                                  Left             1
Régionalistes                                                      Other             0
Socialistes                                                         Left             1
Union pour la Démocratie Française - Mouvement Démocrate          Center             1
Union pour un Mouvement Populaire                                  Right             1
Les Verts                                                           Left             1




                                         63
                        2011 local elections
Political label                        Political orientation   Party
Autres                                         Other             0
Communiste                                      Left             1
Divers Droite                                  Right             0
Divers Gauche                                   Left             0
Ecologistes                                    Other             0
Extrême Droite                               Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                                Far-left           0
Front National                               Far-right           1
Majorité présidentielle                        Right             1
Nouveau Centre                                 Right             1
Modem                                         Center             1
Parti de Gauche                                 Left             1
Radicaux De Gauche                              Left             1
Régionalistes                                  Other             0
Socialistes                                     Left             1
Union pour un Mouvement Populaire              Right             1
Europe Ecologie les Verts                       Left             1




                                64
                   2012 parliamentary elections
Political label                      Political orientation   Party
Alliance Centriste                          Center             1
Autres                                       Other             0
Centre pour la France                       Center             0
Divers Droite                                Right             0
Divers Gauche                                 Left             0
Ecologistes                                  Other             0
Extrême Droite                             Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                              Far-left           0
Front de Gauche                               Left             1
Front National                             Far-right           1
Nouveau Centre                               Right             1
Parti Radical                                Right             1
Radicaux De Gauche                            Left             1
Régionalistes                                Other             0
Socialistes                                   Left             1
Union pour un Mouvement Populaire            Right             1
Europe Ecologie les Verts                     Left             1




                               65
                        2015 local elections
Political label                         Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                      Left             1
Divers                                          Other             0
Debout La France                                Right             1
Divers Droite                                   Right             0
Divers Gauche                                    Left             0
Extrême Droite                                Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                                 Far-left           0
Front de Gauche                                  Left             1
Front National                                Far-right           1
Modem                                          Center             1
Parti De Gauche                                  Left             1
Radicaux De Gauche                               Left             1
Socialistes                                      Left             1
Union Centriste                                Center             1
Union pour la Démocratie                        Right             1
Union des Démocrates et Indépendants            Right             1
Union de Gauche                                  Left             1
Union pour un Mouvement Populaire               Right             1
Europe Ecologie les Verts                        Left             1




                                 66
                 2017 parliamentary elections
Political label                      Political orientation   Party
Communistes                                   Left             1
Divers                                       Other             0
Debout La France                             Right             1
Divers Droite                                Right             0
Divers Gauche                                 Left             0
Ecologistes                                   Left             0
Extrême Droite                             Far-right           0
Extrême Gauche                              Far-left           0
France Insoumise                              Left             1
Front National                             Far-right           1
Les Républicains                             Right             1
Modem                                       Center             1
Radicaux De Gauche                            Left             1
Régionalistes                                Other             0
Républicque En Marche                       Center             1
Socialistes                                   Left             1
Union des Démocrates et Indépendants         Right             1




                               67
