                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    MOTIVATED ERRORS

                                       Christine L. Exley
                                        Judd B. Kessler

                                      Working Paper 26595
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26595


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




Research support was provided by the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and
Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christine L. Exley and Judd B. Kessler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Motivated Errors
Christine L. Exley and Judd B. Kessler
NBER Working Paper No. 26595
December 2019
JEL No. C91,D64,D91

                                          ABSTRACT

In three sets of experiments involving over 4,200 subjects, we show that agents motivated to be
selfish make systematic decision errors of the kind generally attributed to cognitive limitations or
behavioral biases. We show that these decision errors are eliminated (or dramatically reduced)
when self-serving motives are removed. We say that individuals make "motivated errors." They
make decision errors, but only when it is self-serving to do so.


Christine L. Exley
Harvard Business School
clexley@gmail.com

Judd B. Kessler
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
    Most people would like to believe that they are good.1 Yet, many of their decisions are not
good -- they are selfish, lazy, impatient, indulgent, or worse. How do people resolve this tension?
Previous research has highlighted the role of motivated decisions, which allows agents to rationalize
their decisions in a more favorable light.2 In particular, the prior literature on motivated decisions
has demonstrated two broad ways in which agents rationalize decisions that could be viewed as
undesirable.
    The first way involves appealing to uncertainty in how decisions map to outcomes. The intuition
is as follows. Choosing a decision that benefits oneself to the detriment of others is undesirable,
but choosing a decision that benefits oneself but may not harm others -- because of uncertainty
in how decisions map to outcomes -- may be less undesirable. Such motivated decisions are often
facilitated by information avoidance. In the canonical example of Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007),
agents choose to stay uninformed about the state of the world in order to maintain uncertainty
about whether a selfish action harms another subject.3
    The second way involves attributing undesirable decisions to more innocuous preferences or
beliefs. The intuition is as follows. It is bad to be selfish, but there is nothing wrong with holding
particular preferences (over, say, risk) or holding particular beliefs (over, say, what payoffs are likely
to arise), even if those preferences or beliefs lead you to make selfish decisions. This attribution is
possible in settings where there is uncertainty about whether an undesirable action can be attributed
to such innocuous preferences or beliefs. In one of the earliest examples, Snyder et al. (1979)
shows that subjects, when deciding whether or not to watch a movie with an individual who has
a disability, are more likely to avoid this individual when their avoidance "could masquerade as
a movie preference" rather than a dislike for an individual who has a disability. More recently,
empirical work documents that individuals appear to use their fairness preferences (Konow, 2000),
ambiguity preferences (Haisley and Weber, 2010), risk preferences (Exley, 2015), and beliefs about
factors that influence payoffs -- such as how others behave (Di Tella et al., 2015) -- to rationalize
decisions that could otherwise be attributed to selfishness.4
    1
     In November 2018, we ran a Google Consumer Survey that was answered by 1,536 individuals. When asked
to indicate the extent of agreement with the following statement "Overall, I am a good person" on a scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), these results -- after being weighted by age, gender and region to match
the 2015 CPS -- were as follows: 5 (48%), 4 (26%), 3 (14%), 2 (4%), and 1 (8%)
   2
     Such rationalization may be desired by agents with self-image concerns. There is a rich theoretical literature on
the role of self-image (Rabin, 1995; Bodner and Prelec, 2003; B´   enabou and Tirole, 2004, 2006; Mijovi´c-Prelec and
Prelec, 2010; B´ enabou and Tirole, 2011; Grossman, 2015; Grossman and van der Weele, 2017; B´     enabou, Falk and
Tirole, 2018; Foerster and van der Weele, 2018a).
   3
     In Appendix B.3, we discuss the robust literature on information avoidance that has followed from Dana, Weber
and Kuang (2007).
   4
     Other examples include cases where decisions may be rationalized by: condo preferences (Hsee, 1996), fairness
preferences related to disputes (Babcock et al., 1995), honesty preferences (Danilov and Saccardo, 2016), preferences
about charity performance metrics (Gneezy, Keenan and Gneezy, 2014; Exley, Forthcoming), and beliefs about
one's competence (Liu and Lin, 2018). Ambiguity and risk preferences may also be relevant when payoffs explicitly
depend on ambiguity or risk (Dana, Weber and Kuang, 2007; Oberholzer-Gee and Eichenberger, 2008; Gneezy et al.,


                                                          1
    In this paper, we document a third way in which individuals make motivated decisions. Indi-
viduals make unambiguous decision errors -- acting as if they suffer from cognitive limitations or
behavioral biases -- in order to make more selfish choices. We describe this behavior as individuals
making "motivated errors."
    How do we document motivated errors? As noted above, all prior examples of motivated de-
cisions arise in settings with underlying uncertainty, either uncertainty in how decisions map to
outcomes or uncertainty about whether innocuous preferences or beliefs drive decisions.5 We con-
struct experimental environments in which there is no uncertainty that selfish choices lead to selfish
outcomes; and our experimental designs investigate how participants respond to payoff-irrelevant
information when making decisions over payoffs, so there is no preference or belief that can jus-
tify responding to the information. In a series of experiments involving over 4,200 subjects, we
document that individuals respond to payoff-irrelevant information -- acting as if they suffer from
cognitive limitations or behavioral biases -- when it is self-serving to do so, but they make few to no
errors when self-serving motives are removed. By acting as if they suffer from cognitive limitations
or behavioral biases, individuals appear to "create" uncertainty (e.g., about whether selfishness was
caused by a decision error) in order to rationalize undesirable choices.
    In our first set of experiments (Study 1), subjects choosing between a payoff for themselves and
a payoff for charity are less likely to choose the payoff for charity when a zero is added to it. For
instance, subjects are less likely to choose a payoff for charity when told that 55 + 55 + 55 + 55 + 0
cents will be donated than when told that 55 + 55 + 55 + 55 cents will be donated.6 However,
when self-serving motives are removed (i.e., when participants choose between two payoffs that
both benefit charity), decisions are no longer influenced by the addition of a zero. Agents only act
as if they cannot properly add a zero when doing so can rationalize selfish decisions.7
2015; Garcia, Massoni and Villeval, 2018; Regner, 2018; Olschewski et al., 2019); when payoffs are influenced by the
(unknown) behavior of others (Falk and Szech, 2013; Bartling and Ozdemir,    ¨        2017; Falk and Szech, 2017; Gneezy,
Saccardo and van Veldhuizen, 2018); or when payoffs are determined by some unknown, even if it could become
easily known, state of the world (see citations in Appendix B.3).
    5
      In these demonstrations, uncertainty is built into the decision environment. Indeed, empirical evidence for mo-
tivated decisions almost always involves showing decreases in undesirable decisions when uncertainty in the decision
environment in exogenously decreased. For example, evidence for motivated decisions is rampant when agents can
appeal to subjective preferences about whether one option is "better" than the other option, and it is dramatically
reduced when agents receive information that makes clear which option is preferable (Hsee, 1996; Gneezy et al.,
2015; Danilov and Saccardo, 2016; Gneezy, Saccardo and van Veldhuizen, 2018). In addition, motivated decisions
often occur when agents may appeal to ambiguity or risk preferences, and it is decreased when agents receive infor-
mation that resolves (some) uncertainty about how outcomes result from decisions (Dana, Weber and Kuang, 2007;
Oberholzer-Gee and Eichenberger, 2008; Haisley and Weber, 2010; Falk and Szech, 2013; Bartling and Ozdemir,  ¨         2017;
Falk and Szech, 2017; Regner, 2018; Olschewski et al., 2019). Even in studies that pursue alternative identification
approaches -- such as Di Tella et al. (2015) or Exley (2015) -- uncertainty remains in the decision environment and
allows agents to appeal to beliefs that need not be self-serving (given the unknown behavior of others, as in Di Tella
et al. (2015)) or risk preferences that need not be self-serving (given the unknown outcomes that result from lotteries,
as in Exley (2015)).
    6
      This setting is absent underlying uncertainty. When subjects choose between a payoff for themselves and a payoff
for charity, there is no uncertainty that selfish decisions result in selfish outcomes. In addition, a rational agent cannot
hold preferences or beliefs that justify responding to payoff-irrelevant information when making decisions over payoffs.
    7
      As further evidence that subjects are just acting as if they cannot properly add a zero, we show in Section 2.3


                                                             2
     In our second set of experiments (Study 2), we show that agents motivated to be selfish are more
likely to respond to a salience manipulation. When choosing between a payoff for themselves and a
payoff that benefits multiple charities, participants are less likely to choose the latter when it makes
salient a charity that does not benefit. For instance, participants are less likely to choose payoffs
for charity when they are told that each of charities A, B , C , and D receives 55 cents and charity E
receives 0 cents than when they are told that each of the charities A, B , C , and D receives 55 cents
(where charity E is not mentioned and any charity not mentioned is known to receive 0 cents).
However, when self-serving motives are removed, participants' decisions are substantially less --
albeit still statistically significantly -- influenced by the salience manipulation. Agents are more
likely to act as if the saliency of information known to them matters when doing so can rationalize
selfish decisions.8
     In our third set of experiments (Study 3), we show that agents motivated to be selfish are more
likely to respond to anchoring manipulations. When choosing between a payoff for themselves and
a payoff for charity, participants are less likely to choose 200 cents for charity when it is anchored to
400 cents by being described as the smaller of 400 cents and 200 cents (in one anchoring treatment)
or as 400 - 200 cents (in another anchoring treatment) than when it is described directly as 200 cents.
However, when self-serving motives are removed, participants no longer respond to the anchoring
manipulations.9
     The first main contribution of our paper is to provide the first empirical evidence for motivated
decisions in environments without underlying uncertainty.10 As noted above, that motivated de-
cisions can arise in settings absent underlying uncertainty allows us to show a new way in which
motivated decisions arise, which we highlight as our second main contribution. It also qualita-
that when participants are directly asked to calculate these sums, they do so correctly in 98% of cases and their
ability to do so does not depend on whether a 0 is added to the sum.
    8
      We ran Study 2 first, and after observing the strength of our results in Study 2, we sought to test whether we
could push the empirical boundaries of motivated errors further, by documenting it in a even simpler environment
(resulting in Study 1) and in new environments (resulting in Study 3).
    9
      In Study 3, we additionally show that subjects make motivated errors in the spirit of what we found in Study 1
and 2. When self-serving motives are present, participants are less likely to choose 200 cents for charity when it is
described as 50 + 50 + 50 + 50 + 0 cents than when it is described directly as 200 cents. This behavior is dramatically
reduced in the absence of self-serving motives. Note that in Study 3 we are comparing 50 + 50 + 50 + 50 + 0 to
200 cents rather than to the summation without the last 0, as in Study 1, and so one can consider it a response to
addition generally, rather than to simply adding a 0.
   10
      This paper focuses on motivated decisions rather than motivated beliefs, for reasons outlined in footnote 12.
However, there is a rich related literature on motivated beliefs about: ability (Eil and Rao, 2011; Ertac, 2011;
Grossman and Owens, 2012; Mobius et al., 2014; Buser, Gerhards and Van der Weele, 2018; Coutts, 2018; Heger
and Papageorge, 2018; Schwardmann and van der Weele, 2017; Chew, Huang and Zhao, 2018; Zimmermann, 2018),
politics (Thaler, 2019), beauty (Eil and Rao, 2011), others' prosocial behavior (Di Tella et al., 2015; Palma and
Xu, 2019), financial decisions (Kuhnen, 2015), and non-ego relevant but desirable events (Gotthard-Real, 2017). See
B´enabou and Tirole (2016) for a review, B´  enabou and Tirole (2002) and K¨ oszegi (2006) for related theoretical work,
and Schwardmann, Tripodi and van der Weele (2019) for evidence from the field. Ashraf, Bandiera and Lee (2014)
even shows that individuals may reduce their effort if it allows them to hold more egoistic beliefs. Because of the
nature of beliefs -- being about an unknown state of the world -- the literature on motivated beliefs has also focused
on decision environments with underlying uncertainty (e.g., when there is uncertainty about how one performed on a
test, the motivated belief literature explores how individuals update in response to noisy signals about performance).



                                                           3
tively increases the range of environments in which motivated decisions might be relevant, which
we highlight as our third main contribution.
    Our second main contribution is to show a new way in which motivated decisions arise: in-
dividuals make unambiguous decision errors when motivated to do so -- acting as if they suffer
from cognitive limitations or behavioral biases -- which we call "motivated errors."11 Documenting
motivated errors in decisions connects us to a recent literature on motivated errors in beliefs, which
has documented that agents appear unable to recall information when it allows them to hold self-
serving beliefs (see Chew, Huang and Zhao (2018), Zimmermann (2018) and Saucet and Villeval
(2019), which -- guided by B´   enabou and Tirole (2002) -- show that motivated reasoning leads to
false or selective memory). That said, we find it unlikely that the motivated errors in decisions we
document are solely reflective of motivated beliefs (e.g., we find it unlikely that subjects believe that
the smaller of 400 and 200 is below 200, even when motivated to do so). Even more importantly, we
believe it is essential to study both motivated decisions and motivated beliefs, as their prevalence
and some of their underlying drivers may differ.12
    Our third main contribution is providing evidence for more unconstrained notions of motivated
decisions. Because prior work showed motivated decisions (and motivated beliefs, see footnote
10) arising only in settings with underlying uncertainty, a common intuition held is that moti-
vated decisions would be constrained to such settings.13 To the extent that motivated decisions
are constrained by individuals' "ability to construct seemingly reasonable justifications for these
conclusions" (Kunda, 1990) or by the environment providing "sufficient flexibility to allow plausible
justification" (Gino, Norton and Weber, 2016), our results suggest that removing underlying un-
certainty from the decision environment is an insufficient constraint. By showing that agents make
motivated errors, we highlight that motivated decisions could -- in principle -- arise in nearly any
environment. This finding suggests the potential relevance of motivated decisions in more contexts
than had previously been considered and highlights the importance of more research on the topic.14
  11
     Evidence observed in prior literature on motivated decisions could relate to the aforementioned channels that
rely on appeals to underlying uncertainty to explain agents' decisions even under the assumption that agents do not
make errors in their decisions. This is not the case in our paper. While the prior literature on motivated decisions
has documented distorted -- even difficult to rationalize -- decisions, we are the first to show unambiguous errors
in decisions.
  12
     For instance, motivated beliefs can arise without resulting in motivated decisions (e.g., if a motivated distortion
in beliefs is not large enough to change decisions), and motivated decisions can arise absent motivated beliefs (e.g.,
due to a change in preferences rather than a change in beliefs) or absent the ability to observe motivated beliefs (e.g.,
because the elicitation of beliefs could change what beliefs people hold).
  13
     Early work on self-deception in psychology stressed the role of ambiguity (Batson et al., 1997), a recent review of
the psychology work notes that "[a]mbiguity has been shown to be necessary for self-deception" (Chance and Norton,
2015), and a recent review of the literature in psychology and economics stresses the importance of uncertainty by
noting "In this paper, we will argue that there is a widespread tendency for individuals to exploit justifications and
uncertainties present in decision-making environments in order to act egoistically" (Gino, Norton and Weber, 2016).
  14
     Gino, Norton and Weber (2016) highlights that "an underexplored element in much of this research is the frequent
tendency of decision makers to engage in motivated information processing." In somewhat related work, Batson et al.
(1999) investigates two ways in which individuals may feel moral while not being moral: (i) they may convince or
deceive themselves into thinking their behavior is moral, or (ii) they may simply avoid reflecting on the morality
of their behavior. While this second channel is also more unconstrained, it is different than the type of motivated


                                                           4
    Our fourth main contribution is showing that behavior that could be attributed to a behavioral
bias (such as anchoring in Study 3) might instead be indicative of self-serving motives. Since
participants in our experiments respond in systematic ways to irrelevant information, they look like
they are subject to behavioral biases. Indeed, had we only explored behavior in environments with
self-serving motives, one could have easily imagined attributing the systematic errors we observe
in our three studies to heuristics or biases.15 That the motivated errors we document could have
been mistaken for behavioral biases supports the call put forth in B´   enabou and Tirole (2016) for
more work on how behavior that may appear to be indicative of "wired-in cognitive mistakes" could
instead be indicative of self-serving motives.
    Our fifth main contribution, discussed in more detail in the results sections below, is to highlight
why it is important to diagnose whether an error is motivated in nature. We find that debiasing
techniques traditionally used to overcome behavioral biases or cognitive limitations prove largely
ineffective at mitigating motivated errors. A recent example of standard debiasing techniques used
to overcome behavioral biases can found in Enke and Zimmermann (2019), in which cognitive
limitations cause correlation neglect and prevent agents from making accurate calculations. In that
setting -- where motivations are not relevant -- making sure that agents pay attention to the
correlated nature of signals or simplifying the underlying correlation structure helps agents make
fewer mistakes. More generally, errors due to cognitive limitations are expected to become less
pronounced as decision environments are made simpler, as agents are made to pay more attention
to a decision, or as agents gain experience with a decision.16 We find that none of these techniques
eliminate the motivated errors we observe. Consequently, determining how to counter systematic
errors may be facilitated by the identification of whether an error is fully, or even in part, driven
by self-serving motives.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the design and results of Study 1.
decisions discussed in this paper -- which is focused on the first channel -- because the second channel involves a
lack of reasoning as opposed to motivated reasoning. Thus, it could not explain why individuals exploit excuses, such
as the addition of a zero to a bundle (or, for that matter, risk, ambiguity, ambiguous fairness norms, etc.), because
excuses are only relevant when individuals are trying to rationalize their decisions.
   15
      Absent identifying the role of self-serving motives, our findings from Studies 1 and 2 could simply reflect the affect
heuristic (Gilovich, Griffin and Kahneman, 2002). Study 1 could also be considered evidence of errors arising from
irrelevant attributes as shown in Chadd, Filiz-Ozbay and Ozbay (2019); Study 2 could relate to narrow bracketing
(Barberis, Huang and Thaler, 2006; Rabin and Weizs¨         acker, 2009; Imas, 2016; Exley and Kessler, 2019), salience
(Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2012, 2013; Taubinsky and Rees-Jones, Forthcoming), focusing (K       oszegi and Szeidl,
2013), or relative thinking (Bushong, Rabin and Schwartzstein, 2017); and Study 3 relates to the large literature
on anchoring (see, e.g., Tversky and Kahneman (1974)). More generally, this contribution connects us to the early
work in behavioral economics that highlighted the role of heuristics when agents lacked the cognitive capacity to
process all relevant information (Simon, 1955; Tversky and Kahneman, 1973; Conlisk, 1996) and explained subjects'
responses to irrelevant information as arising due to "imperfections of human perception and decision," which they
analogized to the limits of humans' visual perception (Tversky and Kahneman, 1981, 1986; Kahneman, 2011) and
has more recently been considered through the lens of inattention (Sims, 2003; Gabaix, 2014; Caplin, 2016; Gabaix,
2017; Caplin, Dean and Leahy, 2018).
   16
      For reviews, see Conlisk (1996); Rabin (1998); DellaVigna (2009); Madrian (2014); Gabaix (2017); for related
examples, see List (2003); Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009); Finkelstein (2009); Brocas et al. (2014); Hanna, Mul-
lainathan and Schwartzstein (2014); Schwartzstein (2014); Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (Forthcoming); Enke (2017).



                                                             5
Section 3 describes design and results of Study 2. Section 4 describes design and results of Study
3. Section 5 concludes.

2      Study 1: Adding a Zero
    In our first set of experiments (Study 1), payoff-irrelevant information influences agents' decisions
over payoffs only when self-serving motives are relevant. When choosing between a payoff for
themselves and a payoff for charity, participants are more likely to favor a payoff for themselves
when a zero is added to the payoff for charity. By contrast, when choosing between two payoffs
for charity, participants no longer respond to the addition of the zero. Because self-serving motives
lead to these decision errors, we call them "motivated errors."
    In this section, we present the design and results from this set of experiments. In addition,
we show that motivated errors survive standard debiasing attempts. Motivated errors persist as
participants gain experience (i.e., in the latter half of decisions they make). Motivated errors
persist when participants pay attention to the amounts that comprise the charity payoff (i.e., in
decisions where participants choose to view all of the amounts, even though they could avoid them).
Motivated errors even persist, albeit less so, when the (already simple) decision environment is made
simpler by the total amount in the charity payoff being displayed on the decision screen. We only
eliminate motivated errors by making participants correctly enter the total amount in the charity
payoff before making a decision, which gives insight into the underlying mechanisms for motivated
errors (see Section 2.4).

2.1     Experimental Design
   Study 1 included 1,168 participants in one of six versions.17 In all versions, each participant
received $4 for completing the 25-minute study. In addition, one randomly selected decision for
each participant was implemented for bonus payment and resulted in an additional payment for the
participant or a donation to charity.
   In all versions, participants make 48 binary choices in which they choose between a "bundle,"
which changes from decision to decision, and an "outside option," which is fixed for all 48 decisions.
  17
     From January 16-17, 2018, we recruited and randomized 600 participants from Amazon's Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) into one of three study versions: Self/Charity, Charity/Charity, Self(150)/Self, and 599 participants com-
pleted the study. On January 18, 2018, we recruited and randomized 401 participants from MTurk into one of two
study versions: Self/Charity-Choice, Self/Charity-Sum, and all 401 participants completed the study. On December
28, 2018, we recruited 200 participants from MTurk into the Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version, and 199 par-
ticipants completed the study. However, we exclude 31 participants from the Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version
because they completed in prior versions of our study (due to a change in research assistants this exclusion had
to occur after collecting the data). The Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version was run after the other versions in
response to helpful comments from anonymous referees. To be eligible for any of our study versions, workers must
have previously completed at least 100 HITs with a 95% or better approval rating and must be working from a
United States IP address. Overall, 49% of participants are female, the median age is 33 years old, and the median
educational attainment is an Associate's Degree. Across these demographic variables, there is only one significant
difference across the Self/Charity, Charity/Charity, and Self(150)/Self versions and there are no significant differ-
ences across the Self/Charity-Choice and Self/Charity-Sum versions, demonstrating successful randomization. Full
instructions for Study 1 can be found in Appendix D.1.


                                                         6
In each decision, the value of the bundle is equal to the sum of 4 or 5 summands. For simplicity,
each summand in a bundle is either 0 or a single positive number that (usually) appears multiple
times. Consequently, the sum of a bundle can always be calculated as n × d (where n is the number
of times the positive number d appears in the bundle, with all remaining summands being 0).
    The six versions of Study 1 -- Self/Charity, Charity/Charity, Self(150)/Self, Self/Charity-
Choice, Self/Charity-Sum, Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum -- vary along three dimensions: (1) the
recipient and level of the outside option, (2) the recipient of the bundle, and (3) what information
about the bundle participants have to learn before making each choice. The differences across the
six versions of Study 1 are best visualized in Table 1. The naming of the versions follows two
rules. First, the name indicates the recipient of the outside option followed by the recipient of
the bundle. For example, in the Self/Charity version, the outside option benefits the participant
(thus Self/ ) and the bundle benefits a charity (thus Charity ). Second, any text after a hyphen
indicates a difference in information structure relative to the Self/Charity version. For instance, in
the Self/Charity-Choice version, participants can choose to avoid more information than they can
in the Self/Charity version (thus -Choice ).

                                     Table 1: Study 1 Versions

 Outside Option to...                      ...Charity                     ...Self
                                                         Self/Charity-Choice
                        Optional
                                                              (n = 195)
 Information is
                                        Charity/Charity      Self/Charity         Self(150)/Self
                        Required
                                          (n = 199)           (n = 198)             (n = 202)
                     Required and                         Self/Charity-Sum
                      Sum Shown                               (n = 206)
                     Required and                            Self/Charity-
                      Sum Shown                           Unavoidable Sum
                     Unavoidably                              (n = 168)
 Bundle to...                                       ...Charity                        ...Self


    We begin by describing the Self/Charity version in depth, since the other five versions are easily
explained as slight variations off of this version. In the Self/Charity version, the recipient of the
outside option is the participant and the level of the outside option is calibrated on the participant
level; the recipient of the bundle is the national chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation, a charity;
and participants must learn about each summand in the bundle before making their choice. In the
remainder of this section, we explain how the bundles are constructed, we explain how and why we
calibrated the outside option at the participant level, and we describe how the other five versions
differ from the Self/Charity version.
Bundles in the Self/Charity version
   Each bundle in the Self/Charity version of Study 1 includes four or five summands (called
"amounts" to participants) that are either zero or the same non-zero number. Participants are

                                                  7
informed that if the bundle is chosen, the sum of these four or five amounts will be donated to
the Make-A-Wish Foundation national chapter. The first amount in a bundle is always revealed by
default (see Figure 1 for an example). Participants are then required to reveal the remaining three
or four amounts in a bundle by clicking on the header above each amount. We present the bundles to
participants in this interactive manner so that we could require them to view all of the amounts in a
bundle. (In the Self/Charity-Choice version, detailed later in this section, this interface also allows
us to observe which amounts participants choose not to view). To ensure participants comprehend
this structure, we require participants to correctly answer questions about how much money would
be given to charity in several example bundles before they make choices in the study (see Appendix
Figure D.5).

                  Figure 1: Example of how a bundle initially appears in Study 1




              Clicking on each header reveals the number of cents associated with that amount.



    To facilitate comparisons across each participant's decisions, we carefully structured the 48
bundles (importantly, however, participants are not informed of this structure). In particular, we
started with 12 "baseline" bundles, which we call n/4-bundles, since they include four amounts of
which n amounts are non-zero (so, if n < 4, then 4 - n amounts are zero). Each non-zero amount
within a bundle equals d, which is constant within a bundle but varies across bundles. Thus, the
sum going to charity if a baseline n/4-bundle is chosen is n × d cents. The n and d parameters for
the baseline bundles are chosen such that n × d varies systematically around 150 cents. We have
four baseline bundles with n = 2, four baseline bundles with n = 3, and four baseline bundles with
n = 4. We randomly select d  {51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59} at the bundle level, so that n × d is
substantially below 150 cents for the bundles with n = 2, slightly above 150 cents for bundles with
n = 3, and substantially above 150 cents for the bundles with n = 4. The amounts in the bundles
appear in a designated order, and we vary the order of the zeros in the baseline bundles as shown
in Appendix Table A.1.
    From each of 12 baseline bundles, we construct an n/5-bundle by "adding a zero" to it. Each
n/5-bundle mirrors the payoff structure of an n/4-bundle except for the addition of a fifth amount
that is zero. From each of these 12 baseline bundles, we additionally construct a (n+1)/5-bundle by
"improving" it. Each (n+1)/5-bundle mirrors the payoffs structure of an n/4-bundle except for the


                                                     8
addition of a fifth amount that is d. We call the 12 baseline bundles and the 24 bundles constructed
from them our "main bundles."
    In addition to our main bundles, we have 12 non-main bundles with four amounts each. We
included these bundles both to balance the number of bundles of each size (i.e., to have 24 bundles
with four amounts along with the 24 bundles with five amounts) and to provide additional data to
perform secondary analyses conducted in Section 2.3. Until then, decisions involving these non-main
bundles are excluded from our analysis (see Appendix Table A.2 for details on these bundles).
    The order in which participants make their 48 binary decisions varies. Half of participants
make their 24 decisions involving bundles with four amounts first and the other half make their 24
decisions involving bundles with five amounts first. In addition, within each block of 24 decisions,
the order in which each bundle is shown randomly varies for each participant.
Outside options in the Self/Charity version
    The value of donations in the bundles vary systematiically around 150 cents because we set
the outside option to be equivalent to a donation of 150 cents. Of course, each participant may
have a different value for a 150-cent donation to charity and most are likely to value money for
themselves more than money for charity. Consequently, we calibrate the outside option for each
participant in the Self/Charity version to a value of money for themselves that is equivalent to 150
cents for charity (and directly set the outside option in the Charity/Charity version to be 150 cents
for charity). This calibration allows us to keep the value of the outside option similar across study
versions with and without self-serving motives. This is a methodological contribution that we have
also used in our other work (Exley, 2015, Forthcoming; Exley and Kessler, 2019).18 We discuss the
calibration procedure further in Section 2.3 and Appendix B.2, but we highlight its features here
as well.
    By calibrating the outside option in the Self/Charity version to be equivalent to 150 cents for
charity, we can ensure that each participant is close to indifferent between the outside option and
the bundle for the n = 3 decisions (and further from indifferent for the n = 2 and n = 4 decisions)
so that we have a well-controlled measure of how likely the participant is to select the bundle. If
we had not calibrated the outside option and instead set it directly, we might have ended up in an
environment where participants found the outside option in the Self/Charity version to be much
more (or much less) appealing than all of the bundles. If that had happened, we might have seen
subjects always choosing (or never choosing) the outside option in the Self/Charity version. A bad
calibration -- that sets the outside option too high or too low relative to the bundles -- could
therefore prevent us from observing that adding a zero affects behavior.19 Moreover, we stress
that a bad calibration cannot contribute to us finding that adding a zero affects behavior. The
  18
    See a discussion of the advantages of this procedure in Gauriot, Heger and Slonim (2019).
  19
    This makes it even more informative that, as detailed in Appendix B.2, our results persist in a version of Study 2
in which the calibration is not used to set the outside option. Indeed, in this version, participants select the outside
option substantially more often, which could have resulted in a "floor effect" in which participants could not be
further discouraged from choosing the bundle when a zero is added to it.


                                                           9
identification strategy in our study relies on comparing the rates at which the bundles are chosen
with and without an additional zero. Participants should never respond to the addition of the zero,
regardless of the level of the outside option.
    How do we implement the participant-level calibration? Before facing the 48 binary decisions,
each participant completes a multiple price list that aims to elicit an X value that makes the
participant indifferent between X cents for themselves and 150 cents for the national chapter of
the Make-A-Wish Foundation. Once we identify this X value, we set each individual participant's
outside option to X cents for themselves since, as detailed above, the outside option in the Char-
ity/Charity version is 150 cents to the national chapter.
    The multiple price list generates an indifference range for X . We assign participants an X value
equal to the lower bound of their indifference range, unless the lower bound of the indifference range
is 0, in which case we assign X = 5 cents.20 The distribution of X values are displayed in Panel
A of Appendix Figure A.1 and, as will be shown throughout the paper, our results are robust to a
restricted sample that excludes the 12% of participants whose lower bound implies X = 0 and for
whom we assign X = 5 cents.
Additional versions of Study 1
    Each of the five other versions of Study 1 have a slight variation off of the Self/Charity version,
and they are described here. Additional details are shown in the corresponding sections where we
discuss the results from these versions.
    The Charity/Charity version is like the Self/Charity version, except that the outside option
for all the decisions is 150 cents going to the national chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation.
Since the national chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation is the recipient of both the bundle and
the outside option, participants who want to maximize donations to the charity should choose the
bundle whenever its sum is greater than 150 cents. This allows us to examine decisions in a setting
where stakes are comparable to the Self/Charity version (due to the calibration procedure) but
where self-serving motives are absent. The results of this version are reported in Section 2.3.
    The Self(150)/Self version is like the Self/Charity version, except that the recipient of the bundle
is the participant and the outside option for all the decisions is 150 cents going to the participant.
Since the participant is the recipient of both the bundle and the outside option, participants who
want to maximize earnings in the experiment should choose the bundle whenever its sum is greater
than 150 cents. This allows us to consider how the absence of self-serving motives influences
  20
    In particular, as shown in Appendix Figure D.3, the price list contains 31 rows. On each row, the participant
must decide between 150 cents being given to the Make-A-Wish Foundation national chapter and an amount of
money for themselves that varies from 0 cents to 150 cents in five-cent increments (i.e., the price list gives 5 × (r - 1)
cents to the participant on the rth row). If a participant switches from choosing the first payment option on the rth
to the second payment option on the (r + 1)th row, then that participant is indifferent between 150 cents for the
national chapter and X cents for themselves, where 5 × (r - 1)  X  5 × r. Setting X to the lower bound ensures
that, if anything, participants should prefer bundles over their outside option more when the outside option is X
cents for themselves than when it is 150 cents for the national chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation. To obtain
more precise estimates of X cents, one could employ a version of the DOSE approach in Wang, Filiba and Camerer
(2010).

                                                           10
decisions in a setting where participants' own money is still at stake. As evident from our extensive
discussion of the calibration procedure, however, we view the Charity/Charity version -- and not
the Self(150)/Self version -- as the appropriate "control" for the Self/Charity version. The results
of the Self(150)/Self version are reported in Section 2.3.
    The Self/Charity-Choice and Self/Charity-Sum versions are like the Self/Charity version, except
for what participants must learn about each bundle. In the Self/Charity-Choice version, participants
are shown the first amount in each bundle by default but do not need to reveal the other three or four
amounts before making a choice about the bundle. This allows us to examine whether our results
persist among decisions in which participants are known to pay attention to the information in a
bundle. In Self/Charity-Sum, participants must view all of the amounts in the bundle before making
a choice, just like in the Self/Charity version, but they are also shown the sum of the amounts in the
bundle on the decision screen (i.e., the computer sums the amounts for them and displays this sum).
This allows us to examine participants' decisions when the already simple decision environment is
simplified further. The results of both of these versions are reported in Section 2.4.
    The Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version is like the Self/Charity-Sum version, except that the
sum of the amounts in each bundle is made "unavoidable" to participants in two ways. First, the
sum itself is made more salient on the decision screen. Second, prior to facing each decision screen,
we informed participants about the sum of the bundle they were about to be shown, and they were
required to correctly enter this amount into a text box before proceeding to the decision screen.
The results of this version -- and a discussion of how it is informative above and beyond what we
already learn from the Self/Charity-Sum version -- are reported in Section 2.4.

2.2     Documenting errors in decisions
    In the Self/Charity version, we find clear evidence that participants make systematic errors in
their decisions. In particular, participants are less likely to choose a bundle when a zero is added
to it, even though the donation made by the bundle (i.e., the sum of the amounts in the bundle)
has not changed.
    Figure 2 shows our results graphically, collapsing across all our main bundles. The shading
of the bars indicates the number of non-zero amounts in the bundle, which determines the sum
of the bundle and whether the sum is above or below 150 cents.21 It is clear that participants'
willingness to choose a bundle is not solely driven by the number of non-zero amounts. For each
of the four-amount bundles (i.e., the 4/4-bundles, the 3/4-bundles, and the 2/4-bundles ), there are
corresponding five-amount bundles that involve the same number of non-zero donation amounts
(i.e., the 4/5-bundles, the 3/5-bundles, and the 2/5-bundles ). The fact that these five-amount
bundles contain an additional zero is payoff irrelevant, but adding a zero causes a substantial drop
  21
     In the 5/5-bundles, 5 of the donation amounts are non-zero, so the sum is 255 to 295 cents. In the 4/4- and
4/5-bundles, 4 of the donation amounts are non-zero, so the sum is 204 to 236 cents. In the 3/4- and 3/5-bundles, 3
of the donation amounts are non-zero, so the sum is 153 to 177 cents. In the 2/4- and 2/5-bundles, 2 of the donation
amounts are non-zero, so the sum is 102 to 118 cents.



                                                        11
in willingness to choose a bundle.

        Figure 2: In the Self/Charity version of Study 1, fraction choosing a main bundle




                                                               .8
                                   Fraction choosing bundles
                                                               .6
                                                               .4
                                                               .2
                                                               0




                                                                    5/5   4/4     4/5     3/4    3/5   2/4   2/5
                                                                                Description of bundles


       Data include all participants' decisions in all main bundles in the Self/Charity version of Study 1.



   Table 2 presents the results from the main bundles in a regression framework that includes
additional controls and carefully isolates the impact of adding a zero and the impact of adding a
non-zero amount to a baseline n/4-bundle. In particular, we report results from the following linear
probability model:

                                                                                                         4   59
                      P(choose bundle) = 1 (+ 0) + 2 (+ 1) +                                                       kn × ld +   (1)
                                                                                                       n=2 d=51


where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is
equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed
by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle (averaging the effect over the
possible d values), kn are dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying
baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1), and ld are dummies for the value of the non-zero amounts in
the bundle, which range from 51 to 59 cents.
    individuals make decisions in a setting in which they cannot fully access all relevant information
unless they have perfect recall of information that was previously provided to them. Not only is
there is noise in the information we provide to participants in our studies, all relevant information
is on the decision screens in our studies.)
    The coefficient estimate on (+ 0) in Column 1 of Table 2 shows that adding a zero significantly
decreases participants' willingness to choose a bundle by 6 percentage points. This effect is large.
It is 10% of the likelihood of choosing a baseline bundle, which is 0.58. It is more than half the
magnitude of the 10 percentage point increase observed from adding a non-zero amount to a bundle

                                                                                      12
(see the coefficient estimate on (+ 1)), which on average increases the total amount donated in a
main bundle by 33%. In addition, the 6 percentage point average effect reflects a large fraction
of participants responding to the addition of the zero in this biased way: 50% of our participants
make errors at least once by choosing an n/4-bundle but not the n/5-bundle constructed by adding
a zero to it.
          Table 2: In the Self/Charity version of Study 1, regression of choosing a main bundle

   Sample:                                  full                          choice varies         X is lower bound
                          main          if 4/4       if 2/4 or 3/4            main                    main
                         bundles       baseline         baseline            bundles                  bundles
                           (1)            (2)             (3)                  (4)                     (5)
   (+ 0)                 -0.06         -0.04           -0.07                 -0.08                    -0.07
                          (0.01)        (0.02)          (0.01)                (0.01)                   (0.01)
   (+ 1)                 0.11           0.03            0.15                  0.14                     0.12
                          (0.01)        (0.02)          (0.02)                (0.02)                   (0.01)
   N                       7128          2376            4752                  5616                     6336
   kn  ld FEs               yes           yes             yes                   yes                      yes
       
          p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level and shown in
       parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose a main bundle in the
       Self/Charity version of Study 1, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a
       fifth amount that is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is
       constructed by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, kn  ld FEs include all possible
       interactions of dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see
       Table A.1) and dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of
       the amounts in the baseline bundle. Columns 1-3 analyze all participants' decisions: in all main bundles in
       Column 1, involving the baseline 4/4-bundles in Column 2, and involving the baseline 2/4- and 3/4-bundles
       in Column 3. Column 4 analyzes all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants who choose
       the bundle at least once and choose their outside option at least once across all 48 decisions. Column 5
       analyzes all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the
       lower bound of their indifference range (and thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound).


    What can we say about why participants respond to the addition of the zero? First, participants
do not solely interpret five-amount bundles more negatively than four-amount bundles, since adding
a non-zero amount to a bundle increases participants' willingness to choose it. More is not less.22
Our effect is instead driven by participants responding to the addition of a zero to a bundle. Adding
a zero makes a bundle less attractive, even though it does not change the sum of donations to charity.
    Second, our results are not solely about the presence of a zero in a bundle.23 Column 2 of Table
2 examines the impact of adding a zero to a baseline bundle absent any zeros (i.e., to 4/4-bundles )
while Column 3 of Table 2 examines the impact of adding a zero to a baseline bundle with one or
  22
     This is not surprising. The donation from choosing a bundle in our experiment is known with certainty, and so
our setting differs from prior literature that has documented a "more is less" phenomenon in environments in which
underlying uncertainty about the value of a bundle allows agents to update about the bundle's overall quality when
a good is added (Hsee, 1998; List, 2002; Leszczyc, Pracejus and Shen, 2008).
  23
     This result helps us to differentiate from effects related to the presence of a zero, such as those observed in
Magen, Dweck and Gross (2008) and Read, Olivola and Hardisty (2016), which show that decision-makers choosing
between money now and money later can be made more patient by reminding them that taking money now means
receiving $0 later.

                                                           13
two zeros (i.e., to 2/4-bundles or 3/4-bundles ). The negative effect of adding a zero persists in both
cases: adding a zero decreases participants' willingness to choose a bundle by 4 percentage points
when a zero is not already present and by 7 percentage points when a zero is already present.
     Our findings are also robust to different restrictions on the set of participants we consider.
Column 4 and Column 5 of Table 2 examine whether our effect persists with more restricted samples
of participants. Column 4 only includes participants who choose the bundle at least once and choose
their outside option at least once.24 Not surprisingly, the impact of adding a zero is even larger (i.e.,
it is 8 percentage points) for this sample. Column 5 shows that our results are robust to excluding
participants for whom we assigned an outside option of 5 cents because the lower bound of their
indifference range was 0 cents.

2.3     Documenting motivated errors
    In the previous subsection, we document systematic errors in decisions. When a zero is added
to a bundle, participants are less likely to choose that bundle, even though the additional zero does
not change the donation made by the bundle. Participants act as if (n × d) + 0 < (n × d). A natural
inclination for behaviorally minded researchers is to attempt to identify a cognitive limitation,
behavioral bias, or heuristic that might explain these errors (see the related discussion footnote
15). For example, one might hypothesize that participants systematically miscalculate the amount
in the bundle when a zero is added because they think in terms of the average amount (which is
mechanically lower when there are more zeros) or because they overweigh the last amount in the
bundle (which is zero when a zero is added).25
    We instead examine whether self-serving motives might cause agents to make these errors. Thus,
we consider two additional versions of Study 1 that eliminate self-serving motives. As described
above, participants in the Self/Charity version made binary decisions between a bundle of money
for a charity and an outside option of money for themselves and so had a potentially motivated
reason to choose the outside option. In the Charity/Charity version, we eliminate the self-serving
motive by having participants choose between the bundle for charity and an outside option of 150
cents for the same charity. Similarly, participants in the Self(150)/Self version chose between the
bundle for themselves and an outside option of 150 cents for themselves. In these two versions,
there is no self-serving motive to choose the outside option.
    Panel A of Figure 3 reproduces Figure 2 for the Charity/Charity version. As expected, whether
there are 3 or more non-zero amounts in a bundle (and thus the sum of the bundle is more than
150 cents) is the key determinant in whether the bundle is selected. Notably however, adding a
zero to a bundle does not influence whether the bundle is selected. Participants' unresponsiveness
to the addition of a zero is confirmed by the near-zero coefficient estimates on (+ 0) in Panel A of
  24
     Across all 48 decisions, 10% of participants never choose the outside option, and 11% of participants always
choose the outside option.
  25
     Counter to this latter possibility, when we regress choice on the location of zeros in a bundle, we do not find
evidence that the location of zeros matters. In addition, results from some of our other study versions, discussed in
Section 2.4, show that there is little scope for miscalculations or for inattention to produce these errors.


                                                         14
Table 3. Similarly, Panel B of Figure 3 reproduces the figure for the Self(150)/Self version. The
pattern looks almost identical to Panel A and participants' unresponsiveness to the addition of a
zero is again confirmed by the near-zero coefficient estimates on (+ 0) in Panel B of Table 3.

Figure 3: In the Charity/Charity and Self(150)/Self versions of Study 1, fraction choosing a main
bundle
           Panel A: Charity/Charity version                                                                            Panel B: Self(150)/Self version
                                      .8




                                                                                                                           .8
          Fraction choosing bundles




                                                                                               Fraction choosing bundles
                                      .6




                                                                                                                           .6
                                      .4




                                                                                                                           .4
                                      .2




                                                                                                                           .2
                                      0




                                                                                                                           0
                                           5/5   4/4     4/5     3/4    3/5   2/4   2/5                                         5/5   4/4     4/5     3/4    3/5   2/4   2/5
                                                       Description of bundles                                                               Description of bundles

Data include all participants' decisions in all main bundles: in the Charity/Charity version of Study 1 in Panel A
and in the Self(150)/Self version of Study 1 in Panel B.



    That participants do not respond to the addition of a zero in the absence of self-serving motives
means that participants are capable of accurately ignoring the addition of a zero when making their
decisions. This implies that participants in the Self/Charity version are motivated to respond to
the addition of a zero in a self-serving way.
    To statistically confirm that the effect of adding a zero is different when self-serving motives are
present and absent, we compare results from the Self/Charity and Charity/Charity versions. In
both versions, participants face the same bundles going to the Make-A-Wish Foundation national
chapter. The only difference is the outside option to choosing a bundle, which is X cents for
participants in Self/Charity and 150 cents for the national chapter in Charity/Charity. Since we
estimate each participant's X value to make them indifferent between X cents for themselves and
150 cents for the national chapter, the comparison between these versions isolates the impact of
removing self-serving motives without changing stakes.26
    Appendix Table A.3 presents the corresponding results. The coefficients on (+ 0) and (+ 1)
show the effects in Self/Charity version (which are mechanically the same as in Table 2). The
coefficient on Charity/Charity and the associated interactions show how these effects differ in the
Charity/Charity version. In particular, the coefficient on Charity/Charity *(+ 0) shows that the
effect of adding a zero is fully eliminated when self-serving motives are removed.
  26
    Note that a comparison between the Self/Charity and Self(150)/Self versions would involve a comparison across
versions with different stakes and thus is not used.

                                                                                          15
  Table 3: In the Charity/Charity and Self(150)/Self versions of Study 1, regression of choosing
  a main bundle

   Sample:                               full                         choice varies        X is lower bound
                        main         if 4/4      if 2/4 or 3/4            main                   main
                       bundles      baseline        baseline            bundles                 bundles
                         (1)           (2)            (3)                  (4)                    (5)
   Panel A: Charity/Charity version
   (+ 0)            0.01      0.01                    0.01                0.01                    0.01
                   (0.01)    (0.01)                  (0.01)              (0.01)                  (0.01)
   (+ 1)           0.28       0.02                   0.42                0.29                    0.29
                   (0.01)    (0.01)                  (0.02)              (0.01)                  (0.01)
   N                     7164         2388            4776                7092                    6156
   kn  ld FEs             yes          yes             yes                 yes                    yes

   Panel B: Self(150)/Self version
   (+ 0)             -0.00     0.01                   -0.01               -0.00                   -0.01
                    (0.01)    (0.01)                 (0.01)              (0.01)                  (0.01)
   (+ 1)           0.29        0.01                  0.42                0.29                    0.28
                    (0.01)    (0.01)                 (0.01)              (0.01)                  (0.01)
   N                     7272         2424            4848                7128                    6336
   kn  ld FEs             yes          yes             yes                 yes                     yes
     
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level and shown in
     parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose a main bundle in
     the Charity/Charity version of Study 1 in Panel A and in the Self(150)/Self version of Study 1 in Panel
     B, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is equal
     to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by adding
     a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, kn  ld FEs include all possible interactions of
     dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1)
     and dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts
     in the baseline bundle. Columns 1-3 analyze all participants' decisions: in all main bundles in Column 1,
     involving the baseline 4/4-bundles in Column 2, and involving the baseline 2/4- and 3/4-bundles in Column
     3. Column 4 analyzes all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants who choose the bundle
     at least once and choose their outside option at least once across all 48 decisions. Column 5 analyzes all
     main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound
     of their indifference range (and thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound).


    Evidence for motivated errors is also readily apparent at the individual level. First, the fraction
of participants who make at least one error -- choosing an n/4-bundle but not the n/5-bundle
constructed from it -- is 50% in the Self/Charity version but only 26% in the Charity/Charity
version (p < 0.01). Second, the fraction of participants who make at least two errors of this form,
with the second error arising in response to a bundle that have a different sum than the bundles
in the first error, is 29% in the Self/Charity version but only 14% in the Charity/Charity version
(p < 0.01). This latter result shows that participants' decisions do not simply reflect the use of an
additional zero as a way to break indifference between the bundle and the outside option, since they
could not be indifferent between their outside option and two bundles with different total amounts.
Third, we find that the fraction of participants who display non-monotonic behavior (with regard

                                                       16
to the sum of donations made by a bundle) is 37% in the Self/Charity version but is only 25% in the
Charity/Charity version (p < 0.01).27 As expected, this non-monotonic classification is significantly
correlated with whether participants respond to the addition of a zero.
    We note that the comparison between the Self/Charity version and the Charity/Charity also
allows us to specifically rule out any potential explanations for the response to adding a zero
that are related to the experimental design itself, including experimenter demand effects (see, e.g.,
De Quidt, Haushofer and Roth (2017)). For instance, one could have worried that participants
respond negatively to the addition of a zero because they think the experimenter wants them to
respond negatively to the addition of a zero. However, this form of experimenter demand would
have resulted in a response to the additional zero in both the Charity/Self and Charity/Charity
versions, and we only observe it in the former.
    Finally, we highlight that participants are able to correctly sum the amounts in the bundle
-- and that their ability to correctly sum the numbers does not depend on adding a zero --
lending additional credence to the notion that they are using the additional zero as an excuse. In
a supplemental study, the Calculation study, participants are shown 12 of our main bundles (six
n/4-bundles and the six n/5-bundles constructed from them) and are asked to report the sum of
each bundle.28 To incentivize accuracy, participants are told that one bundle will be randomly
selected and the participant will receive a 25-cent bonus if they correctly sum the amounts in that
bundle. Nearly all calculations are accurate: 98% and 99% of the calculations involving the n/4-
bundles and the n/5-bundles, respectively, are accurate (and this one percentage point difference
is not statistically significant). Participants are able to sum the bundles regardless of whether the
bundle includes an additional 0.

2.4     Attempting to debias motivated errors
    We have documented evidence of motivated errors. In this subsection, we draw from a vast
related literature and explore whether common debiasing strategies mitigate these motivated errors.
We first specifically consider whether motivated errors are less likely as agents gain experience, when
agents pay attention, and when the (already simple) decision environment is made simpler. None
of these debiasing strategies (fully) mitigate motivated errors. We then provide results from the
  27
      Our measure of non-monotonicity uses decisions from four non-main bundles that are denoted as 4L /4-bundles
because all four amounts are non-zero, but each amount is smaller than the amounts in the main bundles. The
non-zero amounts in these bundles are randomly selected to be dL cents, where dL  {30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38}
(for more details about these bundles, see Appendix Table A.2). These bundles were constructed so that the sum of
each bundle was close to, but lower than, the sum of each 3/4-bundle and each 3/5-bundle (i.e., 3 × d > 4 × dL for
all d and dL ). Thus, we call a participant non-monotonic if the participant chooses one or more 4L /4-bundles and
fails to choose all of the 3/4-bundles and 3/5-bundles. While we could construct other measures of non-monotonic
behavior, even among this set of 16 bundles, this measure seems particularly natural since it utilizes bundles designed
to be close in sum to our main bundles but with significantly lower individual donation amounts.
   28
      On October 22 2019, we recruited 100 participants from Amazon's Mechanical Turk to complete the Calculation
study. Each participant received $3 for completing the 20-minute study as well as any additional bonus payments
from one randomly selected decision. In addition, as with our other studies, workers must have previously completed
at least 100 HITs with a 95% or better approval rating and must be working from a United States IP address.



                                                          17
Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version that we designed to fully mitigate motivated errors and that
succeeded in doing so.
The impact of experience
    Since we document evidence for motivated errors using a within-subject design, we can ask
whether errors are mitigated as a participant gains experience over the 48 decisions in our study. Put
differently, we can ask whether the response to adding a zero lessens or disappears with experience.
We answer this question in two ways. First, we exploit that participants either make all 24 decisions
involving four-amount bundles and then make all 24 decisions involving five-amount bundles or vice
versa. Second, we exploit that the order of bundles randomly varies within the set of 24 four-amount
bundles and within the set of 24 five-amount bundles.
    Appendix Table A.4 examines whether our results differ as participants gain experience. For
simplicity, only the results related to adding a zero are shown. Columns 1 and 2 split participants
based on whether they faced the four-amount bundles first (and so the zeros were added in the
second half of the study, Column 1) or the five-amount bundles first (so the zeros were added in
the first half of the study, Column 2). Columns 3 and 4 show the results from decisions involving
main bundles that occur "early" in each set (from the first half of each set, decisions 1­12 and
25­36, Column 3) or "late" in each set (from the second half of each set, decisions 13­24 and 37­48,
Column 4). Rather than mitigating motivated errors, experience, if anything, exacerbates them
(i.e., the estimated magnitude is larger in Column 4 than in Column 3).
    That participants' decisions are influenced by an additional zero to the same degree when they
first make decisions involving bundles that contain an additional zero (Column 1) as when they
first make decisions involving bundles that do not contain an additional zero (Column 2) also
provides evidence against cognitive dissonance or consistency influencing participants' decisions
to a substantial degree (Cialdini, 1984; Bazerman, Loewenstein and White, 1992; Babcock et al.,
1995; Konow, 2000; Haisley and Weber, 2010; Gneezy et al., 2012; Bohnet and Bazerman, 2016;
Falk and Zimmermann, 2016; Golman et al., 2016; Gneezy et al., 2015; Gneezy, Saccardo and van
Veldhuizen, 2018; Falk and Zimmermann, Forthcoming). Of course, the number of decisions that
participants make in our study may minimize the role of these mechanisms, since participants may
be less constrained by prior decisions if they cannot fully remember those prior decisions (B´ enabou
and Tirole, 2002; Zimmermann, 2018).
The impact of attention
   Even though participants must reveal all of the amounts in the Self/Charity version, they may
make errors because they fail to carefully attend to the amounts in the bundle. For instance, they
may notice an additional 0 in a bundle but fail to pay attention to the other amounts in a bundle.
To assess whether attention mitigates motivated errors, we ran the Self/Charity-Choice version
in which participants have the option to avoid information about a bundle. While participants
must still view the first amount in a bundle (as it is revealed by default), they can choose whether
to click to reveal each of the remaining amounts in the bundle before making their choice. If

                                                 18
attention mitigates motivated errors, they should not persist among the "attentive decisions" in
which participants self-select into acquiring all of the information about a bundle before making
their choice.
    Column 1 of Appendix Table A.5 presents results from the 44% of decisions involving main
bundles that we classify as attentive in the Self/Charity-Choice version -- because participants chose
to reveal all the information about the bundles -- and the main bundles in the Self/Charity version.
Motivated errors are present even when restricting to these attentive decisions. The coefficient on
(+ 0) applies to the attentive decisions in the Self/Charity-Choice version and shows that adding
a zero significantly decreases participants' willingness to choose a bundle by 11 percentage points.
The statistically significant positive coefficient on Self/Charity *(+ 0) shows that the negative effect
of adding a zero is larger among attentive decisions in the Self/Charity-Choice version than across
all the decisions in the Self/Charity version.
    While the main takeaway from the Self/Charity-Choice version is that attention does not miti-
gate evidence for motivated errors, we can make two additional observations. First, the statistically
significant negative coefficient on Self/Charity in Column 1 of Appendix Table A.5 shows that the
baseline four-amount bundles are more likely to be chosen in attentive decisions in the Self/Charity-
Choice version than in the Self/Charity version. Consequently, that motivated errors are prevalent
in attentive decisions directly implies that they persist in decisions where participants are particu-
larly inclined to choose the bundle. Second, one could have thought that motivated errors are driven
by participants who are motivated to be inattentive. That evidence for motivated errors persists
after excluding the decisions in which agents are shown to be inattentive (i.e., decisions in which
agents choose not to reveal all the information about a bundle) suggests that this is not the case.
While Appendix B.3 provides a richer discussion on how our results relate to the the motivated
information avoidance literature, that motivated errors persist among the attentive decisions is also
related to motivated information acquisition, rather than avoidance, as in Spiekermann and Weiss
(2016).
The impact of simplifying the decision environment
    While our environment is exceedingly simple -- the relevant calculation for the participant's
binary decision involves adding two to five two-digit numbers in a manner that can also be achieved
with basic multiplication -- one could theoretically imagine making it even simpler. In particular,
an extreme intervention to debias participants would be to do the requisite math for them by
directly showing them the sum of the amounts in the bundle. Such an intervention reveals that a
bundle generates the same donation to charity whether or not the zero is added to the bundle.
    In the Self/Charity-Sum version, we provide this information on the sum. In particular, in
addition to being required to reveal each amount in a bundle, participants are directly informed of
the sum of the amounts in the bundle when making the choice. Figure 4 shows the decision screens
for the Self/Charity version in Panel A and for the Self/Charity-Sum version in Panel B.
    Column 2 of Appendix Table A.5 presents results from decisions involving the main bundles in

                                                  19
Figure 4: Example question faced by participants in the Self/Charity, Self/Charity-Sum, and
Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum versions, assuming X = 100
                                                                (b) Self/Charity-Sum version
              (a) Self/Charity version




      (c) Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version




the Self/Charity-Sum and Self/Charity versions. The coefficient on (+ 0) applies to the decisions
in the Self/Charity-Sum version and its statistically significant negative coefficient demonstrates
that motivated errors persist when we further simplify the decision environment by presenting the
sum of donations made by the bundle. However, the statistically significant negative coefficient on
Self/Charity *(+ 0) reveals that presenting the sum does somewhat mitigate motivated errors.
The impact of eliminating the ability to appear as if cognitive limitations are relevant
    Why does presenting the sum not entirely mitigate motivated errors? How can participants still
act as if they cannot properly add a zero when they do not even need to add a zero to know the
sum? There are two possible explanations as to how -- even in this case -- participants may be
able to "create" uncertainty that helps them to justify selfish decisions.
    The first explanation is that participants remain unaware of the sum even though it was displayed
on their decision screens. Indeed, participants could be motivated not to pay attention to the sum
because they want to exploit ignorance about the total amount in the charity payoff as an excuse
to choose the selfish payoff. In this case, displaying the sum need not constrain their ability to
create uncertainty about the value of the sum. While possible, this explanation is at odds with the
fact that agents who desire to exploit such ignorance could have easily done so in the Self/Charity-
Choice version where they do not have to reveal all of the amounts in each charity payoff, yet our
results persists among the "attentive decisions" in that version.
    The second explanation is that participants are aware of the sum in the Self/Charity-Sum
version but they act as if they are not. This could be relevant if the way in which motivated

                                                 20
decisions arise is that participants desire to appear as if they are cognitively limited, even if they
are not. Put differently, participants may care about whether there is uncertainty held by others
-- not necessarily themselves -- as to whether they are aware of the sum. As discussed in Section
5, such a desire could reflect conscious rationales if participants desire to rationalize their decisions
to others (e.g., to the experimenter; or to others, even though no one else observes their decisions
in the experiment).
    To examine the impact of ensuring participants know the sum, we ran the Self/Charity-Unavoidable
Sum version. Not only is the sum made more salient on the decision screen (see Panel C of Figure
4), participants are required to correctly report the sum for each charity payoff before making the
associated decision (see Appendix Figure D.8).29 This combination proves successful at eliminating
motivated errors. As shown in Column 3 of Appendix Table A.5, the coefficient on (+ 0), which ap-
plies to the decisions in the Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version, is not significant (and is smaller
in magnitude than all the other Self/Charity versions).
    That only this final debiasing attempt -- highlighting the sum and making participants report
it back to us -- succeeds at eliminating motivated errors indicates that individuals' ability to
appear cognitively limited, or to create uncertainty that they can exploit, is particularly difficult to
constrain. Only when individuals cannot be confused, nor appear confused to others, do we eliminate
motivated errors. In the next section, we explore the robustness of our results by examining whether
motivated errors arise in response to a salience manipulation.

3      Study 2: Salience
    In our second set of experiments (Study 2), subjects make motivated errors in response to a
salience manipulation. When choosing between a payoff for themselves and a payoff for multiple
charities, participants are influenced by the saliency of something that is known to them. The
corresponding errors in decisions are significantly less likely -- but still arise -- when self-serving
motives are removed. These motivated errors survive the same debiasing techniques as in Study 1.
Study 2 both shows robustness of the main results to a more-standard behavioral bias (i.e., salience)
and shows that self-serving motives can also exacerbate errors that arise absent self-serving motives.

3.1     Experimental Design
   A total of 1596 individuals participated in one of eight versions of Study 2.30 As in Study 1,
each participant received $4 for completing the 25-minute study. In addition, one randomly selected
  29
     While this version ensures that participants are neither ignorant of the sum nor can act as if they are ignorant
of the sum, we note that separating between these two possibilities is challenging. For instance, if we attempted
to investigate whether individuals were doing correct calculations by asking them to report the sum, we would not
know whether an individual who reported an incorrect sum was unaware of the correct sum or was trying to justify
a selfish decision by acting unaware of the correct sum. That is, individuals might still misreport the sum to help
rationalize their self-serving decisions (while actually knowing the correct sum). In addition, providing incentives for
the proper calculation before a participant made a donation decision would fundamentally change the decision, and
providing incentives after the donation decision would tell us whether the participant could report the sum but not
whether the participant knew the sum at the time of the donation decision.
  30
     As in Study 1, these participants were recruited from MTurk. See Appendix B for details.

                                                          21
decision for each participant was implemented for bonus payment and resulted in an additional
payment for the participant or a donation to charity.
   Participants in Study 2 face the same 48 binary decisions as participants in Study 1 but each
amount in a bundle is given to a different Make-A-Wish Foundation state chapter, rather than the
sum of the amounts going to the national chapter. Which state chapters receive which amounts
in a bundle is displayed on the decision screen for participants (see Figure 5 for an example).
Participants are informed that any state chapter not included in a bundle receives no donation, and
understanding questions ensure comprehension of this structure.

                    Figure 5: Example of how a bundle initially appears in Study 2




                Clicking on each header reveals the number of cents donated to that state chapter.



    In Study 2, we ran four of the same versions as Study 1 (i.e., Self/Charity, Charity/Charity,
Self/Charity-Choice, Self/Charity-Sum ) and, as we will show below, we get the same pattern of
results. In addition, we ran four additional study versions. The first two additional versions
-- Charity/Charity-Choice and Charity/Charity-Sum -- are technically necessary as controls to
test the effect of our debiasing techniques since we find evidence of errors in the Charity/Charity
version.31 The final two treatments are discussed at length in Appendix B.2. Charity(ARC)/Charity
underscores that the motivated errors we document are not driven by an added difficulty in making
tradeoffs between two different recipients. Self(150)/Charity shows the value of our normalization
and provides further evidence that our results persist absent the normalization.32

3.2     Experimental Results
    Figure 6 shows the main results from the Self/Charity and Charity/Charity versions of Study
2. Panel A shows that making salient a charity that does not receive a donation (i.e., including it
in the bundle rather than excluding it from the bundle) decreases willingness to choose the bundle
in the Self/Charity version, even though the charity is known to receive no donation regardless of
  31
     When biased behavior arises in both Self/Charity and Charity/Charity, the natural approach to considering
whether a debiasing technique is effective at mitigating motivated errors is to compare how this difference between
the two versions changes when debiasing techniques are used. We thus need to run Charity/Charity-Choice alongside
Self/Charity-Choice and Charity/Charity-Sum alongside Self/Charity-Sum.
  32
     Additional details about the versions of Study 2 can be found in Appendix B and Appendix Table B.1.


                                                        22
whether or not it is included in the bundle. Panel B shows that these errors are less likely, but still
present, when self-serving motives are removed in the Charity/Charity version.

Figure 6: In the Self/Charity version and the Charity/Charity version of Study 2, fraction choosing
a main bundle
                                            Panel A: Self/Charity                                                               Panel B: Charity/Charity
                                      .8




                                                                                                                           .8
                                      .6
          Fraction choosing bundles




                                                                                               Fraction choosing bundles
                                                                                                                           .6
                                      .4




                                                                                                                           .4
                                      .2




                                                                                                                           .2
                                      0




                                                                                                                           0
                                           5/5   4/4     4/5     3/4    3/5   2/4   2/5                                         5/5   4/4     4/5     3/4    3/5   2/4   2/5
                                                       Description of bundles                                                               Description of bundles

Data include all participants' decisions in all main bundles: in the Self/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel A and
the Charity/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel B.



    Appendix Table A.6 presents results from Figure 6 in a regression framework. The coefficient on
(+ 0) in Column 1 of Panel A shows that making salient a charity that does not receive a donation
significantly decreases willingness to choose a bundle by 9 percentage points in the Self/Charity
version. The coefficient on (+ 0) in Column 1 of Panel B shows that making salient a charity that
does not receive a donation also statistically significantly decreases willingness to choose a bundle by
4 percentage points in the Charity/Charity version. Appendix Table A.7 compares these coefficients
and shows that the 5 percentage point difference between them is statistically significant.33
    These results persist when restricting the type of bundles or restricting the sample of participants
(as shown in Columns 2­5 of Appendix Tables A.6 and A.7). The results also survive our three
main debiasing attempts. They persist when participants are relatively experienced (as shown in
Appendix Table A.8), when subjects choose to be attentive (comparing results from Self/Charity-
Choice to results from Charity/Charity-Choice in Appendix Table A.9), and when we simplify
the decision environment (comparing results from Self/Charity-Sum to Charity/Charity-Sum in
Appendix Table A.9).34
  33
     Appendix Table A.7 also shows that the bundle is chosen more often in Charity/Charity than Self/Charity, a
difference that is itself reflective of self-serving motives.
  34
     The last set of robustness tests shows that simplifying the (already simple) decision environment -- by summing
the donations made to charity in the bundle -- does not mitigate the motivated error in Study 2, even though it was
somewhat effective in Study 1. One possibility for the difference is that participants care about the distribution of
donations made to various state chapters in Study 2, and thus the sum of donations is not a sufficient statistic about
the bundle. Such distributional concerns could not have been relevant in Study 1 since all charity payoffs benefited
a single charity. Note that we do not run the -Unavoidable Sum versions in Study 2 for similar reasons.

                                                                                          23
    While both Study 1 and Study 2 document evidence for motivated errors, they do so in different
ways. Study 1 shows how self-serving motives create (otherwise non-existent) errors: motivated
errors arise in the Self/Charity version but not in the Charity/Charity version. Study 2 shows how
self-serving motives exacerbate (already existent) errors: errors arise in both the Self/Charity and
Charity/Charity versions, but to a substantially greater degree in the Self/Charity version.35

4      Study 3: Anchoring
    As in Study 1 and Study 2, Study 3 investigates whether there is evidence of motivated errors
in response to payoff-irrelevant information. The structure of the first two studies allowed us to
observe participants making multiple decisions and allowed us to run a variety of additional study
versions to test debiasing strategies and to evaluate the robustness of our results. The structure
of Study 3 is much simpler because the central purpose of Study 3 is to broaden the scope of our
investigation of motivated errors and, secondarily, to show that our results are robust to a different
experimental paradigm.
    To broaden the scope of our investigation, two versions of Study 3 investigate one of the most
well-studied behavioral biases: anchoring. We find that when participants are anchored to a 400-
cent donation to charity, they are substantially less likely to choose a 200-cent donation for charity
when the alternative is money for themselves. When self-serving motives are removed, however,
they no longer respond to these anchoring manipulations.
    To show the robustness of our results to a new paradigm, a third version of Study 3 investigates
the impact of complexity that arises from decisions in which participants must calculate a sum
to determine how much money is going to charity. We find that when the alternative is money
for themselves, participants are substantially less likely to choose 200 cents for charity when it is
presented as 50 + 50 + 50 + 50 + 0 cents rather than presented directly as 200 cents. When self-
serving motives are removed, however, they respond substantially less to the presentation of the
sum. Put differently, while Study 1 captures motivated errors that relate to the addition of a 0,
Study 3 captures motivated errors that arise from addition more generally.
    Finally, all three versions of Study 3 provide additional evidence that our results are robust to
our calibration procedure and to having participants make multiple main decisions. In Study 3, we
employ a different calibration procedure and participants make a single main decision.

4.1     Experimental Design
    Study 3 included 1505 participants randomized into one of eight study versions arising from
a 2 × 4 design of {Self/Charity, Charity/Charity } × {Baseline, Anchor-1, Anchor-2, Addition }.36
  35
      Why do participants make errors even when self-serving motives are not relevant in the Charity/Charity version
of Study 2? One natural explanation is that the decision environment in Study 2 is more "complex" than the decision
environment in Study 1, thus causing more (unmotivated) errors. See also footnote 15 for a discussion of biases that
could cause a response to a 0 in Study 2.
   36
      As in Study 1 and Study 2, these participants were recruited from MTurk using the same qualification criteria
as before. In particular, on October 22, 2019, we recruited and randomized 1505 participants from MTurk into one


                                                        24
Each participant received $2 for completing the 15-minute study. In addition, one decision was
randomly selected for each participant and determined any additional bonus payment.
    In all versions, participants first complete 17 calibration decisions to determine their X value
such that they are indifferent between X cents for themselves and 150 cents for the Make-A-Wish
Foundation. Each decision involves a binary choice between: (i) 150 cents for charity and (ii) Yi
cents for themselves where Yi  {0, 5, 10, 20, 30, ..., 150}. Each participant sees these 17 decisions in
a random order.
    For all participants who have an implied indifference range with a non-zero lower bound (i.e., for
all participants who prefer the 150-cent donation to charity more than 0 cents for themselves and
more than 5 cents for themselves), the X value is set to Yi-1 cents, where Yi is the smallest amount
for which they prefer Yi cents for themselves over 150 cents for charity. For all other participants,
the X value is set to 5 cents.37
    After completing the calibration decisions, participants make one final decision in which they
choose between a 200-cent donation to the Make-A-Wish Foundation national chapter and an "out-
side option." The outside option equals a X -cent bonus payment for participants in the Self/Charity
versions but a 150-cent donation to Make-A-Wish Foundation in the Charity/Charity versions. All
that differs across the Baseline, Anchor-1, Anchor-2, and Addition versions is how information on
Option A, the 200-cent donation, is presented.
    In the Baseline version, the information about the 200-cent donation directly states that the
donation amount equals 200 cents. In the other versions, the information about the 200-cent dona-
tion indirectly states the donation amount. In the Anchor-1 and Anchor-2 versions, participants
are anchored to a higher donation amount of 400 cents because the information about the 200-cent
donation states that it is: the smaller of 400 cents and 200 cents (in Anchor-1 ) or 400 - 200 cents
(in Anchor-2 ). In the Addition version, we introduce complexity -- similar but even more complex
than adding a 0 in Study 1 -- since the information about the 200-cent donation describes it as
equaling 50 + 50 + 50 + 50 + 0 cents.
of these four versions. We intended to recruit 1500 participants, but due to a few subjects having difficulty with
submitting their "completion" code on MTurk, we ended up with 1505 participants. Our randomization was weighted
such that approximately twice as many participants would be randomized into one of the Baseline versions, since
it would serve as the comparison group for all other versions. Overall, 48% of participants are female, the median
age is 35 years old, and the median educational attainment is a Bachelor's Degree. Out of the 18 t - tests that
arise when comparing the three observable characteristics between the baseline version and each of the other three
versions among either the Self/Charity versions or the Charity/Charity versions, there are no statistically significant
differences. Full instructions for Study 3 can be found in Appendix D.3.
   37
      As in Study 1 and Study 2, we show that our results are robust to restricting to the set of participants with X
values that reflect non-zero lower bounds of their indifference range. We also show that our results are robust to
restricting to the set of participants who appear consistent in decisions: those with monotonic calibration decisions
(i.e., such that they never choose Yi-1 cents for themselves but not Yi cents for themselves for all i). This latter
evidence indicates that our results persist among participants who are consistent in how they value money for
themselves relative to money for charity (and thus may have less measurement error in their calibrations).




                                                          25
4.2     Experimental Results
    Figure 7 shows the results from Study 3. Panel A shows that, in the Self/Charity versions, both
the anchoring versions and the addition version decrease the rate at which the 200-cent donation
is chosen as compared to the baseline version. Panel B, however, shows that these effects are
are either eliminated (in Anchor-1 and Anchor-2 ) or substantially reduced (in Addition ) in the
Charity/Charity versions when self-serving motives are absent.

Figure 7: In the Self/Charity version and the Charity/Charity version of Study 3, fraction choosing
the 200-cent donation
                                              Panel A: Self/Charity                                                            Panel B: Charity/Charity
                                       .8




                                                                                                                          .8
          Fraction choosing Option A




                                                                                             Fraction choosing Option A
                                       .6




                                                                                                                          .6
                                       .4




                                                                                                                          .4
                                       .2




                                                                                                                          .2
                                       0




                                                                                                                          0




                                            Baseline   Anchor-1   Anchor-2   Addition                                          Baseline   Anchor-1   Anchor-2   Addition

Data include all participants' decisions in the Self/Charity version of Study 3 in Panel A and the Charity/Charity
version of Study 3 in Panel B.



    Table 4 presents results from Figure 7 in a regression framework. In all regressions we compare
the anchoring versions and addition version to the baseline version (the coefficient on Complex in-
dicates that we are looking at an anchoring or addition version). In Column 1 of Panel A, Complex
is negative and significant, showing that the first anchoring manipulation decreases willingness to
choose the 200-cent donation by 11 percentage points in the Self/Charity version. By contrast, the
coefficient on Complex in Column 1 of Panel B is 0 and statistically insignificant, showing that
the first anchoring manipulation does not significantly influence willingness to choose the 200-cent
donation in the Charity/Charity version. Column 2 presents similar results for the second an-
choring manipulation. Column 3 presents an even larger impact of the addition treatment in the
Self/Charity version, and a small, marginally statistically significant effect in the Charity/Charity
version. Appendix Table A.10 confirms that the differences across the Self/Charity and Char-
ity/Charity versions are statistically significant.
    As we observed when considering results across both Study 1 and Study 2, our results in Study
3 again show that self-serving motives can create (otherwise non-existent) errors (i.e., in both
of the anchoring versions) and exacerbate (already existent) errors (i.e., in the addition version).


                                                                                        26
Unsurprisingly, Column 4 shows that the results persist when pooling across all study versions.
Columns 5 and 6 show the robustness of our results to the sample restrictions noted in footnote
37. Notably, Column 6 shows that restricting to the set of participants with monotonic responses
in the calibration procedure -- indicating less measurement error in the calibration -- results in, if
anything, stronger evidence for motivated errors.

    Table 4: In the Self/Charity and Charity/Charity versions of Study 3, regression of choosing
    the 200-cent donation

     Sample:                                    full                             X is lower         monotonic
                                                                                  bound             calibration
     Version:           Anchor-1      Anchor-2     Addition         All             All                 All
                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)                 (6)
     Panel A: Self/Charity versions
     Complex         -0.11      -0.10                  -0.20      -0.13           -0.09               -0.17
                      (0.04)     (0.04)                 (0.05)     (0.03)          (0.03)              (0.04)
     Constant        0.80      0.80                     0.80       0.80            0.89                0.81
                      (0.02)     (0.02)                 (0.02)     (0.02)          (0.02)              (0.03)
     N                 456        455                     453        754             551                569
     Panel B: Charity/Charity         versions
     Complex          -0.00             0.01           -0.05       -0.01           -0.00               -0.01
                     (0.03)            (0.02)          (0.03)     (0.02)          (0.02)              (0.02)
     Constant        0.93             0.93             0.93       0.93            0.94                0.95
                     (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.02)              (0.01)
     N                 452              450              453        751             559                 590
       
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are robust and shown in parentheses. The results
       are from a linear probability model of the likelihood of choosing the 200-cent donation in the Self/Charity
       version of Study 3 in Panel A and in the Charity/Charity version of Study 3 in Panel B, where Complex is
       an indicator for one of the non-baseline versions. All columns include results from the Baseline version. The
       non-baseline versions included are the Anchor-1 version in Column 1, the Anchor-2 version in Column 2,
       the Addition version in Column 3, and all of these versions in Columns 4 ­ 6. Column 5 involves a restricted
       sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound of their indifference range (and thus
       excludes participants with a zero lower bound). Column 6 involves a restricted sample of participants who
       are monotonic in their calibration decisions.



5      Conclusion
    Across three studies involving more than 4,200 participants and more than 100,000 main deci-
sions, we show that payoff-irrelevant information influences decisions over payoffs, clear evidence of
decision errors. These errors are eliminated -- or dramatically reduced -- when self-serving motives
are removed (i.e., when agents are no longer motivated to make selfish decisions). This leads us to
call them "motivated errors." Table 5 presents a summary of our results across the three studies.
For each study, the table lists the versions with self-serving motives first (the first four rows for
Study 1 and 2 and the first three rows for Study 3) followed by the versions without self-serving
motives.
    In light of our results, we have several observations that may be informative for future work.

                                                           27
                Table 5: The impact of irrelevant information in each study version

                                                                                             Impact of
                                                                                      irrelevant information
                                               N       Self-serving    Baseline      Change in       Percent
                                                        motives?       Average        Average        Change
  Study 1
  Self/Charity                              198              Yes          0.58         -0.06            -10%
  Self/Charity-Choice                       195              Yes          0.52         -0.04             -8%
  Self/Charity-Sum                          206              Yes          0.54         -0.03              -6%
  Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum              168              Yes          0.51           -0.02            -4%
  Charity/Charity                           199              No           0.62           0.01             2%
  Self(150)/Self                            202              No           0.63           -0.00            0%
  Study 2
  Self/Charity                              203              Yes          0.42         -0.09            -21%
  Self/Charity-Choice                       190              Yes          0.38         -0.06            -16%
  Self/Charity-Sum                          195              Yes          0.42         -0.08            -19%
  Self(150)/Charity                         200              Yes          0.24         -0.05            -21%
  Charity/Charity                           191              No           0.58         -0.04             -7%
  Charity/Charity-Choice                    215              No           0.50           -0.01           -2%
  Charity/Charity-Sum                       202              No           0.56         -0.03             -5%
  Charity(ARC)/Charity                      200              No           0.57           -0.01           -2%
  Study 3
  Self/Charity-Anchor 1                  456   (151)         Yes          0.80          -0.11           -14%
  Self/Charity-Anchor 2                  455   (150)         Yes          0.80          -0.10           -13%
  Self/Charity-Addition                  453   (148)         Yes          0.80         -0.20            -25%
  Charity/Charity-Anchor 1               452   (150)         No           0.93            -0.00          0%
  Charity/Charity-Anchor 2               450   (148)         No           0.93            0.01           1%
  Charity/Charity-Addition               453   (151)         No           0.93           -0.05           -5%
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. For Study 1 and Study 2, the baseline average is the fraction of
    baseline n/4-bundles chosen, and the change in average is the estimated coefficient on (+ 0) from the regression
    specification detailed for Column 1 of Table 2, run separately for each study version. For Study 3, the
    baseline average is the fraction choosing the 200-cent donation, and the change in the average is the estimated
    coefficient on Complex from the regression specifications in Table 4. Also, since Study 3 does not involve a
    within-subject design, note that results from two Baseline versions -- one for the Charity/Self versions and
    one for the Charity/Charity versions -- are used to determine these estimates. Thus, to make the sample
    sizes in Study 3 clear, the sample size shown in parentheses excludes participants from the Baseline versions.


First, while motivated reasoning is often facilitated by inattention or some level of unawareness,
the motivated errors we document persist -- and, if anything, are stronger -- among the "attentive
decisions" in the Self/Charity-Choice versions of Study 1 and Study 2. That attentiveness does
not mitigate motivated errors suggests that conscious rationales may be at play (i.e., that agents
may know they are making errors). Previous research has shown evidence of conscious rationales
justifying behavior to others (see, e.g., Foerster and van der Weele (2018b)). A desire to consciously
justify behavior to others may also relate to the rich literature on more self-serving outcomes that
result from delegating one's decisions to others (Fershtman and Gneezy, 2001; Hamman, Loewen-
stein and Weber, 2010; Coffman, 2011; Bartling and Fischbacher, 2012; Oexl and Grossman, 2013),

                                                        28
from obscuring the degree to which others can observe one's decisions (Dana, Cain and Dawes, 2006;
Broberg, Ellingsen and Johannesson, 2007; Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009; Linardi and McConnell,
2011; Shaw et al., 2014), and from deceiving others (Gneezy, 2005; Shalvi et al., 2011; Shalvi, Eldar
and Bereby-Meyer, 2012; Gino and Ariely, 2012; Gino, Ayal and Ariely, 2013; Pittarello et al.,
2015; Bicchieri and Dimant, 2018).38 Given our results, an open question is whether conscious
rationales may even help to justify behavior to oneself, for instance, because agents may desire for
their decisions to appear justifiable to others even when they are not observed by others.
     Second, we document motivated errors in decisions that require little to no calculation. An
interesting avenue for future work is to consider settings that require more complex calculations, such
as those that relate to base-rate neglect, correlation neglect, confirmation bias, and the gambler's
fallacy. Such work could employ an identification strategy similar to the one in our studies --
varying the relevance of self-serving motives while ensuring stakes remain comparable -- and observe
whether biases are exacerbated when self-serving motives are relevant. Such work could also examine
if -- as proposed in B´ enabou (2015) and B´   enabou and Tirole (2016), and indeed consistent with
the empirical findings from our experiments -- the biased behavior: (i) occurs in a predictably self-
serving direction, (ii) persists even as agents gain experience and when agents pay attention, and
(iii) is pronounced when motives are about one's "religion, identity, morality, or politics." Indeed,
we view such work as important because we agree with the speculation put forth in B´       enabou and
Tirole (2016) that self-serving motives may contribute to behavior and beliefs that seem to be
indicative of agents "displaying limited cognitive abilities due to some the biases discussed in the
large behavioral-economics and bounded-rationality literatures."
     Our caveat to such future work, however, is that motivated errors can only be observed if there is
room for individuals to act more confused than they actually are. As an example, let us turn to the
results from an additional study that we ran ("Study 4") that follows a similar design as detailed in
Study 3 (see Appendix C for full study details). Participants choose between a 200-cent donation to
Make-A-Wish Foundation national chapter and X cents for themselves in the Charity/Self versions
of Study 4. When the 200-cent donation is presented directly, 79% of participants choose it. When
information about the 200-cent donation is presented in a correlated way, only 49% of participants
choose it. This 30 percentage point decrease is substantially larger than all of the effects we
observe in our other studies. However, when participants choose between a 200-cent donation and a
150-cent donation to the national chapter in the Charity/Charity versions, the same change in how
information about the 200-cent donation is presented results in a 68 percentage point decrease (from
  38
     In the literature on deceiving others, participants are often described as making "errors" to achieve more self-
serving outcomes (e.g., by misreporting the state of the world to others or to the experimenter). In these experiments,
however, such "errors" are necessary to achieve certain self-serving outcomes (e.g., I have to tell the experimenter the
die landed on 6 to get the highest possible payoff). Our experiments are notably different since self-serving outcomes
can be achieved without making errors (indeed, the most self-serving outcomes would involve always choosing payoffs
that benefit oneself and thus would not be indicative of errors). Put differently, rather that examining whether agents
make errors to achieve the most self-serving outcome, we examine whether agents make errors to rationalize more
self-serving outcomes.



                                                          29
93% to 25%). This massive effect when participants are not motivated means we cannot conclude
that individuals exploit correlation neglect as an excuse not to give. Note that the extent to which
participants suffer from correlation neglect when self-serving motives are not relevant ensures this
result. To find evidence of motivated errors in this experiment, the correlated information structure
would have had to cause a decrease statistically significantly larger than the 68 percentage point
decrease observed in the Charity/Charity versions (off of a base of 79%). Rather than concluding
that individuals are unlikely to exploit correlation neglect as an excuse, however, we simply note
that in decision environments in which unmotivated errors are pervasive it may be infeasible to
identify more errors arising due to self-serving motives. Put differently, we can only identify an
individual making a motivated error if that individual does not make the same error when motives
are removed. More empirical work is clearly needed to map out the space in which the complexity
is sufficient enough to facilitate excuses but not so great as to prevent the identification of motived
errors.
    Third, that standard debiasing techniques used to eliminate errors due to cognitive limitations
prove ineffective at countering motivated errors suggests the need for more work on debiasing
techniques and highlight the value in determining whether an error is motivated before determining
which debiasing strategies should be used. Related to work on the role of cognitive dissonance
(Babcock et al., 1995; Haisley and Weber, 2010; Gneezy et al., 2015; Gneezy, Saccardo and van
Veldhuizen, 2018), one approach may be to make motivated errors more salient to individuals by
juxtaposing them with the lack of errors when agents are not motivated.
    Fourth and finally, we speculate that motivated errors may be particularly difficult to mitigate
because agents want to make these errors. If future work finds this to indeed be the case, another
important question is whether trying to debias agents who display motivated errors makes them
worse off.




                                                  30
References
Andreoni, James, and B. Douglas Bernheim. 2009. "Social Image and the 50­50 Norm: A Theoretical
  and Experimental Analysis of Audience Effects." Econometrica, 77(5): 1607­1636.

Andreoni, James, Justin M. Rao, and Hannah Trachtman. 2016. "Avoiding the ask: A field
  experiment on altruism, empathy, and charitable giving." Journal of Political Economy.

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and Scott S. Lee. 2014. "Awards Unbundled: Evidence from a
  Natural Field Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 100: 44­63.

Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff, and Colin Camerer. 1995. "Biased
  Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining." The American Economic Review, 85(5): 1337­1343.

Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard H Thaler. 2006. "Individual preferences, monetary
  gambles, and stock market participation: A case for narrow framing." The American economic review,
  96(4): 1069­1090.

Bartling, Bj¨
            orn, and Urs Fischbacher. 2012. "Shifting the Blame: On Delegation and Responsibility."
  Review of Economic Studies, 79(1): 67­87.

Bartling, Bj¨              ¨
            orn, and Yagiz Ozdemir. 2017. "The Limits to Moral Erosion in Markets: Social Norms
  and the Replacement Excuse." Working Paper.

Bartling, Bj¨
            orn, Florian Engl, and Roberto A. Weber. 2014. "Does willful ignorance deflect pun-
  ishment? ­ An experimental study." European Economic Review, 70(0): 512 ­ 524.

Bartos, Vojtech, Michal Bauer, Julie Chytilov´
                                             a, and Filip Matejka. 2016. "Attention Discrimi-
  nation: Theory and Field Experiments with Monitoring Information Acquisition." American Economic
  Review, 106(6): 1437­1475.

Batson, C Daniel, Diane Kobrynowicz, Jessica L Dinnerstein, Hannah C Kampf, and An-
  gela D Wilson. 1997. "In a very different voice: unmasking moral hypocrisy." Journal of personality
  and social psychology, 72(6): 1997.

Batson, C Daniel, Elizabeth R Thompson, Greg Seuferling, Heather Whitney, and Jon A
  Strongman. 1999. "Moral hypocrisy: appearing moral to oneself without being so." Journal of person-
  ality and social psychology, 77(3).

Bazerman, Max H, George F Loewenstein, and Sally Blount White. 1992. "Reversals of preference
  in allocation decisions: Judging an alternative versus choosing among alternatives." Administrative
  Science Quarterly, 37(2): 220­240.

B´
 enabou, Roland. 2015. "The economics of motivated beliefs." Revue d'´
                                                                     economie politique, 125(5): 665­
  685.



                                                  31
B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2002. "Self-confidence and personal motivation." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 117(3): 871­915.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2004. "Willpower and personal rules." Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 112(4): 848­886.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior." American Economic
  Review, 96(5): 1652­1678.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2011. "Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 126: 805­855.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2016. "Mindful Economics: The Production, Consumption, and
  Value of Beliefs." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 141­164.

B´
 enabou, Roland, Armin Falk, and Jean Tirole. 2018. "Narratives, Imperatives and Moral Reason-
  ing." Working Paper.

Bicchieri, Cristina, and Eugen Dimant. 2018. "It's Not A Lie If You Believe It. Lying and Belief
  Distortion Under Norm-Uncertainty." Working Paper.

Bodner, Ronit, and Drazen Prelec. 2003. "Self-signaling and diagnostic utility in everyday decision
  making." The psychology of economic decisions, 1: 105­26.

Bohnet, Iris, Alexandra van Geen, and Max Bazerman. 2016. "When Performance Trumps Gender
  Bias: Joint Versus Separate Evaluation." Management Science, 62(5): 1225­1234.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2012. "Salience theory of choice under
  risk." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1243­1285.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. "Salience and consumer choice."
  Journal of Political Economy, 121(5): 803­843.

Broberg, Tomas, Tore Ellingsen, and Magnus Johannesson. 2007. "Is generosity involuntary?"
  Economics Letters, 94(1): 32­37.

Brocas, Isabelle, Juan D Carrillo, Stephanie W Wang, and Colin F Camerer. 2014. "Imperfect
  choice or imperfect attention? Understanding strategic thinking in private information games." Review
  of Economic Studies, 81(3): 944­970.

Buser, Thomas, Leonie Gerhards, and Jo¨
                                      el J Van der Weele. 2018. "Measuring responsiveness to
  feedback as a personal trait." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 56(2): 165­192.

Bushong, Benjamin, Matthew Rabin, and Josh Schwartzstein. 2017. "A Model of Relative Think-
  ing." Working Paper.

Caplin, Andrew. 2016. "Measuring and Modeling Attention." Annual Review of Economics, 8: 379­403.

                                                   32
Caplin, Andrew, Mark Dean, and John Leahy. 2018. "Rational Inattention, Optimal consideration
  sets and stochastic choice." Review of Economic Studies.

Chadd, Ian, Emel Filiz-Ozbay, and Erkut Y. Ozbay. 2019. "The Relevance of Irrelevant Informa-
  tion." Working Paper.

Chance, Zoe, and Michael I Norton. 2015. "The what and why of self-deception." Current Opinion
  in Psychology, 6: 104­107.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. "Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence."
  The American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145­1177.

Chew, Soo Hong, Wei Huang, and Xiaojian Zhao. 2018. "Motivated False Memory." Working Paper.

Cialdini, Robert. 1984. Influence, the Psychology of Persuasion. New York:Harper Collins.

Coffman, Lucas C. 2011. "Intermediation Reduces Punishment (and Reward)." American Economic
  Journal: Microeconomics, 3(4): 1­30.

Conlisk, John. 1996. "Why bounded rationality?" Journal of economic literature, 34(2): 669­700.

Conrads, Julian, and Bernd Irlenbusch. 2013. "Strategic ignorance in ultimatum bargaining." Journal
  of Economic Behavior and Organization, 92(C): 104­115.

Coutts, Alexander. 2018. "Good news and bad news are still news: Experimental evidence on belief
  updating." Experimental Economics, 1­27.

Dana, Jason, Daylian M. Cain, and Robyn M. Dawes. 2006. "What you don't know won't hurt
  me: Costly (but quiet) exit in dictator games." Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
  100: 193­201.

Dana, Jason, Roberto A. Weber, and Jason Xi Kuang. 2007. "Exploiting moral wiggle room:
  experiments demonstrating an illusory preference for fairness." Economic Theory, 33: 67­80.

Danilov, Anastasia, and Silvia Saccardo. 2016. "Disguised Discrimination." Working Paper.

DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. "Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field." Journal of Economic
  literature, 47(2): 315­72.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. "Testing for Altruism and Social
  Pressure in Charitable Giving." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 1­56.

De Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth. 2017. "Measuring and Bound-
  ing Experimenter Demand." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Di Tella, Rafael, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Andres Babino, and Mariano Sigman. 2015. "Conve-
  niently Upset: Avoiding Altruism by Distorting Beliefs about Others' Altruism." American Economic
  Review, 105(11): 3416­42.

                                                  33
Eil, David, and Justin M. Rao. 2011. "The Good News-Bad News Effect: Asymmetric Processing of
  Objective Information about Yourself." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(2): 114­138.

Enke, Benjamin. 2017. "What You See Is All There Is." Working Paper.

Enke, Benjamin, and Florian Zimmermann. 2019. "Correlation Neglect in Belief Formation." Review
  of Economic Studies, 88(1): 313­332.

Ertac, Seda. 2011. "Does self-relevance affect information processing? Experimental evidence on the
  response to performance and non-performance feedback." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
  80(3): 532­545.

Exley, Christine L. 2015. "Excusing Selfishness in Charitable Giving: The Role of Risk." Review of
  Economic Studies, 83(2): 587­628.

Exley, Christine L. Forthcoming. "Using Charity Performance Metrics as an Excuse Not To Give."
  Management Science.

Exley, Christine L., and Judd B. Kessler. 2019. "Equity Concerns are Narrowly Framed." Working
  paper.

Exley, Christine L., and Ragan Petrie. 2018. "The Impact of a Surprise Donation Ask." Journal of
  Public Economics, 158(152-167).

Falk, Armin, and Florian Zimmermann. 2016. "Consistency as a Signal of Skills." Management
  Science, 63(7): 2197­2210.

Falk, Armin, and Florian Zimmermann. Forthcoming. "Information Processing and Commitment."
  The Economic Journal.

Falk, Armin, and Nora Szech. 2013. "Morals and markets." Science, 340(6133): 707­711.

Falk, Armin, and Nora Szech. 2017. "Diffusion of Being Pivotal and Immoral Outcomes." Working
  Paper.

Feiler, Lauren. 2014. "Testing Models of Information Avoidance with Binary Choice Dictator Games."
  Journal of Economic Psychology.

Fershtman, Chaim, and Uri Gneezy. 2001. "Strategic delegation: An experiment." RAND Journal of
  Economics, 352­368.

Finkelstein, Amy. 2009. "E-ztax: Tax salience and tax rates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(3): 969­1010.

Foerster, Manuel, and Joel J van der Weele. 2018a. "Denial and Alarmism in Collective Action
  Problems." Working Paper.



                                                 34
Foerster, Manuel, and Jo¨
                        el van der Weele. 2018b. "Persuasion, justification and the communication
  of social impact." Working Paper.

Freddi, Eleonora. 2018. "Do People Avoid Morally Relevant Information? Evidence from the Refugee
  Crisis." Working Paper.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. "A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 129(4): 1661­1710.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2017. "Behavioral Inattention." NBER Working Paper No. 24096.

Garcia, Thomas, S´
                 ebastien Massoni, and Marie Claire Villeval. 2018. "Ambiguity and excuse-
  driven behavior in charitable giving." Working Paper.

Gauriot, Romain, Stephanie A. Heger, and Robert Slonim. 2019. "Altruism or Diminishing
  Marginal Utility?" Working Paper.

Gilovich, T., D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman. 2002. "The Affect Heuris." In Heuristics and biases:
  The psychology of intuitive judgment. 397­420. New York:Cambridge University Press.

Gino, Francesca, and Dan Ariely. 2012. "The dark side of creativity: original thinkers can be more
  dishonest." Journal of personality and social psychology, 102(3): 445.

Gino, Francesca, Michael I. Norton, and Roberto A. Weber. 2016. "Motivated Bayesians: Feeling
  Moral While Acting Egoistically." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 189­212.

Gino, Francesca, Shahar Ayal, and Dan Ariely. 2013. "Self-serving altruism? The lure of unethical
  actions that benefit others." Journal of economic behavior & organization, 93(285-292).

Gneezy, Ayelet, Alex Imas, Amber Brown, Leif D Nelson, and Michael I Norton. 2012. "Paying
  to be nice: Consistency and costly prosocial behavior." Management Science, 58(1): 179­187.

Gneezy, Uri. 2005. "Deception: The Role of Consequences." The American Economic Review, 95(1): pp.
  384­394.

Gneezy, Uri, Elizabeth A. Keenan, and Ayelet Gneezy. 2014. "Avoiding overhead aversion in
  charity." Science, 346(6209): 632­635.

Gneezy, Uri, Silvia Saccardo, and Roel van Veldhuizen. 2018. "Bribery: Behavioral Drivers of
  Distorted Decisions." Journal of the European Economic Association.

Gneezy, Uri, Silvia Saccardo, Marta Serra-Garcia, and Roel van Veldhuizen. 2015. "Bribing
  the Self." Working paper.

Golman, Russell, David Hagmann, and George Loewenstein. 2017. "Information Avoidance."
  Journal of Economic Literature, 55(1): 1­40.



                                                   35
Golman, Russell, George Loewenstein, Karl Ove Moene, and Luca Zarri. 2016. "The Preference
  for Belief Consonance." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 165­188.

Gotthard-Real, Alexander. 2017. "Desirability and information processing: An experimental study."
  Economics Letters, 152: 96­99.

Grossman, Zachary. 2014. "Strategic ignorance and the robustness of social preferences." Management
  Science, 60(11): 2659­2665.

Grossman, Zachary. 2015. "Self-signaling and social-signaling in giving." Journal of Economic Behavior
  & Organization, 117(0): 26­39.

Grossman, Zachary, and David Owens. 2012. "An unlucky feeling: Overconfidence and noisy feed-
  back." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 84(2): 510­524.

Grossman, Zachary, and Jo¨
                         el J van der Weele. 2017. "Self-image and willful ignorance in social
  decisions." Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(1).

Haisley, Emily C., and Roberto A. Weber. 2010. "Self-serving interpretations of ambiguity in other-
  regarding behavior." Games and Economic Behavior, 68: 614­625.

Hamman, John R., George Loewenstein, and Roberto A. Weber. 2010. "Self-Interest through
  Delegation: An Additional Rationale for the Principal-Agent Relationship." American Economic Review,
  100(4): 1826­1846.

Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2014. "Learning through notic-
  ing: Theory and evidence from a field experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1311­
  1353.

Heger, Stephanie A, and Nicholas W Papageorge. 2018. "We should totally open a restaurant: How
  optimism and overconfidence affect beliefs." Journal of Economic Psychology, 67: 177­190.

Hsee, Christopher K. 1996. "Elastic justification: How unjustifiable factors influence judgments." Or-
  ganizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, , (1).

Hsee, Christopher K. 1998. "Less is better: When low-value options are valued more highly than
  high-value options." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 11(107-121).

Imas, Alex. 2016. "The realization effect: Risk-taking after realized versus paper losses." The American
  Economic Review, 106(8): 2086­2109.

Jacobsen, Karin J, Kari H Eika, Leif Helland, Jo Thori Lind, and Karine Nyborg. 2011. "Are
  nurses more altruistic than real estate brokers?" Journal of Economic Psychology, 32(5): 818­831.

Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan.




                                                  36
Kamdar, Amee, Steven D. Levitt, John A. List, Brian Mullaney, and Chad Syverson. 2015.
  "Once and Done: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Increase Charitable Contributions."

Konow, James. 2000. "Fair Shares: Accountability and Cognitive Dissonance in Allocation Decisions."
  The American Economic Review, 90(4): 1072­1092.

K¨
 oszegi, Botond. 2006. "Ego utility, overconfidence, and task choice." Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 4(4): 673­707.

Koszegi, Botond, and Adam Szeidl. 2013. "A model of focusing in economic choice." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 128(1): 53­104.

Kuhnen, Camelia M. 2015. "Asymmetric learning from financial information." The Journal of Finance,
  70(5): 2029­2062.

Kunda, Ziva. 1990. "The Case for Motivated Reasoning." Psychological Bulletin, 108(3): 480­498.

Larson, Tara, and Monica C. Capra. 2009. "Exploiting moral wiggle room: Illusory preference for
  fairness? A comment." Judgment and Decision Making, 4(6): 467­474.

Lazear, Edward P., Ulrike Malmendier, and Roberto A. Weber. 2012. "Sorting in experiments
  with application to social preferences." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 136­163.

Leszczyc, Peter TL Popkowski, John W Pracejus, and Yingtao Shen. 2008. "Why more can
  be less: An inference-based explanation for hyper-subadditivity in bundle valuation." Organizational
  Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 105(2): 233­246.

Linardi, Sera, and Margaret A. McConnell. 2011. "No excuses for good behavior: Volunteering and
  the social environment." Journal of Public Economics, 95: 445­454.

Lin, Stephanie C., Rebecca L. Schaumberg, and Taly Reich. 2016. "Sidestepping the rock and the
  hard place: The private avoidance of prosocial requests." Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
  35­40.

List, John A. 2002. "Preference reversals of a different kind: The "More is less" Phenomenon." American
  Economic Review, 92(5): 1636­1643.

List, John A. 2003. "Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?" Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 118(1): 41­71.

Liu, Peggy J, and Stephanie C Lin. 2018. "Projecting lower competence to maintain moral warmth
  in the avoidance of prosocial requests." Journal of Consumer Psychology, 28(1): 23­39.

Madrian, Brigitte C. 2014. "Applying insights from behavioral economics to policy design." Annual
  Review of Economics, 6(1): 663­688.




                                                  37
Magen, Eran, Carol S Dweck, and James J Gross. 2008. "The hidden-zero effect representing a
  single choice as an extended sequence reduces impulsive choice." Psychological Science, `9(7): 648­649.

Matthey, Astrid, and Tobias Regner. 2011. "Do I really want to know? A cognitive dissonance-based
  explanation of other-regarding behavior." Game, 2(1): 114­135.

Mijovi´
      c-Prelec, Danica, and Drazen Prelec. 2010. "Self-deception as self-signalling: a model
  and experimental evidence." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
  365(1538): 227­240.

Mobius, Markus M., Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus, and Tanya S. Rosenblat. 2014. "Managing
  Self-Confidence: Theory and Experimental Evidence." Working Paper.

Nyborg, Karine. 2011. "I don't want to hear about it: Rational ignorance among duty-oriented con-
  sumers." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 79(3): 263­274.

Oberholzer-Gee, Felix, and Reiner Eichenberger. 2008. "Fairness in Extended Dictator Game Ex-
  periments." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 8(1).

Oexl, Regine, and Zachary J Grossman. 2013. "Shifting the blame to a powerless intermediary."
  Experimental Economics, 16(3): 306­312.

Olschewski, Sebastian, Marius Dietsch, Elliot A Ludvig, et al. 2019. "Anti-social motives ex-
  plain increased risk aversion for others in decisions from experience." Judgment and Decision Making,
  14(1): 58­71.

Palma, Marco A, and Zhicheng Phil Xu. 2019. "Shadow of a Doubt: Moral Excuse in Charitable
  Giving." Review of Behavioral Economics, 6(2): 133­146.

Pittarello, Andrea, Margarita Leib, Tom Gordon-Hecker, and Shaul Shalvi. 2015. "Justifications
  shape ethical blind spots." Psychological Science.

Rabin, M. 1995. "Moral preferences, moral constraints, and self-serving biases." Working paper.

Rabin, Matthew. 1998. "Psychology and economics." Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1): 11­46.

Rabin, Matthew, and Georg Weizs¨
                               acker. 2009. "Narrow bracketing and dominated choices." The
  American Economic Review, 1508­1543.

Read, Daniel, Christopher Y Olivola, and David J Hardisty. 2016. "The value of nothing: Asym-
  metric attention to opportunity costs drives intertemporal decision making." Management Science.

Regner, Tobias. 2018. "Reciprocity under moral wiggle room: Is it a preference or a constraint?" Ex-
  perimental Economics, 1­18.

Saucet, Charlotte, and Marie Claire Villeval. 2019. "Motivated memory in dictator games." Games
  and Economic Behavior, 117: 250­275.

                                                   38
Schwardmann, Peter, and Jo¨
                          el van der Weele. 2017. "Deception and Self-Deception." Working
  Paper.

Schwardmann, Peter, Egon Tripodi, and Jo¨
                                        el J. van der Weele. 2019. "Self-Persuasion: Evidence
  from Field Experiments at Two International Debating Competitions." Working Paper.

Schwartzstein, Joshua. 2014. "Selective attention and learning." Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 12(6): 1423­1452.

Serra-Garcia, Marta, and Nora Szech. 2019. "The (in)elasticity of moral ignorance." Working Paper.

Shalvi, Shaul, Jason Dana, Michel JJ Handgraaf, and Carsten KW De Dreu. 2011. "Justified
  ethicality: Observing desired counterfactuals modifies ethical perceptions and behavior." Organizational
  Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 115(2): 181­190.

Shalvi, Shaul, Ori Eldar, and Yoella Bereby-Meyer. 2012. "Honesty requires time (and lack of
  justifications)." Psychological science, 10(1264-1270).

Shaw, Alex, Natalia Montinari, Marco Piovesan, Kristina R Olson, Francesca Gino, and
  Michael I Norton. 2014. "Children develop a veil of fairness." Journal of Experimental Psychology:
  General, 143(1).

Simon, Herbert A. 1955. "A behavioral model of rational choice." The quarterly journal of economics,
  69(1): 99­118.

Sims, Christopher A. 2003. "Implications of rational inattention." Journal of Monetary Economics,
  50(3): 665­690.

Snyder, Melvin L, Robert E Kleck, Angelo Strenta, and Steven J Mentzer. 1979. "Avoidance
  of the handicapped: an attributional ambiguity analysis." Journal of personality and social psychology,
  37(12): 2297­2306.

Spiekermann, Kai, and Arne Weiss. 2016. "Objective and subjective compliance: A norm-based
  explanation of `moral wiggle room'." Games and Economic Behavior, 96: 170­183.

Taubinsky, Dmitry, and Alex Rees-Jones. Forthcoming. "Attention variation and welfare: theory
  and evidence from a tax salience experiment." Review of Economic Studies.

Thaler, Michael. 2019. ""The "Fake News" Effect: An Experiment on Motivated Reasoning and Trust
  in News".Abstract." Working Paper.

Trachtman, Hannah, Andrew Steinkruger, Mackenzie Wood, Adam Wooster, James An-
  dreoni, James J. Murphy, and Justin M. Rao. 2015. "Fair weather avoidance: unpacking the
  costs and benefits of "Avoiding the Ask"." Journal of the Economic Science Association, 1­7.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1973. "Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
  probability." Cognitive psychology, 5(2): 207­232.

                                                     39
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. "Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases."
  Science, 185(4157): 1124­1131.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. "The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice."
  Science, 211(4481): 453­458.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1986. "Rational choice and the framing of decisions." Journal
  of business, S251­S278.

van der Weele, Jo¨
                 el J., Julija Kulisa, Michael Kosfeld, and Guido Friebel. 2014. "Resisting Moral
  Wiggle Room: How Robust Is Reciprocal Behavior?" American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
  6(3): 256­264.

Wang, Stephanie W., Michelle Filiba, and Colin F. Camerer. 2010. "Dynamically Optimized
  Sequential Experimentation (DOSE) for Estimating Economic Preference Parameters." Working Paper.

Zimmermann, Florian. 2018. "The Dynamics of Motivated Beliefs." Working Paper.




                                               40
    Appendixes (For Online Publication Only)
A      Additional Tables and Results Mentioned in Main Text

                                 Table A.1: The 36 main bundles

                                     n=4                        n=3                         n=2
n/4-bundles
1st amount                     d d d d                    0 d d d                     0 d d 0
2nd amount                     d d d d                    d 0 d d                     0 0 d d
3rd amount                     d d d d                    d d 0 d                     d 0 0 d
4th amount                     d d d d                    d d d 0                     d d 0 0
Total amount                   4d 4d 4d 4d                3d 3d 3d 3d                 2d 2d 2d 2d

n/5-bundles
1st-4th amount                 ---------------- same as in n/4-bundles ----------------
5th amount                     0 0 0 0             0 0 0 0               0 0 0 0
Total amount                   4d 4d 4d 4d         3d 3d 3d 3d           2d 2d 2d 2d

(n+1)/5-bundles
1st-4th amount                 ---------------- same as in n/4-bundles ----------------
5th amount                     d d d d             d d d d               d d d d
Total amount                   5d 5d 5d 5d         4d 4d 4d 4d           3d 3d 3d 3d

    Each column indicates the amounts associated with each bundle. Note that while the four-amount
    bundles with n = 4 only vary in terms of which value for d is randomly selected (since there are no
    zeros in those bundles), the four bundles with n = 2 and the four bundles with n = 3 also vary in terms
    of which amounts (i.e., the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and/or 4th amount shown on the decision screen) are zero.
    In the n/5-bundles and (n+1)/5-bundles, the payoff structure for the first four amounts is the same
    as in the corresponding n/4-bundle. 0 indicates a zero-amount, and d indicates a non-zero of d that
    is randomly selected on the participant-bundle level such that d  {51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59}.



                              Table A.2: The 12 non-main bundles

                                     n = 4L                     n = 3L                      n=1
n/4-bundles
1st amount                     dL    dL    dL    dL       0     dL    dL    dL        d     0    0     0
2nd amount                     dL    dL    dL    dL       dL    0     dL    dL        0     d    0     0
3rd amount                     dL    dL    dL    dL       dL    dL    0     dL        0     0    d     0
4th amount                     dL    dL    dL    dL       dL    dL    dL    0         0     0    0     d
Total amount                   4dL   4dL   4dL   4dL      3dL   3dL   3dL   3dL       d     d    d     d
    Each column indicates the amounts associated with each bundle. 0 indicates a zero-amount, dL
    indicates a non-zero of dL that is randomly selected on the participant-bundle level such that dL 
    {30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38} and d indicates a non-zero of d that is randomly selected on the
    participant-bundle level such that d  {51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59}.



                                                          41
                                         Figure A.1: Distribution of X values
                                                     (a) Study 1




                                  25
                                  2015
                               Percent
                               10 5
                                  0




                                         0           50              100            150
                                                      Outside option X

                                                     (b) Study 2
                                  25
                                  2015
                               Percent
                               10 5
                                  0




                                         0           50              100            150
                                                      Outside option X

                                                     (c) Study 3
                                  50
                                  4030
                               Percent
                               20 10
                                  0




                                         0           50              100            150
                                                      Outside option X

Data include all participants' decisions in the calibration procedure across all versions of Study 1 in Panel A, across
all versions of Study 2 in Panel B, and across all versions of Study 3 in Panel C. X is set to the lower bound of
participants' implied indifference range from the calibration procedure except for when there is a zero lower bound
and so X is set to 5 cents. There is a zero lower bound for 12% of the 1000 participants in Study 1, for 13% of the
1596 participants in Study 2, and for 26% of the 1505 participants in Study 3.

                                                          42
Table A.3: In the Self/Charity and the Charity/Charity version of Study 1, regression of choosing
a main bundle

 Sample:                                    full                          choice varies        X is lower bound
                           main         if 4/4       if 2/4 or 3/4            main                   main
                          bundles      baseline         baseline            bundles                 bundles
                            (1)           (2)             (3)                  (4)                    (5)
 (+ 0)                  -0.06           -0.04           -0.07                -0.08                   -0.07
                         (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.01)               (0.01)                  (0.01)
 (+ 1)                  0.11             0.03            0.15                 0.14                    0.12
                         (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.02)               (0.02)                  (0.01)
 Charity/Charity *(+ 0) 0.07             0.06            0.08                 0.09                    0.08
                         (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)               (0.02)                  (0.02)
 Charity/Charity *(+ 1) 0.17              -0.02         0.27                  0.15                    0.16
                         (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)               (0.02)                  (0.02)
 Charity/Charity          0.03           0.15             -0.03                0.00                    0.01
                         (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)               (0.02)                  (0.03)
 N                       14292            4764            9528                12708                   12492
 kn  ld FEs                yes             yes             yes                  yes                     yes
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level and shown in
   parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose a main bundle in the
   Self/Charity version or in the Charity/Charity version of of Study 1, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle
   that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator
   for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle,
   Charity is an indicator for the Charity/Charity version, kn  ld FEs include all possible interactions of dummies
   for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1) and dummies
   for the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts in the baseline
   bundle. Columns 1­3 analyze all participants' decisions: in all main bundles in Column 1, involving the baseline
   4/4-bundles in Column 2, and involving the baseline 2/4- and 3/4-bundles in Column 3. Column 4 analyzes
   all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants who choose the bundle at least once and choose
   their outside option at least once across all 48 decisions. Column 5 analyzes all main bundles but among a
   restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound of their indifference range (and
   thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound).




                                                         43
Table A.4: Considering the role of experience in the Self/Charity version of Study
1, regression of choosing a main bundle

                     5-bundles first    4-bundles first      early bundles       late bundles
                          (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)
 (+ 0)                  -0.06               -0.06               -0.04              -0.08
                         (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.02)             (0.02)
 N                        3744                3384                3568               3560
 (+ 1) controls            yes                 yes                 yes                yes
 kn  ld FEs                yes                 yes                 yes                yes
   
      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level
   and shown in parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood
   to choose a main bundle in the Self/Charity version of Study 1, where (+ 0) is an indicator for
   an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is equal to zero to a baseline
   n/4-bundle, (+ 1) controls involve an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed
   by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, kn  ld FEs include all
   possible interactions of dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying
   baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1) and dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d in
   the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts in the baseline bundle. Columns 1­2
   analyze decisions in all main bundles by participants who first view the set of five-amount
   bundles then the set of four-amount bundles in Column 1 and instead by participants who
   first view the set of four-amount bundles then the set of five-amount in Column 2. Columns
   3­4 analyze all participants' decisions in main bundles that occur "early" within each set of
   bundles (i.e., decisions 1­12 and 25­36) in Column 3 and that instead occur "late" within
   the set of bundles (i.e., decisions 13­24 and 37­48) in Column 4.




                                               44
Table A.5: Considering the role of inattention and simplifying the decision envi-
ronment in Study 1, regression of choosing a main bundle

                                                   Self/Charity and

                              attentive               Self/Charity         Self/Charity
                            decisions from                -Sum           -Unavoidable Sum
                         Self/Charity-Choice
                                  (1)                      (2)                    (3)
 (+ 0)                          -0.11                   -0.03                     -0.02
                                 (0.02)                  (0.01)                  (0.01)
 Self/Charity *(+ 0)             0.05                    -0.03                  -0.04
                                 (0.02)                  (0.02)                  (0.02)
 Self/Charity                   -0.12                     0.04                   0.08
                                 (0.03)                  (0.03)                  (0.04)
 N                               10209                   14544                   13176
 (+ 1) controls                    yes                     yes                     yes
 kn  ld FEs                        yes                     yes                     yes
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level
   and shown in parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood
   to choose a main bundle, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed
   by adding a fifth amount that is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, Self/Charity is an
   indicator for being in the Self/Charity version, (+ 1) controls involve an indicator for an
   (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline
   n/4-bundle as well as an interaction of that indicator with the Self/Charity indicator, kn  ld
   FEs include all possible interactions of dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within
   the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1) and dummies for the value of the non-
   zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts in the baseline
   bundle. Column 1 analyzes all participants' decisions in all main bundles in the Self/Charity
   version of Study 1 and all participants' decisions that are "attentive" (as indicated by them
   fully revealing information in that decision) in all main bundles in the Self/Charity-Choice
   version of Study 1. Column 2 analyzes all participants' decisions in all main bundles in the
   Self/Charity version of Study 1 and all participants' decisions in all main bundles in the
   Self/Charity-Sum version of Study 1. Column 3 analyzes all participants' decisions in all
   main bundles in the Self/Charity version of Study 1 and all participants' decisions in all
   main bundles in the Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version of Study 1.




                                              45
Table A.6: In the Self/Charity and Charity/Charity versions of Study 2, regression of choosing
a main bundle

 Sample:                                full                          choice varies        X is lower bound
                      main          if 4/4       if 2/4 or 3/4            main                   main
                     bundles       baseline         baseline            bundles                 bundles
                       (1)            (2)             (3)                  (4)                    (5)
 Panel A: Self/Charity version
 (+ 0)          -0.09      -0.10                   -0.08                 -0.13                   -0.10
                 (0.01)     (0.02)                  (0.01)                (0.02)                  (0.01)
  +
 ( 1)            0.07        0.01                   0.10                  0.10                    0.08
                 (0.01)     (0.01)                  (0.02)                (0.02)                  (0.01)
 N                     7308          2436            4872                 5148                    6048
 kn  ld FEs             yes           yes             yes                  yes                    yes

 Panel B: Charity/Charity version
 (+ 0)           -0.04     -0.03                   -0.05                 -0.05                   -0.04
                  (0.01)   (0.02)                   (0.01)                (0.01)                  (0.01)
  +
 ( 1)            0.17       0.00                    0.26                  0.19                    0.18
                  (0.02)   (0.02)                   (0.02)                (0.02)                  (0.02)
 N                     6876          2292            4584                 6192                    5940
 kn  ld FEs             yes           yes             yes                  yes                     yes
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level and shown in
   parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose a main bundle in the
   Self/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel A and in the Charity/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel B, where
   (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is equal to zero to a
   baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount
   that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, kn  ld FEs include all possible interactions of dummies for the
   number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1) and dummies for
   the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts in the baseline
   bundle. Columns 1­3 analyze all participants' decisions: in all main bundles in Column 1, involving the
   baseline 4/4-bundles in Column 2, and involving the baseline 2/4- and 3/4-bundles in Column 3. Column 4
   analyzes all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants who choose the bundle at least once
   and choose their outside option at least once across all 48 decisions. Column 5 analyzes all main bundles but
   among a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound of their indifference
   range (and thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound).




                                                       46
Table A.7: In the Self/Charity and the Charity/Charity version of Study 2, regression of choosing
a main bundle

 Sample:                                    full                         choice varies        X is lower bound
                           main         if 4/4       if 2/4 or 3/4           main                   main
                          bundles      baseline         baseline           bundles                 bundles
                            (1)           (2)             (3)                 (4)                    (5)
 (+ 0)                  -0.09          -0.10           -0.08                -0.13                   -0.10
                         (0.01)         (0.02)          (0.01)               (0.02)                  (0.01)
 (+ 1)                  0.07              0.01          0.10                 0.10                    0.08
                         (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.02)               (0.02)                  (0.01)
 Charity/Charity *(+ 0) 0.05            0.07             0.04                0.08                    0.06
                         (0.02)         (0.03)          (0.02)               (0.02)                  (0.02)
 Charity/Charity *(+ 1) 0.10             -0.01         0.16                  0.09                    0.10
                         (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.03)               (0.02)                  (0.02)
 Charity/Charity        0.16            0.21            0.13                 0.06                    0.13
                         (0.03)         (0.04)          (0.03)               (0.03)                  (0.03)
 N                       14184           4728            9456                11340                   11988
 kn  ld FEs                yes            yes             yes                  yes                     yes
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level and shown in
   parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose a main bundle in the
   Self/Charity version or in the Charity/Charity version of Study 1, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle
   that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator
   for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle,
   Charity/Charity is an indicator for the Charity/Charity version, kn  ld FEs include all possible interactions of
   dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1) and
   dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts in
   the baseline bundle. Columns 1­3 analyze all participants' decisions: in all main bundles in Column 1, involving
   the baseline 4/4-bundles in Column 2, and involving the baseline 2/4- and 3/4-bundles in Column 3. Column 4
   analyzes all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants who choose the bundle at least once and
   choose their outside option at least once across all 48 decisions. Column 5 analyzes all main bundles but among
   a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound of their indifference range (and
   thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound).




                                                        47
Table A.8: Considering the role of inexperience in the Self/Charity and Char-
ity/Charity versions of Study 2, regression of choosing a main bundle

                     5-bundles first    4-bundles first      early bundles       late bundles
                          (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)
 Panel A: Self/Charity
 (+ 0)            -0.09                     -0.09               -0.07              -0.11
                   (0.02)                    (0.02)              (0.02)             (0.02)
 N                        3744                3564               3665                3643
 (+ 1) controls            yes                 yes                yes                 yes
 kn  ld FEs                yes                 yes                yes                yes

 Panel B: Charity/Charity
 (+ 0)              -0.03                   -0.05                 -0.02            -0.06
                   (0.02)                    (0.02)              (0.02)             (0.02)
 N                        3060                3816               3462                3414
 (+ 1) controls            yes                 yes                yes                 yes
 kn  ld FEs                yes                 yes                yes                 yes
   
      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level
   and shown in parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood
   to choose a main bundle in in the Self/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel A and in the
   Charity/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel B, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle
   that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle,
   (+ 1) controls involve an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth
   amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, kn  ld FEs include all possible interactions
   of dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle
   (see Table A.1) and dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully
   control for the sum of the amounts in the baseline bundle. Columns 1­2 analyze decisions
   in all main bundles by participants who first view the set of five-amount bundles then the
   set of four-amount bundles in Column 1 and instead by participants who first view the set
   of four-amount bundles then the set of five-amount in Column 2. Columns 3­4 analyze all
   participants' decisions in main bundles that occur "early" within each set of bundles (i.e.,
   decisions 1­12 and 25­36) in Column 3 and that instead occur "late" within the set of bundles
   (i.e., decisions 13­24 and 37­48) in Column 4.




                                               48
Table A.9: Considering the role of inattention and simplifying the decision en-
vironment in Study 2, regression of choosing a main bundle

 Panel A: Self/Charity versions
                                               Self/Charity and
                          attentive decisions from            Self/Charity-Sum
                            Self/Charity-Choice
                                     (1)                             (2)
 (+ 0)                             -0.16                               -0.08
                                    (0.03)                              (0.01)
 Self/Charity *(+ 0)                0.07                                 -0.01
                                    (0.03)                              (0.02)
 Self/Charity                      -0.20                                 -0.00
                                    (0.04)                              (0.04)
 N                                   9378                               14328
 (+ 1) controls                       yes                                yes
 kn  ld FEs                           yes                                yes

 Panel B: Charity/Charity versions
                                            Charity/Charity and
                          attentive decisions from         Charity/Charity-Sum
                          Charity/Charity-Choice
                                     (1)                           (2)
 (+ 0)                             -0.06                               -0.03
                                    (0.01)                              (0.01)
 Charity/Charity *(+ 0)              0.02                                -0.01
                                    (0.02)                              (0.02)
 Charity/Charity                    -0.04                                 0.01
                                    (0.02)                              (0.02)
 N                                  10767                               14148
 (+ 1) controls                      yes                                 yes
 kn  ld FEs                          yes                                 yes
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level
   and shown in parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood
   to choose a main bundle in the Self/Charity or Self/Charity-Choice versions of Study 2 in
   Column 1 and in the Self/Charity or Self/Charity-Sum versions of Study 2 in Column 2,
   where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount
   that is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, Self/Charity is an indicator for being in
   the Self/Charity version, (+ 1) controls involve an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that
   is constructed by adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle as well
   as an interaction of that indicator with the Self/Charity indicator, kn  ld FEs include all
   possible interactions of dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying
   baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1) and dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d
   in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts in the baseline bundle. Column
   1 analyzes all participants' decisions in all main bundles in the Self/Charity version of
   Study 2 and all participants' decisions that are "attentive" (as indicated by them fully
   revealing information in that decision) in all main bundles in the Self/Charity-Choice
   version of Study 2. Column 2 analyzes all participants' decisions in all main bundles in
   the Self/Charity version of Study 2 and all participants' decisions in all main bundles in
   the Self/Charity-Sum version of Study 2.


                                             49
Table A.10: In the Self/Charity and the Charity/Charity version of Study 3, regression of
choosing the 200-cent donation

 Sample:                                       full                            X is lower         monotonic
                                                                                bound             calibration
 Version:             Anchor-1      Anchor-2      Addition        All             All                 All
                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)                 (6)
 Complex                -0.11        -0.10            -0.20     -0.13           -0.09               -0.17
                         (0.04)       (0.04)           (0.05)    (0.03)          (0.03)              (0.04)
 Charity/Charity        0.12         0.12              0.12      0.12            0.05                0.14
                         (0.03)       (0.03)           (0.03)    (0.03)          (0.03)              (0.03)
 Charity/Charity         0.11         0.11             0.14      0.12            0.09                0.16
 *Complex                (0.05)       (0.05)           (0.06)    (0.04)          (0.04)              (0.04)
 Constant               0.80         0.80              0.80      0.80            0.89                0.81
                         (0.02)       (0.02)           (0.02)    (0.02)          (0.02)              (0.03)
 N                        908          905               906      1505            1110                1159
     
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are robust and shown in parentheses. The results are
     from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose the 200-cent donation in the Self/Charity version
     or in the Charity/Charity version of Study 3, where Complex is an indicator for one of the non-baseline
     versions and Charity/Charity is an indicator for the Charity/Charity version. All columns include results
     from the Baseline version. The non-baseline versions included are the Anchor-1 version in Column 1, the
     Anchor-2 version in Column 2, the Addition version in Column 3, and all of these versions in Columns 4­6.
     Column 5 involves a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound of their
     indifference range (and thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound). Column 6 involves a restricted
     sample of participants who are monotonic in their calibration decisions.




                                                          50
B     Additional Information about Study 2
B.1     Additional Experimental Design Information about Study 2
Implementation details
    From October 10­13, 2016, we recruited and randomized 1200 participants from Amazon's Me-
chanical Turk (MTurk) into one of six study versions in a 2 × 3 design: {Self/, Charity/ } × {Charity,
Charity-Choice, Charity-Sum }, and 1196 participants completed the study. On March 13, 2017,
we recruited and randomized 400 participants into one of two study versions: Self(150)/Charity
and Charity(ARC)/Charity, and all 400 participants completed the study. To be eligible for any
of our study versions, workers must have previously completed at least 100 HITs with a 95% or
better approval rating and must be working from a United States IP address. Overall, 50% of
participants are female, the median age is 33 years old, and the median educational attainment
is an Associate's Degree. There are not significant differences across the Self/ version and the
Charity/ version for any of {Charity, Charity-Choice, Charity-Sum } or between Self(150)/Charity
and Charity(ARC)/Charity, demonstrating successful randomization. Full instructions for Study 2
can be found in Appendix D.2.
State Chapters
    Due to constraints (related to which chapters were approved by the IRB to receive donations and
related to how some states shared chapters), we randomly drew states from a list of 28 states that
we matched with corresponding Make-A-Wish Foundation chapters. This list of states was: Alaska,
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.
Study Versions
   The eight versions of Study 2 vary along two dimensions: (1) the recipient and level of the
outside option and (2) what information about the bundle participants must learn before making
each choice. The differences across the eight versions of Study 2 are best visualized in Appendix
Table B.1.




                                                 51
                                        Table B.1: Study 2 Versions

 Outside Option to...                           ...Charity                         ...Self
                                                          Charity /         Self /
                       Optional                       Charity-Choice Charity-Choice
 Information                                             (n = 215)        (n = 190)
                                      Charity(ARC) /      Charity /         Self /         Self(150) /
                       Required          Charity          Charity          Charity          Charity
                                        (n = 200)        (n = 191)        (n = 203)        (n = 200)
                       Required                           Charity /         Self /
                       and Sum                         Charity-Sum      Charity-Sum
                        Shown                            (n = 202)        (n = 195)
 Bundle to...                                                  ...Charity



B.2      Additional Results from Study 2 to Address Additional Psycho-
         logical Explanations
    In this section, we present results from the final two versions of Study 2 to show the robustness
of our results and to further confirm that observed differences between the Self/ and Charity/
versions of each study are due to self-serving motives.
    The calibration procedure described in Section 2.1 ensures that each participant in Study 1 and
Study 2 values their outside options roughly equivalently regardless of whether they are randomized
into a Self/ or Charity/ version of the study. The calibration has a number of important advantages
as described in Section 2.1. In that section, we emphasize that our identification strategy involves
exploring decision errors within a person who faces a fixed outside option, and so we do not expect
the calibration procedure to have an impact on our results.
    Nevertheless, two concerns were raised to us: (i) errors might be more likely in the Self/Charity
versions than the Charity/Charity versions because the calibration sets the nominal level of the
outside option far from the sum of the donations in the bundle, which might make the amounts
harder to compare; (ii) errors might be more likely in the Self/Charity versions than the Char-
ity/Charity versions because the recipient of the bundle and the outside option were more similar
in the Charity/Charity versions (the charities are alway the Make-A-Wish Foundation national
chapter or state chapters and the self is a different recipient).39
    Note that for such concerns to explain our results, they would need to make it easier to process
the addition of a zero when the outside option is 150 cents for the Make-A-Wish Foundation national
chapter and harder to process the addition of a zero when the outside option is a calibrated amount
for oneself. That is, for a feature of the calibration or outside option to drive the differences across
our versions it could not simply be that the calibration or outside option makes decisions "harder"
in general in the Self/Charity versions, but rather it must be that this difficulty interacts with
  39
    We are grateful to George Loewenstein for raising these concerns to us and inspiring the final two versions of
Study 2, which are presented in this section.

                                                       52
adding a zero in Study 1 and interacts with changing the salience of a state chapter in Study 2.
While neither of the concerns raised above struck us as likely to interact with the ability to process
the addition of a zero, we ran two additional study versions to address them. The Self(150)/Charity
version of Study 2 was run to assuage concerns related to point (i).40 The Charity(ARC)/Charity
version of Study 2 was run to assuage concerns related to point (ii).
    In the Self(150)/Charity version, we still ask participants the calibration question (to keep
procedures identical to the other treatments), but all participants make all decisions with 150
cents for themselves as the outside option, so the calibration does not affect their outside option.
In this Self(150)/Charity version, the rate of choosing a baseline n/4-bundle is only 0.24. This is
substantially and statistically significantly lower than the 0.42 rate of choosing a baseline n/4-bundle
in the Self/Charity version of Study 2. This difference suggests the need for the calibration in order
to avoid censoring concerns from participants being too far from indifferent between the outside
option and the bundles (an issue raised in Section 2.1). Indeed, while only 25% of participants in the
Self/Charity version of Study 2 choose their outside option in all 48 decisions, this rate doubles to
51% in the Self(150)/Charity version. In spite of the lower rate of selecting bundles mechanically
shrinking the effect in percentage point terms, Appendix Table B.2 shows that the response to
making salient a charity that does not receive a donation is robust to the 150-cent outside option.
Column 1 shows that participants are 5 percentage points less likely to choose a bundle when we
add to it a charity that does not receive a donation. Given the lower rate of choosing the bundles
in this version, the 5 percentage point reduction is the same percent effect (21%) as the percent
effect in the Self/Charity version of Study 2 (21%). Columns 2 to 5 confirm the robustness of this
result. Notably, in Column 4, when we focus on the restricted sample of participants who choose
the bundle in at least one of the 48 decisions and choose the outside option in at least one of the 48
decisions, we see a coefficient that is similarly sized as in the Self/Charity version (10 percentage
points here as compared to 9 percentage points in the Self/Charity version of Study 2). Thus,
these results indicate that self-serving motives -- rather than something about the calibration --
are driving the larger effects we observe the Self/ versions than in the Charity/ versions.
    In the Charity(ARC)/Charity version, the bundle continues to go to Make-A-Wish Foundation
state chapters, but the outside option is now 150 cents for the American Red Cross, a charity that
differs from the Make-A-Wish Foundation in both its mission and the types of people that it serves.
If differences between recipients of the bundle and the outside option cause the errors that we see,
then this difference should increase errors relative to the standard Charity/Charity version of Study
2, in which the recipients are more similar. As shown in Appendix Table B.2, the frequency of errors
does not increase in the Charity(ARC)/Charity and instead becomes statistically indistinguishable
from 0. In fact, the estimated coefficient estimated on (+ 0) in Charity(ARC)/Charity is statistically
  40
     It is worth noting that we observe motivated errors among participants with various X values, including partic-
ipants with X that are close to, and exactly, 150 cents, which made it seem unlikely that concerns related to point
(i) would be problematic.



                                                        53
significantly smaller than that observed in the Charity/Charity version. This evidence directly
counters the hypothesis that the difference between the recipient of the outside option and the
recipient of the bundle is a key driver of the size of the bias. It should be noted, however that any
variant of this difference-in-recipient argument that claims the differential effects across our Self/
and Charity/ versions arise due to particular difficulties associated with making self-other trade-offs
will be isomorphic to our argument that self-serving motives (arising from a desire to keep money
for oneself) are at play. We are thus happy to call any response particular to a self-other trade-off
a result of self-serving motives.

  Table B.2: In the Self(150)/Charity and Charity(ARC)/Charity versions of Study 2, regression
  of choosing a main bundle

   Sample:                               full                          choice varies       X is lower bound
                        main         if 4/4       if 2/4 or 3/4            main                  main
                       bundles      baseline         baseline            bundles                bundles
                         (1)           (2)             (3)                  (4)                   (5)
   Panel A: Self(150)/Charity version
   (+ 0)           -0.05     -0.07                   -0.03               -0.10                   -0.05
                    (0.01)    (0.02)                  (0.01)              (0.02)                  (0.01)
   (+ 1)           0.07        0.01                   0.10                0.14                    0.07
                    (0.01)    (0.01)                  (0.01)              (0.02)                  (0.01)
   N                     7200         2400            4800                 3384                    6372
   kn  ld FEs             yes          yes             yes                  yes                    yes

   Panel B: Charity(ARC)/Charity version
   (+ 0)            -0.01   -0.00        -0.02                             -0.02                 -0.02
                   (0.01)  (0.01)       (0.01)                            (0.01)                 (0.01)
   (+ 1)           0.21    0.03        0.30                               0.23                   0.22
                   (0.01)  (0.01)       (0.02)                            (0.01)                 (0.01)
   N                     7200         2400            4800                 6408                    6012
   kn  ld FEs             yes          yes             yes                  yes                     yes
     
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the participant-level and shown in
     parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to choose a main bundle in
     the Self(150)/Charity version of Study 2 in Panel A and in the Charity(ARC)/Charity version of Study 2
     in Panel B, where (+ 0) is an indicator for an n/5-bundle that is constructed by adding a fifth amount that
     is equal to zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, (+ 1) is an indicator for an (n+1)/5-bundle that is constructed by
     adding a fifth amount that is non-zero to a baseline n/4-bundle, kn  ld FEs include all possible interactions
     of dummies for the number of non-zero amounts within the underlying baseline n/4-bundle (see Table A.1)
     and dummies for the value of the non-zero amount d in the bundle to fully control for the sum of the amounts
     in the baseline bundle. Columns 1-3 analyze all participants' decisions: in all main bundles in Column 1,
     involving the baseline 4/4-bundles in Column 2, and involving the baseline 2/4- and 3/4-bundles in Column
     3. Column 4 analyzes all main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants who choose the bundle
     at least once and choose their outside option at least once across all 48 decisions. Column 5 analyzes all
     main bundles but among a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the lower bound
     of their indifference range (and thus excludes participants with a zero lower bound).




                                                        54
B.3      Additional Results from Study 2 on Information Avoidance
    There is a vast literature on how individuals avoid information in order to maintain "moral wiggle
room" about the extent to which a decision is selfish. The canonical example involves the hidden
information treatment in Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007): subjects frequently avoid learning how
their decisions influence the payoffs of others, and this avoidance results in more selfish behavior (as
compared to when subjects cannot avoid learning how their decisions influence the payoffs of others).
There is a subsequent literature that finds similar results (Larson and Capra, 2009; Matthey and
Regner, 2011; Conrads and Irlenbusch, 2013; Feiler, 2014; Grossman, 2014; van der Weele et al.,
2014; Exley and Petrie, 2018; Serra-Garcia and Szech, 2019); that shows how willful ignorance
may help agents rationalize discriminatory behavior (Barto      s et al., 2016) and avoid learning about
refugees (Freddi, 2018); that shows how willful ignorance can help agents avoid blame from others
(Bartling, Engl and Weber, 2014); that shows how willful ignorance depends on what individuals
expect to learn and how motivated information acquisition can also occur (Spiekermann and Weiss,
2016); and that develops related theoretical models (Nyborg, 2011; Grossman and van der Weele,
2017).41
    As discussed in our Introduction, when individuals make decisions under uncertainty (even if
they could have resolved that uncertainty), they may appeal to preferences under uncertainty to
rationalize self-serving decisions. Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007) indeed note that participants
in their hidden payoff treatment "appear to exploit the payoff uncertainty as an excuse." How our
results differ from that finding, and differ from the larger motivated information avoidance literature,
is that participants in the Self/Charity study versions cannot avoid payoff information on how their
decisions influence others. In addition, there is no payoff uncertainty in the decisions they make, so
they cannot appeal to preferences under uncertainty to rationalize self-serving decisions. Moreover,
since we document self-serving decisions in response to payoff-irrelevant information, they cannot
appeal to any preference or belief over payoffs to rationalize their self-serving decisions.
    However, since we also conduct study versions in which participants can avoid payoff information
on how their decisions influence others -- the Self/Charity-Choice and the Charity/Charity-Choice
versions -- we can speak to this motivated information avoidance literature directly. In the results
that follow, we will only consider results from the Study 2 since we did not run a Charity/Charity-
Choice version of Study 1.
    First, we show that we can replicate a common finding in the information avoidance literature:
participants who avoid information make more selfish decisions. As shown in the two bars on the left
side of Panel A of Figure B.1, when we look at settings where information is likely to encourage giving
(i.e., decisions where the sum of donations in the bundle is greater than 150 cents), participants
  41
    Closely related to motivated information avoidance is the literature on motivated avoidance of prosocial asks
(Jacobsen et al., 2011; DellaVigna, List and Malmendier, 2012; Lazear, Malmendier and Weber, 2012; Kamdar et al.,
2015; Trachtman et al., 2015; Andreoni, Rao and Trachtman, 2016; Lin, Schaumberg and Reich, 2016), and for a
review of more broadly related literature, including other motives for information avoidance, see Golman, Hagmann
and Loewenstein (2017).


                                                       55
who can avoid information are significantly less likely to choose the bundle than participants who
are forced to fully reveal information in the Self/Charity version. These bundles are chosen 49%
of the time in the Self/Charity-Choice version and 41% in the Self/Charity version (p < 0.05 with
standard errors clustered at the participant level). This increased selfish behavior is also consistent
with motivated information avoidance, as participants in the Self/Charity-Choice version choose to
avoid revealing all the information about these bundles 70% of the time.
    Second, unlike most of the prior literature, our experiments additionally include decisions in
which information is likely to discourage giving (i.e., decisions where the sum of donations in
the bundle is less than 150 cents).42 In these bundles, we again observe that participants in the
Self/Charity-Choice version frequently choose to avoid revealing all information (such avoidance
occurs 68% of the time). This avoidance -- perhaps not surprisingly given the nature of the
information -- no longer results in reduced giving. As shown in the two bars on the right side
of Panel A of Figure B.1, participants who can avoid the information in the Self/Charity-Choice
version are, if anything, more likely to choose bundles than participants who are forced to fully reveal
information in the Self/Charity version. These bundles are chosen 23% of the time in Self/Charity-
Choice version and 28% in the Self/Charity version (p = 0.16 with standard errors clustered at the
participant level). This finding suggests that in settings where there is uncertainty about whether
revealing information is going to encourage or discourage giving, information avoidance may backfire
as a strategy to behave selfishly.
    Third, our results provide the first test, to our knowledge, of whether individuals avoid infor-
mation more when they have a self-serving motive than when they do not (even though, given our
calibration procedure, the stakes involved are the same). This test is worth performing because
there may be other, unmotivated reasons to avoid information in decision environments, includ-
ing the implicit costs of collecting and processing information. Pooling across all 48 bundles, we
observe significant unmotivated information avoidance: participants avoid fully revealing informa-
tion about the bundles in 50% of decisions in the Charity/Charity-Choice version when self-serving
motives are not relevant. However, we also observe evidence of motivated information avoidance.
The rate at which participants avoid fully revealing information about the bundles is 70% in the
Self/Charity-Choice version when self-serving motives are relevant (this is statistically significantly
higher than the 50% in the Charity/Charity-Choice version, p < 0.01 with standard errors clustered
   42
      In Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007), revealing information either eliminates the possibility to engage in costly
prosocial behavior (i.e., when subjects find themselves in an "aligned" state where the option that is most beneficial
to them is also most beneficial to another subject) or encourages costly prosocial behavior (i.e., when subjects find
themselves in an "unaligned" state and thus learn that sacrificing some of their own payoff would be very beneficial
to another subject). In our study, while revealing information may also encourage costly prosocial behavior (e.g.,
if participants learn that sacrificing the outside option that benefits themselves would be very beneficial to charity,
resulting in a large donation of more than 150 cents), it may also discourage costly prosocial behavior (e.g., if
participants learn that sacrificing the outside option would be only somewhat beneficial to charity, resulting in a
small donation of less than 150 cents). Also, while our findings are in similar in spirit to Spiekermann and Weiss
(2016) since they also examine information that may encourage or discourage giving, our findings differ in that
participants cannot ex-ante know whether information may encourage or discourage giving.



                                                          56
Figure B.1: In the Self/Charity, Self/Charity-Choice, Charity/Charity, and Charity/Charity-Choice
versions of Study 2, fraction choosing a main bundle
                                   Panel A: Self/Charity(-Choice)                                                           Panel B: Charity/Charity(-Choice)
                              .8




                                                                                                                       .8
  Fraction choosing bundles




                                                                                           Fraction choosing bundles
                              .6




                                                                                                                       .6
                              .4




                                                                                                                       .4
                              .2




                                                                                                                       .2
                              0




                                                                                                                       0
                                    150+ cents                Less than 150 cents                                             150+ cents                Less than 150 cents
                                              Total amount in bundle                                                                    Total amount in bundle

                                        Self/Charity            Self/Charity-Choice                                             Charity/Charity          Charity/Charity-Choice


Data include all participants' decisions in all 48 bundles: in the Self/Charity and Self/Charity-Choice versions of
Study 2 in Panel A and the Charity/Charity and Charity/Charity-Choice versions of Study 2 in Panel B.



at the participant level). Thus, our estimates suggest that 71% (i.e., 0.50/0.70) of the information
avoidance we observe in the Self/Charity-Choice version is unmotivated in nature while only 29%
(i.e., 0.20/0.70) is due to self-serving motives. Moreover, the two bars on the left side of Panel B of
Figure B.1 show that being able to avoid information also decreases giving to bundles with a sum
greater than 150 cents when self-serving motives are removed.
    In light of these results, future work on motivated information avoidance and its impact on de-
cisions may seek to net out possible unmotivated information avoidance and its impact on decisions
by considering settings where self-serving motives are and are not relevant. Related to this, recent
results from Serra-Garcia and Szech (2019) provide evidence of more information avoidance when
self-serving motives are relevant in settings in which subjects are incentivized to avoid or to acquire
information.




                                                                                      57
C      Additional Information on Study 4
C.1      Experimental Design
    Study 4 included 588 participants randomized into one of four study versions arising from a 2 × 2
design of {Self/Charity, Charity/Charity } × {Baseline, Correlated }.43 Each participant received
$2 for completing the 15-minute study. In addition, one decision was randomly selected for each
participant and determined any additional bonus payment.
    Study 4 largely follows a similar procedure as Study 3. First, as in Study 3, in all versions of
Study 4, participants complete 17 calibration decisions to determine their X value such that they are
indifferent between X cents for themselves and 150 cents for the Make-A-Wish Foundation. Each
decision involves a binary choice between: (i) 150 cents for charity and (ii) Yi cents for themselves
where Yi  {0, 5, 10, 20, 30, ..., 150}. Second, as in Study 3, after completing the calibration decisions
in Study 4, participants make one final decision in which they choose between a 200-cent donation to
the Make-A-Wish Foundation national chapter and an "outside option." The outside option equals
a X -cent bonus payment for the participant in the Self/Charity versions and a 150-cent donation to
the Make-A-Wish Foundation national chapter in the Charity/Charity versions. Third, as in Study
3, in the Baseline versions of Study 4, the information on the 200-cent donation directly states that
the donation amount equals 200 cents.
    Study 4 only differs from Study 3 in its introduction of the Correlated versions. In these versions,
the information on the 200-cent donation indirectly states the donation amount. In particular,
participants are informed that: (i) the donation amount equals the sum of Amounts 1 and 2; (ii)
Amount 1 equals 0; (iii) the estimate of Amount 2 equals the average of Amount 1 and Amount
2, which equals (0 + Amount 2)/2; and (iv) the estimate of Amount 2 equals 100 cents. We chose
this implementation to present correlated information in a similar (but even simpler) manner as it
is presented in the low complexity treatment of Enke and Zimmermann (2019).

C.2      Experimental Results
    Figure C.1 shows the results from the Self/Charity and Charity/Charity versions of Study 4.
Panel A shows that, in the Self/Charity versions, the Correlated version dramatically decreases the
rate at which participants choose the 200-cent donation for charity. Panel B, however, shows that
this effect is also massive in the Charity/Charity versions when self-serving motives are absent.
    Table C.1 presents results from Figure C.1 in a regression framework. The coefficient on Corre-
lated in Column 1 of Panel A shows that the correlated information decreases willingness to choose
the 200-cent donation by 30 percentage points in the Self/Charity version. The coefficient on Cor-
related in Column 1 of Panel B shows that this decrease is also significant but larger -- equal to 68
  43
    On November 8, 2019, we recruited and randomized 588 participants from Amazon's Mechanical Turk (MTurk)
into one of these four versions. We intended to recruit 600 participants, but due to some subjects submitting invalid
completion codes (mostly from participation in prior studies), we ended up with 588 participants. To be eligible,
workers must have previously completed at least 100 HITs with a 95% or better approval rating and must be working
from a United States IP address. Full instructions for Study 4 can be found in Appendix D.4.

                                                         58
percentage points -- in the Charity/Charity version. Columns 2 and 3 show similar results among
more restricted samples.
    Clearly, as discussed in Section 5, this evidence does not support individuals exploiting cor-
relation neglect as an excuse. That said, given the extent to which the correlated information
decreases individuals' willingness to choose the 200-cent donation absent self-serving motives in the
Charity/Charity version, it is also clear that it would be close to -- if not entirely -- impossible to
identify more errors due to self-serving motives in this setting.44

Figure C.1: In the Self/Charity version and the Charity/Charity version of Study 4, fraction choos-
ing the 200-cent donation
                                            Panel A: Self/Charity                                                Panel B: Charity/Charity
                                       .8




                                                                                                            .8
          Fraction choosing Option A




                                                                               Fraction choosing Option A
                                       .6




                                                                                                            .6
                                       .4




                                                                                                            .4
                                       .2




                                                                                                            .2
                                       0




                                                                                                            0




                                            Baseline         Correlated                                            Baseline         Correlated

Data include all participants' decisions in the Self/Charity version of Study 4 in Panel A and the Charity/Charity
version of Study 4 in Panel B.




  44
    We ran a small pilot (n=77) at the Wharton Behavioral Lab to examine if we could reduce the impact of
correlated information in the Charity/Charity version -- and thus plausibly be able to test for an additional impact
of self-serving motives -- by using a subject pool of University of Pennsylvania students. In this pilot, however,
the correlated information still resulted in a substantial decrease in the willingness to choose a donation amount
described with correlated information in the Charity/Charity versions, without self-serving motives. We saw a 59
and 56 percentage point decrease when information was presented in a manner similar to the standard treatment
and the low complexity treatment, respectively, of Enke and Zimmermann (2019). These results suggest that when
participants are making binary choices between two payoff options (rather than being incentivized to accurately
produce an estimate based on correlated information), the impact of correlated information is substantial.


                                                                          59
Table C.1: In the Self/Charity and Charity/Charity versions of Study 4,
regression of choosing the 200-cent donation

 Sample:                    full          X is lower bound          monotonic
                                                                    calibration
                            (1)                   (2)                   (3)
 Panel A: Self/Charity version
 Correlated         -0.30                       -0.38                 -0.39
                     (0.05)                      (0.06)                (0.06)
 Constant            0.79                        0.86                  0.77
                     (0.03)                      (0.03)                (0.04)
 N                     292                         218                   209
 Panel B: Charity/Charity version
 Correlated         -0.68                       -0.74                 -0.81
                     (0.04)                      (0.04)                (0.04)
 Constant            0.93                        0.94                  0.95
                     (0.02)                      (0.02)                (0.02)
 N                     296                         217                   215
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are robust and shown in
   parentheses. The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood to
   choose the 200-cent donation in the Self/Charity version of Study 4 in Panel A
   and in the Charity/Charity version of Study 4 in Panel B, where Correlated is an
   indicator for the Correlated version. Column 1 involves the full sample, Column
   2 involves a restricted sample of participants with outside option X set to the
   lower bound of their indifference range (and thus excludes participants with a zero
   lower bound), and Column 3 involves a restricted sample of participants who are
   monotonic in their calibration decisions.




                                         60
D       Experimental Instructions
D.1     Full instructions for Study 1
D.1.1    Instructions for Self/Charity version of Study 1
    After consenting to participate in the study, each participant is informed of the $4 study com-
pletion fee and of the opportunity to earn additional payment for themselves or the Make-A-Wish
Foundation. Figure D.1 shows how this payment information is explained and the corresponding
understanding question that must be answered correctly in order for the participant to proceed.

                                Figure D.1: Payment Information




                                                61
    In Part 1, each participant completes a multiple price list that allows us to calibrate the outside
option used for the decisions in Part 2. In particular, the outside option equals X cents for partici-
pants, where we calibrate X to make the participant indifferent between X cents for themselves and
150 cents for the Make-A-Wish Foundation. Figure D.2 presents the instructions for the multiple
price list and corresponding understanding questions that the participant must answer correctly to
proceed. Figure D.3 shows how the multiple price list appears.

                                   Figure D.2: Part 1 Instructions




                                                  62
              Figure D.3: Part 1 Decisions: Multiple Price List
Before decisions are indicated              After decisions are indicated if X = 100




                                     63
    In Part 2, each participant makes 48 binary decisions between a bundle that changes from
decision to decision and an outside option that is fixed for all 48 decisions. Choosing the outside
option results in the participants receiving X cents for themselves, where X is calibrated from Part
1 as previously explained. Choosing a bundle results in Make-A-Wish Foundation receiving the
sum of the 4 or 5 amounts in the bundle. Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 in the paper detail the
amounts that comprise each bundle. The first amount in a bundle is always revealed by default,
and a participant is required to reveal all of the remaining amounts in a bundle by clicking on
the header above each amount before proceeding onto the next decision screen. Also, the order
of these decision screens varies. It is randomly determined whether a participant first makes the
24 decisions involving bundles with four amounts or instead first makes the 24 decisions involving
bundles with five amounts. Within each block of 24 decisions, the order of those decisions is also
randomly determined.
    Prior to making these 48 decisions, participants face extensive instructions and understanding
questions. Figure D.4 shows the first and second pages of the instructions for Part 2 along with the
corresponding understanding questions that the participant must answer correctly to proceed. These
understanding questions ensure that participants understand the payoffs that result from choosing a
bundle versus the outside option and that they must reveal all amounts in a bundle before making a
decision. Figure D.5 shows the subsequent three example bundles and corresponding understanding
questions that the participant must answer correctly to proceed. These understanding questions
ensure that participants know how to determine the total donation amount made by a bundle.




                                                64
Figure D.4: Part 2 Instructions
    First Page (if X = 100)




         Second Page




              65
            Figure D.5: Part 2 Examples
Example 1
                                          Example 2




Example 3




                        66
   Only after completing all of these understanding questions successfully do participants proceed
to make their 48 decisions. Each decision appears on a separate screen, and Figure D.6 shows an
example of one such decision.

                          Figure D.6: Part 2: Example Decision Screen




    After completing all 48 decisions in Part 2, participants answer follow-up questions about their
decisions in the study and provide demographic information. We distributed the relevant payments
after the study was completed.




                                                67
D.1.2   Instructions for other versions of Study 1
    The previous section details the instructions for the Self/Charity version of Study 1. In this
section, we describe how these instructions differ for the remaining five versions of Study 1.
    In the Self/Charity-Choice version, all that differs is that -- aside from the first amount in a
bundle still being revealed by default -- participants can choose whether or not to reveal the other
amounts in a bundle. Thus, how decision screens appear in Part 2 is still as shown in Figure D.6,
but the participant can make a decision without clicking on all the headers.
    In the Self/Charity-Sum version, all that differs is that participants are also shown the sum of
amounts in the bundle on the decision screen, as shown in Figure D.7.

      Figure D.7: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Self/Charity-Sum version of Study 2




                                                68
   In the Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version, there are two main differences. First, prior to
each decision screen, participants face a screen where they are informed of, and must accurately
report, the sum of the amounts in the bundle that will be on the decision screen, as shown in Figure
D.8. Second, participants are shown the sum of amounts in the bundle on the decision screen in
a manner that is arguably more salient than in the Self/Charity-Sum version, as shown in Figure
D.9.

Figure D.8: Part 2: Example Before-Decision-Screen Screen for Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum
version of Study 2




Figure D.9: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Self/Charity-Unavoidable Sum version of Study 2




                                                69
   In the Charity/Charity version, choosing the outside option now results in 150 cents being given
to Make-A-Wish Foundation (regardless of the decisions in Part 1), as shown in Figure D.10.

      Figure D.10: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Charity/Charity version of Study 2




    In the Self(150)/Self version, choosing the outside option now results in 150 cents being given
to the participant (regardless of the participant's decisions in Part 1) and choosing a bundle now
results in the amount of money in the bundle being given to the participant, as shown in Figure
D.11.
       Figure D.11: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Self(150)/Self version of Study 2




                                                70
D.2     Full instructions for Study 2
D.2.1   Instructions for Self/Charity version of Study 2
    After consenting to participate in the study, each participant is informed of the $4 study com-
pletion fee and of the opportunity to earn additional payment for either themselves or the Make-
A-Wish Foundation. Figure D.12 shows how this payment information is explained along with the
corresponding understanding question that the participant must answer correctly to proceed.

                               Figure D.12: Payment Information




                                                71
    In Part 1, each participant completes a multiple price list that allows us to calibrate the outside
option used for the decisions in Part 2. In particular, the outside option equals X cents for partici-
pants, where we calibrate X to make the participant indifferent between X cents for themselves and
150 cents for the national chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation. Figure D.13 presents the in-
structions for the multiple price list and corresponding understanding questions that the participant
must answer correctly to proceed. Figure D.14 shows how the multiple price list appears.

                                  Figure D.13: Part 1 Instructions




                                                  72
              Figure D.14: Part 1 Decisions: Multiple Price List

Before decisions are indicated               After decisions are indicated if X = 100




                                     73
   In Part 2, each participant makes 48 binary decisions between a bundle that changes from
decision to decision and an outside option that is fixed for all 48 decisions. Choosing the outside
option results in the participants receiving X cents for themselves, where X is calibrated from Part
1 as previously explained. Choosing a bundle results in various state chapters of the Make-A-Wish
Foundation each receiving an amount from the bundle. Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 in the paper
detail the amounts that comprise each bundle. Due to constraints (related to which chapters were
IRB approved and to how some states shared Make-A-Wish Foundation chapters), we randomly
drew states for each bundle from a list of 28 states that we matched with corresponding Make-
A-Wish Foundation chapters. This list of states was: Alaska, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska,
Nevada, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.
   The first amount in a bundle is always revealed by default, and a participant is required to
reveal all of the remaining amounts in a bundle by clicking on the header above each amount before
proceeding onto the next decision screen. Also, the order of these decision screens varies. It is
randomly determined whether a participant first makes the 24 decisions involving bundles with four
amounts or instead first makes the 24 decisions involving bundles with five amounts. Within each
block of 24 decisions, the order of those decisions is also randomly determined.
   Prior to making these 48 decisions, participants face extensive instructions and understanding
questions. Figure D.15 shows the first and second pages of the instructions for Part 2 along with the
corresponding understanding questions that the participant must answer correctly to proceed. These
understanding questions ensure that participants understand the payoffs that result from choosing a
bundle versus the outside option and that they must reveal all amounts in a bundle before making a
decision. Figure D.16 shows the subsequent three example bundles and corresponding understanding
questions that the participant must answer correctly to proceed. These understanding questions
ensure that participants know the number of state chapters that receive a donation from the bundle
and the total donation amount made by a bundle.




                                                 74
                          Figure D.15: Part 2 Instructions
First Page (if X = 100)




                                                         Second Page




                                "`




                                        75
      Figure D.16: Part 2 Examples (if X = 100)
                                                  Example 2
Example 1




Example 3




                         76
   Only after completing all of these understanding questions successfully do participants proceed
to make their 48 decisions. Each decision appears on a separate screen, and Figure D.17 shows an
example of one such decision.

                          Figure D.17: Part 2: Example Decision Screen




    After completing all 48 decisions in Part 2, participants answer follow-up questions about their
decisions in the study and provide demographic information. We distributed the relevant payments
after the study was completed.




                                                77
D.2.2    Instructions for other versions of Study 2
    The previous section details the instructions for the Self/Charity version of Study 2. In this
section, we describe how these instructions differ for the remaining seven versions of Study 2.
    In the Self/Charity-Choice version, all that differs is that -- aside from the first amount in a
bundle that is still revealed by default -- participants can choose whether or not to reveal the other
amounts in a bundle. Thus, how decision screens appear in Part 2 is still as shown in Figure D.17,
but the participant can make a decision without clicking on all the headers.
    In the Self/Charity-Sum version, all that differs is that participants are also shown the sum of
amounts in the bundle on the decision screen, as shown in Figure D.18.

     Figure D.18: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Self/Charity-Sum version of Study 2




                                                 78
   In the Self(150)/Charity version, choosing a bundle results in the same payoffs, but choosing
the outside option now results in results in 150 cents being given to the participant (regardless of
the participant's decisions in Part 1), as shown in Figure D.19.

     Figure D.19: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Self(150)/Charity version of Study 2




                                                79
   In the Charity/Charity version, choosing the outside option now results in 150 cents being given
to the national chapter of Make-A-Wish Foundation (regardless of the participant's decisions in
Part 1), as shown in Figure D.20.

      Figure D.20: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Charity/Charity version of Study 2




                                                80
    In the Charity/Charity-Choice version, subjects face the same bundles and outside options as in
the Charity/Charity version. All that differs is that -- aside from the first amount in a bundle that
is still revealed by default -- participants can choose whether or not to reveal the other amounts
in a bundle. Thus, how decision screens appear in Part 2 is still as shown in Figure D.20, but the
participant can make a decision without clicking on all the headers.
    In the Charity/Charity-Sum version, subjects face the same bundles and outside options as in
the Charity/Charity version. All that differs is that participants are also shown the sum of amounts
in the bundle on the decision screen, as shown in Figure D.21.

   Figure D.21: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Charity/Charity-Sum version of Study 2




                                                 81
   In the Charity(ARC)/Charity version, subjects face the same bundles as in the Charity/Charity
version, but choosing the outside option now results in 150 cents being given to the American Red
Cross, as shown in Figure D.22.

  Figure D.22: Part 2: Example Decision Screen for Charity(ARC)/Charity version of Study 2




                                               82
D.3     Full instructions for Study 3
D.3.1    Instructions for Self/Charity-Baseline version of Study 3
    After consenting to participate in the study, each participant is informed of the $2 study com-
pletion fee and of the opportunity to earn additional payment. Figure D.23 shows how this payment
information is explained along with the corresponding understanding question that the participant
must answer correctly to proceed.

                                 Figure D.23: Payment Information




   Participants first complete the "calibration decisions" by making 17 binary decisions between (i)
150 cents fro the national chapter of Make-A-Wish Foundation and (ii) Z cents for themselves where
Z {0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150}. The calibration decisions are
randomized on the subject-level and allow us to calibrate the outside option used for each subject's

                                                   83
subsequent main decision. In particular, the outside option equals X cents for participants, where
we calibrate X to make the participant indifferent between X cents for themselves and 150 cents
for the national chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation. Figure D.24 presents the instructions for
the calibration decisions and the corresponding understanding question that the participant must
answer correctly to proceed. Figure D.25 shows an example of one of these decisions.

                       Figure D.24: Instructions for Calibration Decisions




                                               84
                        Figure D.25: Example of a Calibration Decision




   Participants then complete their main decision. Figure D.26 presents the instructions and cor-
responding understanding questions that the participant must answer correctly to proceed to this
decision, and Figure D.27 shows the corresponding decision screen.

                          Figure D.26: Instructions for Main Decision




                                               85
Figure D.27: Main Decision




           86
D.3.2   Instructions for other versions of Study 3
    The previous section details the instructions for the Self/Charity-Baseline version of Study 3.
In this section, we will detail how these instructions differ for the remaining seven versions of the
Study 3.
    Relative to theSelf/Charity-Baseline version of Study 3, all that differs in the Self/Charity-
Anchor-1, Self/Charity-Anchor-2, Self/Charity-Addition versions is the main decision screen. Fig-
ures D.28 - D.30 show these decision screens.

                       Figure D.28: Self/Charity-Anchor-1 : Main Decision




                       Figure D.29: Self/Charity-Anchor-2 : Main Decision




                                                 87
                        Figure D.30: Self/Charity-Addition : Main Decision




    Relative to theSelf/Charity-Baseline version of Study 3, all that differs in the Charity/Charity-
Baseline, the Charity/Charity-Anchor-1, Charity/Charity-Anchor-2, Charity/Charity-Addition ver-
sions are the instructions for the main decision and the decision screen for the main decision. Figure
D.31 shows the instructions and Figures D.32 - D.34 show these decision screens.

                  Figure D.31: Charity/Charity : Instructions for Main Decision




                                                 88
Figure D.32: Charity/Charity-Anchor-1 : Main Decision




Figure D.33: Charity/Charity-Anchor-2 : Main Decision




Figure D.34: Charity/Charity-Addition : Main Decision




                         89
D.4     Full Instructions for Study 4
    Appendix D.3 details the instructions for Study 3. Study 4 involves four versions: Self/Charity -
Baseline, Charity/Charity - Baseline, Self/Charity - Correlated, and Charity/Charity - Correlated.
The first two Baseline versions are identical to those in Study 3. For the latter two Correlated ver-
sions, all that differs relative to the Baseline versions are the instructions, understanding questions,
and decision screen for the main decision.
    Figures D.35 and D.36 shows the instructions and understanding questions for the Self/Charity -
Correlated and Charity/Charity - Correlated, respectively. Figures D.37 and D.38 show the decision
screens.




                                                  90
Figure D.35: Self/Charity - Correlated : Instructions for Main Decision




                                  91
Figure D.36: Charity/Charity - Correlated : Instructions for Main Decision




                                   92
 Figure D.37: Self/Charity - Correlated : Main Decision




Figure D.38: Charity/Charity - Correlated : Main Decision




                           93
