                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE AND PERSONALIZED PRICING

                                        S. Nageeb Ali
                                       Gregory Lewis
                                     Shoshana Vasserman

                                     Working Paper 26592
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26592


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




We thank Ben Golub, Nima Haghpanah, Kevin He, Navin Kartik, Vijay Krishna, Pepe Montiel
Olea, Doron Ravid, Ron Siegel, Nikhil Vellodi, and Jidong Zhou for useful comments. We are
grateful to Microsoft Research for hosting Ali and Vasserman. We thank Xiao Lin for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by S. Nageeb Ali, Gregory Lewis, and Shoshana Vasserman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Voluntary Disclosure and Personalized Pricing
S. Nageeb Ali, Gregory Lewis, and Shoshana Vasserman
NBER Working Paper No. 26592
December 2019
JEL No. D4,D8

                                          ABSTRACT

A concern central to the economics of privacy is that firms may use consumer data to price
discriminate. A common response is that consumers should have control over their data and the
ability to choose how firms access it. Since firms draw inferences based on both the data seen as
well as the consumer's disclosure choices, the strategic implications of this proposal are unclear.
We investigate whether such measures improve consumer welfare in monopolistic and
competitive environments. We find that consumer control can guarantee gains for every
consumer type relative to both perfect price discrimination and no personalized pricing. This
result is driven by two ideas. First, consumers can use disclosure to amplify competition between
firms. Second, consumers can share information that induces a seller--even a monopolist--to
make price concessions. Furthermore, whether consumer control improves consumer surplus
depends on both the technology of disclosure and the competitiveness of the marketplace. In a
competitive market, simple disclosure technologies such as "track / do-not-track" suffice for
guaranteeing gains in consumer welfare. However, in a monopolistic market, welfare gains
require richer forms of disclosure technology whereby consumers can decide how much
information they would like to convey.

S. Nageeb Ali                                    Shoshana Vasserman
Penn State University                            Stanford Graduate School of Business
411 Kern Bldg.                                   655 Knight Way
University Park, PA 16802                        Stanford, CA 94305
nageeb@psu.edu                                   svass@stanford.edu

Gregory Lewis
Microsoft Research New England
1 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glewis@microsoft.com
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                               1

2 Example                                                                                                    7

3 Voluntary Disclosure to a Monopolist                                                                      12
  3.1 Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
  3.2 Simple Evidence Does Not Help Consumers         . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
  3.3 A Pareto-Improving Segmentation with Rich       Evidence      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
  3.4 Optimal Equilibrium Segmentation . . . . .      . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16

4 How Disclosure Amplifies Competition                                                                      19
  4.1 Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                         19
  4.2 Constructing Equilibria with Simple and Rich Evidence . . . . . . . . . .                             20
  4.3 Benefits of Personalized Pricing in Competitive Markets . . . . . . . . .                             24

5 Conclusion                                                                                                26

References                                                                                                  26

A Appendix                                                                                                  29
        "Privacy is not the opposite of sharing--rather, it is control over sharing."
                                                         ­ Acquisti, Taylor, and Wagman (2016)

1       Introduction
Alice is shopping for a new widget on the internet. How much should online sellers know
about her preferences? In some countries, regulations allow every seller to leave a cookie
that tracks Alice's online behavior, but in other countries, sellers cannot track Alice at all
without her consent. Tracking is controversial. On the one hand, it may allow sellers to
personalize their offerings by showing more targeted advertisement. On the other hand,
as these sellers learn Alice's preferences, they may set prices that exploit that knowledge.
Should these sellers be allowed to track Alice by default or should she have a say in this
matter? How much control should Alice have in deciding what firms learn about her?
    These questions are at the forefront of an ongoing international debate that has
precipitated action in both the public and private sectors. Regulators concerned that
personalized pricing will harm consumers have focused on the importance of consumer
consent, passing wide-reaching legislation on data storage and tracking. A prominent ex-
ample, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) passed by the European Union,
requires firms to obtain consent from consumers before obtaining and processing their
personal data.1 In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission recommends that
"best practices include...giving consumers greater control over the collection and use of
their personal data..." (Federal Trade Commission, 2012). Meanwhile, private sector
firms have responded to consumer demand for privacy by designing commercial products
and brands that are specifically developed to limit tracking.2
    Against this backdrop, we study the market implications of consumer consent and
control. We investigate what happens when consumers fully control their data--not
only whether they are tracked, but what specific information is disclosed to firms. Each
consumer's data is encoded in a verifiable form that she can partially or fully disclose to
firms. Based on the information that is disclosed, each firm draws an inference about
the consumer's type and charges her an equilibrium price based on her disclosure. Our
motivating question is: when consumers fully control their information, are they hurt or
helped by personalized pricing?
    We pose this question in an environment in which products cannot be personalized,
and so there is no match value from data. A classical intuition might suggest that con-
    1
     Starting on January 1, 2020, California will enforce the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA),
which has similar provisions to the GDPR.
   2
     For example, Apple recently added a feature to its Safari browser that limits the ways in which its
user's activities are tracked by third parties (Hern, 2018).

                                                   1
sumers would not benefit from being permitted to voluntarily disclose information. Be-
cause the market's equilibrium inferences are based both on information that is disclosed
and what is not being disclosed, giving consumers the ability to separate themselves may
be self-defeating, as seen in the unraveling equilibria of Grossman (1981) and Milgrom
(1981). Contrary to that intuition, we find that the combination of personalized pricing
and consumer control is actually beneficial to consumers in both monopolistic and com-
petitive markets. We construct simple equilibria of the consumers' disclosure game in
which sharing data weakly increases consumer surplus for every consumer type, relative
to the benchmark of no personalized pricing.
    Two key ideas drive this result. First, voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing
together amplify competition between firms. Nearly indifferent consumers benefit from
the ability to credibly communicate their flexibility, intensifying competition for their
business, while consumers with a strong preference for the product of one particular firm
can hide this preference.3 Second, even in the absence of competition, consumers can
benefit from sending coarse signals that pool their valuations. These pools are constructed
in such a way that a monopolist finds it optimal to sell to every type within that pool,
and therefore everyone within that pool pays the price of the consumer type that has
the lowest valuation in that pool. Disclosures lead to price discounts that benefit every
consumer type. The take-away is that offering consumers control--and possibly building
tools that coordinate the sharing of data for consumer benefit--may make personalized
pricing attractive even in the absence of better matching.

A Preview: We build on the problem of a monopolist choosing what price to charge
a consumer whose valuation he does not know. We augment that classical problem with
a "verifiable" disclosure game, as in Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981): before the
monopolist sets her price, a consumer chooses what "evidence" or hard information to
disclose about her valuation. We study both those disclosure environments in which
evidence is simple, where a consumer can either speak "the whole truth" (reveal her
type) or say nothing at all, as well as those in which evidence is rich, where a consumer
can disclose facts about her type without having to reveal it completely.4 We first study
simple and rich evidence structures in a monopolistic environment, and then use those
results to characterize behavior in a competitive market.
    Here is the timing of our game: the consumer first observes her type and then chooses
a message to disclose to the firm from the set of messages available to her, the firm then
  3
      Of course, the firms will interpret this non-disclosure as a signal and update accordingly.
  4
      We borrow this terminology from Hagenbach and Koessler (2017).



                                                     2
quotes a price, and the consumer then chooses whether to buy the product at that price.
Neither the firm nor the consumer can commit to its strategic choices.
    Our first conclusion in the monopolistic environment (Proposition 1) is that simple
evidence never benefits the consumer and potentially hurts her: there is no equilibrium
in which any type of the consumer is better off relative to a setting without personalized
pricing. Moreover, there are equilibria in which all consumer types are worse off, such as
an unraveling equilibrium in which the monopolist extracts all surplus.
    Our second conclusion is that once the evidence structure is rich--where consumers
can partially disclose information without revealing all of it--all consumer types can ben-
efit from disclosing information. Proposition 2 constructs an equilibrium that improves
the consumer surplus for almost all consumer types without reducing the surplus of any
consumer type. In this equilibrium, all types are partitioned into segments on the basis
of their willingness to pay, and trading is fully efficient. Because the consumer cannot
commit ahead of time to her disclosure strategy, every consumer type must find that
her equilibrium message induces a weakly lower price than that induced by any other
message; our segmentation guarantees this property. Moreover, our segmentation en-
sures that for each segment, the monopolist's optimal price is the lowest willingness to
pay in that segment. This "greedy algorithm" identifies a "Pareto-improving" equilib-
rium segmentation for every distribution of consumer types and identifies the equilibrium
segmentation that maximizes ex ante consumer surplus for a class of distributions.
    We use these insights to study competitive behavior in a model of Bertrand duopoly
with horizontally differentiated products where the firms are uncertain of the consumer's
location. The consumer can disclose information about her location to the firms, who
then simultaneously make price offers to her. As before, we compare the outcomes when
the consumer can disclose, either via simple or rich evidence, with a benchmark model
in which there is no personalized pricing. Here, voluntary disclosure and personalized
pricing is particularly beneficial to consumer surplus because of a new economic force:
information can be selectively disclosed to amplify competition.5
    More specifically, we show that if the distribution of consumer location has a sym-
metric and log-concave density, then an equilibrium in the game with simple evidence
(where the consumer's disclosure strategies are all-or-nothing) improves consumer wel-
fare for every type relative to the no-personalized-pricing benchmark. With rich evidence,
   5
    We focus on horizontal differentiation because it is the minimal setting where this force appears.
Without product differentiation, Bertrand competition reduces prices to marginal cost regardless of
information disclosure. If differentiation is vertical, voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing lead
to segmentations similar to the monopolistic setting (where the consumer does not benefit from simple
evidence and the pooling equilibria with rich evidence are similar).



                                                    3
one can do even better by using the greedy segmentation strategy similar to that used
in the monopolist's problem, with pools becoming progressively finer as one approaches
the central type from either end.

Implications: From this stylized model, we draw two broad lessons for policy. First,
voluntary disclosure facilitates price concessions in both monopolistic and competitive
markets. Thus, there is something missing in the view that tracking involves a tradeoff
between the benefits of personalized products and the costs of personalized prices. Even
without the benefits of product personalization, a consumer can benefit from personalized
pricing when she has control. Disclosure generates discounts and amplifies competition.
    The second lesson is that whether a track / do-no-track regime (as evoked by the
GDPR) suffices to give consumers useful control over their data depends on the competi-
tiveness of the marketplace. In a monopolistic environment, richer forms of data sharing
are necessary for the consumers to gain, but the same is not true in a competitive market.
Useful control may thus involve a choice not only of whether to share information but
also of how much information to share, and to whom.
    While online communications between consumers and sellers are not yet as sophisti-
cated as that envisioned in our rich-evidence setup, an important element of the digital
economy is its increasing ability to verify information (Goldfarb and Tucker, 2019). These
advances suggest that it may be technologically feasible for consumers to use interme-
diaries or platforms to verifiably disclose that their preferences or characteristics (e.g.,
income, age, address etc.) lie with a certain range without having to forfeit all of their
information to online sellers.

Relationship to Literature: Our work belongs to a burgeoning literature on privacy,
information, and their implications for markets; see Acquisti, Taylor, and Wagman (2016)
and Bergemann and Bonatti (2019) for recent surveys. We view our paper as making two
contributions. First, it formulates and investigates the economic implications of giving
consumers control over their data. Our goal is to study the simplest possible model,
abstracting from a number of details (e.g. the importance of product customization), in
order to elucidate the strategic issues at the core of voluntary disclosure and personalized
pricing. Second, our analysis shows that whether consumers benefit from controlling their
information depends on a subtle interaction between the technology by which consumers
disclose information and the degree of market competition.
    Our work combines classical models of market pricing with the now classical study
of verifiable disclosure. Unlike the first analyses of verifiable disclosure (Grossman, 1981;


                                             4
Milgrom, 1981), unraveling is not the unique equilibrium outcome of the market interac-
tions that we study. An observation at the core of our results is that the price charged
by a firm need not be strictly increasing in his beliefs (in an FOSD sense) about the
consumer's willingness to pay. This observation permits us to pool low and high types
without giving the low type an incentive to separate itself from the pool.6
    The literature on verifiable disclosure has had a recent resurgence,7 and a closely
related contribution therein is Sher and Vohra (2015). They study a general model of
price discrimination with hard evidence in which the monopolist commits to a schedule of
evidence-contingent prices. By contrast, we assume in both monopolistic and competitive
settings that each seller cannot commit and instead sets a price that is a best-response
to the evidence that has been presented.
    Our approach to consumer control complements two important approaches studied
in the literature. The first approach is that of "information design," which considers the
actions of an intermediary that already knows the consumer's type and can commit to a
segmentation strategy. In a monopolistic setting, that intermediary can achieve payoffs
characterized by Bergemann, Brooks, and Morris (2015). Necessarily, any equilibrium
outcome of our monopolist setting is attainable in their model but the converse is false.
The reason is that an intermediary may pool a consumer type stochastically into differ-
ent market segments that induce different prices. But a consumer who cannot commit
would strictly prefer the market segment that offers the best price and would not ran-
domize unless she were indifferent. The second approach is to envision that the consumer
communicates her preferences using cheap talk. In the setting modeled here, cheap talk
is ineffectual because every consumer that trades prefers to send the message that in-
duces the lowest price, and thus, cheap talk alone cannot improve upon the benchmark
of no-personalized-pricing. Hidir and Vellodi (2019) show that cheap talk is effective if
the monopolist also matches a product to the consumer's tastes; then consumers can
use cheap-talk to sort so that they are matched with a better product without being
completely exploited by price discrimination.8
   6
     Prior analyses have highlighted other reasons for why markets may not unravel, in particular (i) un-
certainty about whether the sender has evidence (Dye, 1985; Shin, 1994), (ii) disclosure costs (Jovanovic,
1982; Verrecchia, 1983), or (iii) the possibility for receivers to be naive (Hagenbach and Koessler, 2017).
Our setting does not have any of these features.
   7
     A partial list of recent contributions is Kartik and Tercieux (2012), Ben-Porath and Lipman (2012),
Hagenbach, Koessler, and Perez-Richet (2014), Hart, Kremer, and Perry (2017), Ben-Porath, Dekel, and
Lipman (2017, 2019), and Koessler and Skreta (2019). Our work also relates to the study of certification
in mitigating adverse selection in markets (Lizzeri, 1999; Stahl and Strausz, 2017; Glode, Opp, and
Zhang, 2018), but we study a "private values" model rather than one with interdependent values.
   8
     Their study extends beyond cheap-talk as they introduce and characterize the buyer-optimal
incentive-compatible market segmentation in their setting. Ichihashi (2019) and Haghpanah and Siegel
(2019) also study price discrimination with multiple products, using an information-design approach.


                                                    5
    Verifiable disclosure complements and offers a middleground between information de-
sign and cheap talk. It is particularly germane when a consumer can use an intermediary
to verify information about her type in her communication to firms without forfeiting
control over the disclosure of that information. As the evolving digital economy balances
an increasing ability to verify information cryptographically and public pressure for in-
dividual privacy, we believe it to be useful to complement the existing frameworks with
a verifiable disclosure approach to the question of consumer control.
    A large part of our motivation is to understand the role of voluntary disclosure and
personalized pricing in competitive markets. Using a model of Bertrand duopoly with
horizontal differentiation, we show that the consumer can use disclosure to amplify com-
petitive forces. The notion that personalized pricing may amplify competitive forces is
seen in the innovative work of Thisse and Vives (1988). They consider a setting where
the consumer's type is commonly known, and show that the unique equilibrium involves
firms adopting personalized pricing strategies even though their joint profits would be
higher if they could commit to uniform pricing. An important difference is that the
action in their model and in the subsequent literature is entirely on the side of the firms:
taking consumers as passive, these papers study whether firms personalize prices when
they know (or can learn) consumer types.9 By contrast, our analysis focuses on the con-
sumer who chooses ex interim whether to disclose information and it is her voluntary
disclosure that facilitates personalized pricing. Moreover, the ability to pool is necessary
for every consumer type to benefit from personalized pricing; otherwise, extreme types
would be worse off from personalized pricing (unless types are uniformly distributed).
Thus, the welfare gains that we study would not emerge in a model where consumer
types are commonly known.
    Our results complement recent work that has shed light on the role of information in
competitive markets with horizontal differentiation. Elliott and Galeotti (2019) show that
information can be used to suppress competition: an information-designer can segment
the market so that consumers are allocated efficiently while guaranteeing that consumers
obtain no surplus. Armstrong and Zhou (2019) study firm-optimal and consumer-optimal
information structures for an consumer that does not know her tastes. They show that
the consumer-optimal signal may involve learning little so as to amplify price competition.
    We focus on personalized pricing based on a consumer's tastes and whether a con-
sumer would like to disclose information directly about those tastes. An important prior
   9
    See Armstrong (2006) for a survey of this literature. Liu and Serfes (2004) analyze an information
acquisition game, in which the consumer type space is partitioned, and firms can choose to learn about the
location of the consumer. They show that if partitions are sufficiently fine, firms will acquire information
and price discriminate. We thank Jidong Zhou for drawing our attention to this work.


                                                     6
literature investigates how a consumer may distort her behavior in dynamic settings if
firms draw inferences about her tastes from her past choices. This literature has stud-
ied a broad range of issues, including whether firms prefer to commit to not personalize
prices (Taylor, 2004; Villas-Boas, 2004; Acquisti and Varian, 2005; Calzolari and Pavan,
2006), whether consumers would like to remain anonymous (Conitzer, Taylor, and Wag-
man, 2012), and how anticipating future pricing may induce consumers to randomize
(Bhaskar and Roketskiy, 2019). Bonatti and Cisternas (2019) study the welfare prop-
erties of aggregating consumers' past purchasing histories into scores and characterize
optimal scoring rules. Our analysis complements this research by studying how a con-
sumer fare from directly controlling the flow of information rather than distorting her
behavior to influence the market's perception of her tastes.
    Jones and Tonetti (2019) take a "macro approach" to whether consumers should
control their own data. They show that, because data is non-rival, there are social
gains from multiple firms using the same data simultaneously, and therefore, it is better
to let consumers, rather than firms, own and trade data. Several recent papers (Choi,
Jeon, and Kim, 2019; Acemoglu, Makhdoumi, Malekian, and Ozdaglar, 2019; Bergemann,
Bonatti, and Gan, 2019) model a countervailing force where the data of some consumers
is predictive about others, and each consumer does not internalize this externality, which
induces excessive data-sharing. Fainmesser and Galeotti (2016, 2019) study monopolistic
and competitive price discrimination based on consumers' influence on others and their
susceptibility to influence. Our analysis abstracts from these important externalities.

Paper outline: Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 illustrates our main ideas
in a simple example of a monopolist facing a consumer whose valuation is uniformly
distributed on the unit interval. Section 3 considers the monopolist environment with a
general model of consumer types. Section 4 studies the role of voluntary disclosure in a
model of Bertrand competition with horizontal differentiation. Section 5 concludes.


2    Example
A monopolist ("he") sells a good to a single consumer ("she"), who demands a single
unit. The consumer's value for that good is v , which is drawn uniformly from [0, 1]. If the
consumer purchases the good from the monopolist at price p, her payoff is v - p and the
monopolist's payoff is p; otherwise, each party receives a payoff of 0. The consumer knows




                                             7
her valuation for the good and the monopolist does not.10 In this setting, and without
any disclosure, the monopolist optimally posts a uniform price of 1  2
                                                                       , which induces an ex
interim consumer surplus of max{v - 1    2
                                           , 0}, and a producer surplus of 4
                                                                           1
                                                                             .
    We augment this standard pricing problem with voluntary disclosure on the part of the
consumer. After observing her value, the consumer chooses a message m from the set of
feasible messages for her. The set of all feasible messages is M  {[a, b] : 0  a  b  1},
and we interpret a message [a, b] as "My type is in the set [a, b]." When a consumer's
type is v , the set of messages that she can send is M (v )  M. The evidence structure is
represented by the correspondence M : [0, 1]  M.
    Here is the timeline for the game: first, the consumer observes her type v and chooses
a message m from M (v ). The monopolist then observes the message and chooses a price
p  0. The consumer then chooses whether to purchase the good. Each party behaves
sequentially rationally: we study Perfect Bayesian Equilibria (henceforth PBE) of this
game. Our interest is in the implications of this model for simple and rich evidence
structures, described below.

Simple evidence: An evidence structure is simple if for every v , M (v ) = {{v }, [0, 1]}.
In other words, each type v can either fully reveal her type using the message m = {v }
(which is unavailable to every other type), or not disclose anything at all, using the
message m = [0, 1] (which is available to every type). Such an evidence structure offers a
stylized model for the dichotomy between "track" and "do-not-track": a consumer who
opts into tracking will have all of her digital footprint observed by the buyer, whereas
do-not-track obscures it entirely.
    In this game, there exists an equilibrium in which every type v fully reveals itself using
the message m = {v }, and the monopolist extracts all surplus on the equilibrium path.
Off-path, if the consumer sends the non-disclosure message, m = [0, 1], the monopolist
believes that v = 1 with probability 1, and charges a price of 1. In this equilibrium, all
consumers are hurt by the possibility of voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing
but the monopolist benefits from it.
    But this is not the only equilibrium: there is also one in which every type sends the
                                                                            1
non-disclosure message m = [0, 1], and the monopolist charges a price of 2    . No consumer
type wishes to deviate because revealing her true type results in a payoff of 0. Here, both
consumer and producer surplus are exactly as in the world without personalized pricing.
  10
    While we think of v as the consumer's "valuation," our setting is compatible with v being the
consumer's posterior expected value (after observing a signal), as in Roesler and Szentes (2017), and
with the consumer learning no more than that. She then faces a choice of whether and how to disclose
evidence about that posterior expected value.


                                                 8
                                        1                          1                1

                Full Disclosure         v

                                            profitable
                                                                   pN D
                                            deviation
                                        pN D                       1                         1
               Non Disclosure                                      2
                                                                                    pN D =   2




                                        0                          0                0
                                  (a)                        (b)              (c)
Figure 1: (a) shows that any disclosing type that is strictly higher than pN D has a profitable deviation
 the set of non-disclosing types includes (pN D , 1]. (b) and (c) illustrate different equilibria where the
shaded region is the set of non-disclosing types. Across equilibria, pN D  1/2.


In fact, there are an uncountable number of equilibria. But none of them improve upon
the benchmark of no-personalized-pricing from the perspective of any consumer type.

Observation 1. With simple evidence, across all equilibria, the consumer's interim
payoff is no more than her payoff without personalized pricing, namely max{v - 1/2, 0}.

    The argument is illustrated in Figure 1. In an equilibrium where a positive mass send
the non-disclosure message, suppose that the monopolist charges pN D when he receives
this message. Any type v that is strictly higher than pN D must send this non-disclosure
message because her other option--revealing herself--induces a price that extracts all of
her surplus (this property is illustrated in Figure 1(a)). Hence, the set of types that send
the non-disclosure message must include (pN D , 1]. There are numerous configurations of
dislosure and non-disclosure segments that are compatible with this requirement (illus-
trated in (b) and (c)), but across all of them, the monopolist's optimal non-disclosure
                              1
price pN D never goes below 2   , which is the price charged without personalized pricing.

Rich evidence: Observation 1 illustrates that simple evidence structures and person-
alized pricing do not benefit the consumer. Now we study how the consumer can do
better if she can use a rich evidence structure. An evidence structure is rich if for ev-
ery v , M (v ) = {m  M : v  m}; in other words, a type v can send any interval that
contains v . With a rich evidence structure, all the equilibrium outcomes that can be sup-
ported using simple evidence are also supportable with this richer language. But now new
possibilities emerge, some of which dominate the payoffs from no-personalized-pricing.
    We describe an equilibrium that strictly improves consumer surplus for a positive
measure of consumer types without making any type worse off. Inspired by Zeno's


                                                         9
                                  1



                   1
            m0 = [ 2 , 1]




                                                            Price and Payoff
                                                                                                           CS

                                  1/2

            m1 = [ 1 , 1]                                                                   CS
                   4 2


                                  1/4
            m2 = [ 1 , 1]
                   8 4
                  1 1             1/8
           m3 = [ 16 , 8]                                                       1 1   1          1              1
                                                                               16 8   4          2
                                  0                                                       Consumer's type, v
                            (a)                                                                  (b)
Figure 2: (a) illustrates Zeno's Partition. (b) illustrates prices and payoffs: for each consumer-type v ,
the step-function shows the equilibrium price that is charged and the dashed 45 line shows the payoff
from consumption. The shaded region illustrates the consumer surplus achieved by Zeno's Partition.

                                           {               }
Paradox,11 consider the countable grid 1, 1     , 1 , . . .  {0}. We denote the (k + 1)th
                                               2 4
element of this ordered list, namely 2-k , by ak , and the set mk  [ak+1 , ak ]. We use this
partition to construct an equilibrium segmentation that improves consumer surplus.

Observation 2. With rich evidence, there exists an equilibrium that generates Zeno's
Partition: a consumer's reporting strategy is
                                        
                                        [a             where ak+1 < v  ak                        if v > 0,
                                          k+1 , ak ]
                        m(v ) =
                                        {0}                                                      if v = 0.

When the monopolist receives message mk , he charges ak+1 thereby selling to that entire
segment. Relative to no-personalized-pricing, this equilibrium strictly improves consumer
surplus for all v in (0, 1/2], and leaves consumer surplus unchanged for all other types.
                                                                           (1 ]
    In this equilibrium, the highest market segment is composed of types in 2 , 1 , all of
                                [1 ]
which send the message m0  2 , 1 ; the next highest market segment comprises types
   ( 1]                                        [ 1]
in 1  , , all of which send the message m1  1
     4 2
                                                 , , and so on and so forth. We depict
                                                4 2
this partition in Figure 2. Once the monopolist receives any message corresponding to
each market segment, he believes that the consumer's value is uniformly distributed on
it. His optimal price then is to price at the bottom of the segment. Therefore, trade
occurs with probability 1, with each higher consumer type capturing some surplus.
  11
     Zeno's Paradox is summarized by Aristotle as "...that which is in locomotion must arrive at the
half-way stage before it arrives at the goal...." See https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/paradox-zeno/.


                                                           10
                                                                     1
    This equilibrium generates an ex ante consumer surplus of 6        and producer surplus
   1
of 3 , each of which is higher than what is achieved without personalized pricing. All
types in (1/2, 1] receive the same price that they would have if personalized pricing were
infeasible, and almost every other type is strictly better off.12 Thus, personalized pricing
generates a Pareto improvement for the monopolist and each consumer type.
    How is Zeno's Partition supportable as an equilibrium? We first describe how we
deter consumers from using messages that are not in Zeno's Partition. We assume that if
the monopolist sees such a message, he puts probability 1 on the highest type that could
send such a message, and sets a price equal to that type in response to that off-path
message. Such beliefs ensure that these off-path messages are not profitable deviations
for any consumer type. How about deviations to other on-path messages? For every v in
(ak+1 , ak ), there exists only one on-path message that it can send, and for every v on the
boundaries of such messages, our strategy profile prescribes that they send the message
that results in the lower price. Thus, there are no profitable deviations for any consumer
type. Finally, we have already discussed how the monopolist's best-response after every
equilibrium path message of the form [ak+1 , ak ] is to charge ak+1 .13
    It is useful to understand features of our setting that allow us to escape unraveling.
In many disclosure models, the sender strictly prefers to induce the receiver to have
higher (or lower) beliefs in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance. Unraveling then
emerges as the unique equilibrium outcome as extreme types have a motive to separate
from pools. By contrast, in our setting, there exist many pairs of beliefs (µ, µ ^) that are
ranked by FOSD such that the sender is indifferent between inducing µ and µ       ^ because
they result in the receiver taking the same action. For example, the monopolist charges
the same price when he ascribes probability 1 to type {1/2} as he does when his beliefs
are U [1/2, 1]. This observation permits us to build pools that do not give types the
motive to separate themselves from the pool.
    Zeno's Partition isn't the only possible equilibrium of this example. But it turns
out to be the equilibrium that maximizes ex ante consumer surplus.14 We prove in
Section 3.4 that with a unidimensional type space, for every equilibrium, there exists an
interim payoff-equivalent equilibrium in which trade occurs with probability 1 and types
segment into partitions. Thus, it is without loss of generality to restrict attention to
                                                 ( ) log(1
                                                       log v
                                                               +1
  12
     The consumer of type v obtains surplus v - 1 2
                                                           /2)
                                                                  where · denotes the floor function. This
expression is strictly positive for all v > 0.
  13
     The logic of this market segmentation illustrates the role of hard
                                                                      [ 1information:
                                                                           ]            even though types
              1
greater than 2  would obtain a lower price by sending the message 1     ,
                                                                       4 2  , they are unable to do so.
  14
     That Zeno's Partition is optimal implies that the best consumer-optimal equilibrium delivers payoffs
below the consumer-optimal segmentation of Bergemann, Brooks, and Morris (2015).



                                                   11
equilibria that are fully efficient and partitional. Let us illustrate why Zeno's Partition
is optimal when types are uniformly distributed using the following heuristic argument.
    If consumers purchase with probability 1 in a fully efficient equilibrium, maximizing
consumer surplus is equivalent to minimizing the average price. For a monopolist to price
at the bottom of an interval [a, b] when v is uniformly distributed between a and b, it must
be that a  b/2. Suppose that the consumer-optimal equilibrium involves types from
[, 1] forming the highest segment; by the logic of the previous sentence,   1/2. The
monopolist charges a price of  to that segment, and thus, its contribution to the ex ante
expected price is (1 - ). The remaining population, [0, ], amounts to a -rescaling
of the original problem, and so the consumer-optimal equilibrium after removing that
highest segment involves replicating the same segmentation on a smaller scale. Thus, the
consumer-optimal segmentation can be framed as a recursive problem where P (¯      v ) is the
lowest expected price generated by a partition when types are uniformly distributed on
the interval [0, v
                 ¯]:

                               P (1) = min (1 - ) + P ()
                                        21



                                    = min (1 - ) + 2 P (1)
                                        2
                                        1


                                            (1 - )   1
                                    = min          =   ,
                                        2
                                        1    1 - 2   3

where the first equality follows from framing the problem recursively, the second fol-
lows from P () being a re-scaled version of the original problem, and the remaining
corresponds to algebra. Because Zeno's Partition induces the same expected price, no
alternative segmentation can generate higher consumer surplus.


3     Voluntary Disclosure to a Monopolist
3.1    Environment
The Pricing Problem. A monopolist ("he") sells a good to a single consumer ("she"),
who demands a single unit. The consumer's type, denoted by t, is drawn according to a
measure µ whose support is T . The type space T is a convex and compact subset of a
finite-dimensional Euclidean space, k . Each of these k dimensions of a consumer's type
reflect attributes that affect her valuation for the good according to v : T  . Payoffs
are quasilinear: if the consumer purchases the good from the monopolist at price p when
her type is t, her payoff is v (t) - p and the monopolist's payoff is p; otherwise, each player

                                              12
receives a payoff of 0. We denote by F the induced CDF over valuations; in other words,
   v )  µ({t  T : v (t)  v
F (~                        ~). We denote by v and v the highest and lowest valuations in
the support. We simplify exposition by assuming that F is continuous and F (v ) = 0.15
    Throughout our analysis, we assume that v (t) is non-negative for every type t  T
and is quasiconvex.16 A special leading case is where each dimension of t is a consumer
                                                                       
characteristic (e.g. income) and v (t) is linear; in this case, v (t) = k
                                                                        i=1 i ti where i is
the coefficient on characteristic i. We order types based on their valuations: we say that
t  t if v (t)  v (t ), and we define  and  equivalently. When t  t , we refer to t as
being a higher type.
    Were communication infeasible, this pricing problem has a simple solution: the mo-
nopolist sets a price p that maximizes p(1-F (p)). Let p denote the (lowest) optimal price
for the monopolist. The consumer's interim payoff is then no more than max{v (t) - p , 0}.

The Disclosure Game. We append a disclosure game to this pricing problem. After
observing her type, the consumer chooses a message m from the set of messages available
to her. The set of all feasible messages is MF  {M  T : M is closed and convex},
and we interpret a message M in MF as meaning "My type is in the set M ." When a
consumer's type is t, the set of messages that she can send is M(t)  MF . We focus
attention on the following two different forms of disclosure:

   · the evidence structure is simple if for every t, M(t) = {T, {t}}.
   · the evidence structure is rich if for every t, M(t) = {M  MF : t  M }.

In both simple and rich evidence structures, the consumer has access to hard information
about her type. In a simple evidence structure, the consumer can either disclose a
"certificate" that fully reveals her type or say nothing at all. By contrast, in a rich
evidence structure, the consumer can verifiable disclose true statements about her type
without being compelled to reveal everything. The assumption that messages are convex
sets implies that if types t and t can disclose some common evidence, then so can any
intermediate type t = t + (1 - )t (for   (0, 1)).

Timeline and Equilibrium Concept. First, the consumer observes her type t and
chooses a message M from M(t). The monopolist then observes the message and chooses
a price p  0. The consumer then chooses whether to purchase the good. We study
  15
    An equivalent assumption is that µ({t  T : v (t) = v  }) = 0 for every v  in the range of v (·).
Conditions that guarantee this property are that µ is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue
measure, and v (·) is strictly monotone in each dimension.
 16
    In other words, for every v ¯, the set {t  T : v (t)  v
                                                          ¯} is a convex set.


                                                  13
Perfect Bayesian Equilibria (henceforth PBE) of this game. For convenience, we assume
that a consumer always breaks her indifference in favor of purchasing the good. We say
that a PBE is efficient if trade occurs with probability 1, and is consumer-optimal if
among equilibria, it maximizes ex ante consumer welfare.


3.2    Simple Evidence Does Not Help Consumers
Here, we show that when trading with a monopolist, consumers do not benefit from
personalized pricing if the evidence structure is simple relative to a benchmark in which
personalized pricing is impossible. As we described above, the interim payoff of each type
t without personalized pricing is max{v (t) - p , 0} where p is the monopolist's optimal
price. Relative to that benchmark, we show that there are equilibria with simple evidence
that make all consumer types worse off, but no equilibrium in which any type is strictly
better off. The argument that we use here generalizes that of Section 2.
    To see how consumers may be worse off, consider the equilibrium in which the con-
sumer fully reveals her type with probability 1 and the monopolist charges a price of v (t)
when the consumer reveals that her type is t; off-path, the seller's beliefs are maximally
skeptical in that he believes that the consumer's type is one with the highest valua-
tion with probability 1. In this equilibrium, the monopolist extracts all surplus, and so
consumers are clearly worse off than without personalized pricing.
    But there are also partially revealing equilibria in which only those types below a
cutoff reveal themselves. For example, there exists an equilibrium in which all types t
where v (t)  p stay silent and only types below disclose; this results in payoffs for the
consumer identical to that without personalized pricing. From an interim perspective,
this is the best equilibrium for consumers.

Proposition 1. With simple evidence, across all equilibria, the consumer's interim payoff
is bounded above by max{v (t) - p , 0}.

    In equilibrium, the seller extracts all surplus from any consumer who reveals her type.
Each equilibrium can then be described by a price p     ~ that is faced by those who do not.
Of course, only those types whose valuation exceeds p     ~ choose to purchase at that price.
                                
In equilibrium, p~ is at least p ; otherwise, the seller would wish to increase prices.
    Thus, the consumer gains nothing, ex ante and ex interim, from the ability to disclose
her type using simple evidence. If one takes the model of simple evidence as a stylized
representation of track / do-not-track regulations, our analysis implies that this form of
consumer protection does not benefit consumers in a monopolistic environment relative
to a benchmark that prohibits personalized pricing. Instead, richer forms of verifiable

                                             14
disclosure are needed. We turn to constructing a segmentation with rich evidence that
increases consumer surplus, both ex ante and ex interim.


3.3    A Pareto-Improving Segmentation with Rich Evidence
To improve consumer surplus using rich evidence, we develop a segmentation that gen-
eralizes that of Section 2. Each segment is constructed so that the monopolist's best-
response to that segment is to sell to all consumer types in that segment. Consumers
would profit if they could deviate "downwards" to a lower segment; our construction
guarantees that this is impossible. Our construction is "greedy" insofar as we start with
the highest segment and make each as large as possible without accounting for its effect
on subsequent segments.
    To define the segmentation strategy, consider a sequence of prices {ps }s=0,1,2,...,S where
S  , p0 = v , and for every s where ps-1 > v , ps is the (lowest) maximizer of
ps (F (ps-1 ) - F (ps )). If ps = v for some s , then we halt the algorithm and set S =
s ; otherwise, S =  and p = v . We use these prices to construct sets of types,
(Ms )s=1,2,...,S  M :

                                 Ms  {t  T : v (t)  ps-1 }.
                                M  {t  T : v (t) = v }

Because v is quasiconvex and T is convex, Ms is a convex set for every s = 0, 1, 2, . . . , S ,
and therefore Ms is a feasible message. These messages segment the market.

Proposition 2. With rich evidence, there exists a Pareto-improving equilibrium in which
a consumer's reporting strategy is
                                      
                                      M       if ps < v (t)  ps-1 ,
                                          s
                           M  (t) =
                                      M       if t  M .
                                          


When receiving an equilibrium disclosure of the form Ms , the seller charges a price of ps
and sells to all types that send that message.

    The segmentation described above generalizes the "Zeno Partition" constructed in
Section 2. The highest market segment consists of those consumer types whose valuations
strictly exceed the monopolist's optimal posted price, p1 = p ; these are the types who
send message M1 . The next highest market segment comprises those whose valuations
exceed the optimal posted price, p2 , for the truncated distribution that excludes the


                                              15
highest market segment; they send message M2 . This iterative procedure continues
either indefinitely (if ps > v for every s) or halts once the monopolist has no incentive to
exclude any type in the truncated distribution from trading.
    Notice that in this segmentation, disclosures aren't taken at face value. Instead, the
monopolist infers from receiving a message Ms that the consumer would have preferred
to send message Ms+1 but couldn't, and so her valuation must be in (ps , ps-1 ]. Notice
also that the market segmentation is constructed so that given these beliefs about the
consumer's valuation, the monopolist has no incentive to charge a price that excludes
any type. In fact, this constraint for the seller binds in our greedy segmentation in that
if types below ps were included, the seller's optimal price would exclude those types.
    This equilibrium segmentation is fully efficient--trade occurs with probability 1--and
improves consumer surplus relative to the benchmark without personalized pricing. Con-
sumer types in the highest market segment face the same price that they would without
personalized pricing, but now consumers in other market segments can also purchase at
prices that are (generically) below their willingness to pay. Thus, the segmentation is a
Pareto improvement. One feature of the segmentation that is attractive is its simplicity:
all that consumers have to disclose is information about their willingness to pay.
    Finally, we note that this construction is robust to the possibility that the consumer
does not have evidence with positive probability, an issue frequently considered in the
verifiable disclosure literature (Dye, 1985; Shin, 1994). There exists an equilibrium in
this expanded game where if the consumer does not have evidence, she is charged a price
of p1 = p , and all those with evidence behave as above. If the consumer has evidence,
she does not gain from imitating those without evidence.


3.4    Optimal Equilibrium Segmentation
The previous section describes a disclosure strategy that is Pareto-improving and fully
efficient. In this section, we explore conditions under which this is the optimal segmen-
tation from the perspective of ex ante consumer surplus.
     There are two reasons that this segmentation may not generally maximize ex ante
consumer surplus. The first is that it ignores multidimensionality: even if two types have
the same valuation, it may be optimal to separate them. The second reason that our
segmentation may not be optimal is that even in a one-dimensional world, packing types
greedily need not maximize consumer surplus. To elaborate on this second issue, we
restrict attention to a one-dimensional model. We first prove that the consumer-optimal
equilibrium necessarily features a partitional structure. We use an example to illustrate
that the greedy partition may be suboptimal. We then prove that it is optimal for a

                                            16
specific class of distribution functions.
    Let the set of types T be identical to the set of values [v, v ] and v (t) = t. Recall that
v  0 and that F is an atomless CDF over valuations. The restriction that M (t) is a
closed convex set that includes t implies that here, M (t) = {[a, b]  [v, v ] : a  t  b};
in other words, the set of all closed intervals that include t.
    When applied to this setting, Proposition 2 identifies an equilibrium segmentation of
the form {[0, ps ]}s=0,1,2,...,S where ps is the optimal price to when the distribution F is
truncated to [0, ps-1 ]. Because only types in (ps+1 , ps ] send the message [0, ps ], a payoff-
equivalent segmentation is for a type t to send the message [ps+1 , ps ] where ps+1 < t  ps .
This equilibrium is "partitional" in that types reveal the member of the partition to
which they belong, and thus, these messages can be taken at "face value". We prove that
for any equilibrium, there always exists a payoff-equivalent equilibrium that is partitional
and involves the sale happening with probability 1.
    Our characterization uses the following definitions. A PBE is efficient if trade occurs
with probability 1. A collection of sets P is a partition of [v, v ] if P is a subset of
                                                                             
MF such that mP m = [v, v ] and for every distinct m, m in P , m m is at most a
singleton. One message m dominates m (i.e. m M m ) if for every t  m and t  m ,
t  t ; arg min and arg max over a set of messages refers to this partial order. Given a
partition P , let mP (t)  arg min{mP :tm} m. An equilibrium  is partitional if there
exists a partition P such that m (t) = mP (t), and for every m in P , p (m) = mintm t.

Proposition 3. Given any equilibrium  , there exists an efficient partitional equilibrium
~ that is payoff-equivalent for almost every type.


     The proof of Proposition 3 proceeds in two steps. First, we show that it is without
loss of generality, from the perspective of consumer surplus, to look at efficient equilibria:
for any equilibrium in which there exists a type that is not purchasing the product, there
exists an interim payoff-equivalent equilibrium in which that type fully reveals itself to
the seller. Second, we show that for any efficient equilibrium, there exists a partitional
equilibrium that is payoff-equivalent for almost every type. In this step, we show that in
any efficient equilibrium, prices must be (weakly) decreasing in valuation, and otherwise,
some type has a profitable deviation.
     Thus, it suffices to look at only partitional equilibria. How does the greedy segmen-
tation compare to other partitional equilibria? The greedy partition is ex interim Pareto
efficient: any partition that differs from the greedy partition must involve raising the
lowest type in at least one segment, which increases prices for at least one type. But,
from the perspective of ex ante welfare, it may benefit average prices to exclude some


                                              17
high types from a pool, making those types pay a higher price, and pool intermediate
types with low types. We illustrate this below using a discrete type space.
Example 1. Suppose that the consumer's type is drawn from {1/3, 2/3, 1} where P r(t =
1) = 1/6, P r(t = 2/3) = 1/3 + , and P r(t = 1/3) = 1/2 - , where  > 0 is small. The
greedy construction sets the highest segment as {2/3, 1}--because the seller's optimal
posted price here would be 2/3--and the next segment as {1/3}. This segmentation
results in an average price of  1/2. But a better segmentation for ex ante consumer
surplus involves the high type perfectly separating as {1}, and the next highest segment
being {1/3, 2/3}. This segmentation reduces the average price to 4/9.
    Generally, the optimal segmentation can be formulated as the solution to a con-
strained optimization problem over partitions that minimizes the average price subject
to the constraint that the monopolist finds it optimal to price at the bottom of each
segment. The greedy algorithm offers a simple program where that constraint binds in
each segment and Example 1 indicates that this may be sub-optimal. Identifying nec-
essary and sufficient conditions on distributions when such constraints necessarily bind
is challenging because it requires understanding in detail how sharply the monopolist's
optimal price responds to truncating the distribution at different points. This exercise
is particularly difficult for distributions where we cannot solve for the optimal price in
closed-form.17 A class of distributions where a closed-form solution is available is that
of power distributions. In this case, we show that the greedy algorithm identifies the
consumer-optimal segmentation.

Proposition 4. Suppose that [v, v ] = [0, 1] and the cdf on valuations, F (v ) = v k for
k > 0. Then the greedy segmentation is the consumer-optimal equilibrium segmentation.

Summary: Our analysis concludes that in a monopolistic setting, (i) the combination
of voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing does not benefit consumers if evidence is
simple (Proposition 1), but (ii) generates an ex interim Pareto improvement if evidence
is rich (Proposition 2). Thus, consumers' control over data benefits them when they can
choose not only whether to communicate but also what to communicate.


  17
    Without solving for the closed-form, we can verify that the greedy algorithm is optimal if (i) F is
convex, and (ii) the optimal price on an interval [0, v
                                                      ~], denoted by p(~
                                                                       v ), has a slope bounded above by
1 and is weakly concave.




                                                  18
4      How Disclosure Amplifies Competition
Our analysis above identifies when and how consumers benefit from voluntary disclosure
and personalized pricing when facing a monopolist. However, in many settings, consumers
do not interact with only one seller but instead face a competitive market in which firms
are differentiated. An important characteristic of each consumer then is her location, i.e.,
her tastes for the products made by each firm. In this section, we study the degree to
which voluntary disclosure and personalized pricing benefits a consumer in a model of
Bertrand duopoly with horizontally differentiated products.
    Our analysis identifies a new strategic force absent in a monopolistic market: a con-
sumer can use voluntary disclosure to amplify competition between firms. This force is
sufficiently strong that all consumer types benefit from personalized pricing even with
simple evidence. Richer evidence generates even stronger gains, where we can use an algo-
rithm analogous to that of Proposition 2 to construct equilibria. Our analysis formalizes
the intuition, articulated by Lars Stole (quoted in Wallheimer 2018), that targeting and
personalized pricing benefit consumers in competitive markets:

       "A competitor can quickly undercut a targeted price. Once you start doing
       this, you'll have companies in different markets matching those prices. You
       don't have much market power."

    We proceed as follows. Section 4.1 describes the market setting. Section 4.2 con-
structs equilibrium segmentations with simple and rich evidence. Section 4.3 compares
the consumer's payoffs with those of a benchmark setting without personalized pricing.


4.1    Environment
Two firms, L and R, compete to sell to a single consumer who has unit demand. The
type of the consumer is her location, denoted by t, which is drawn according to measure
µ (and cdf F ) with the support T . We assume that T  [-1, 1] and that F is atomless
with a strictly positive and continuous density f on its support. The firms L and R are
located at the two end points, respectively -1 and 1, and each firm i sets a price pi  0.
The consumer has a value V for buying the good that is independent of her type t, and
when purchasing from firm i, she faces a "transportation cost" that is proportional to the
distance between her location and that of the firm's, i .18 Thus, her payoff from buying
the good from firm i at a price of pi is V - |t - i | - pi . As is standard, we assume that
  18
   Linear transportation costs simplify algebra, but our results do not hinge on it. Identical results
emerge for quadratic distance costs.


                                                 19
V is sufficiently large that in the equilibria we study below, all types of the consumer
purchase the good and no type is excluded from the market.19

Disclosure with Duopoly. After observing her type, the consumer chooses a message
M that is feasible and available for her to send to each of the firms. As before, the set of
feasible messages is MF  {[a, b] : -1  a  b  1} where a message [a, b] is interpreted
as "my type is in the interval [a, b]." When a consumer's type is t, the set of messages
that she can send is M(t)  MF . We study two disclosure technologies:

   · simple evidence messages for each type t, M(t) = {[-1, 1], {t}}.
   · rich evidence messages for each type t, M(t) = {[a, b] : a  t  b}.

    Each evidence technology is identical to its counterpart in the monopolistic model
when the type space is unidimensional. The novelty here is that the consumer now sends
two messages--ML to firm L and MR to firm R--and each message is privately observed
by its recipient. Both messages come from the same technology but are otherwise unre-
stricted. For example, a consumer of type t can reveal her type by sending the message
{t} to one firm while concealing it from the other firm using the message [-1, 1].

Timeline and Equilibrium Concept. The consumer first observes her type t and
then chooses a pair of messages (ML , MR ), each from M(t).20 Each firm i privately
observe its message Mi and sets price pi  0; price-setting is simultaneous. The consumer
then chooses which firm to purchase the good from, if any.
    We study Perfect Bayesian Equilibria of this game. As is well-known (Osborne and
Pitchik, 1987; Caplin and Nalebuff, 1991), the price-setting game in Bertrand compe-
tition with horizontal differentiation may lack a pure-strategy equilibrium for general
distributions. By contrast, we show constructively that pure-strategy equilibria always
exist when this market setting is augmented with a disclosure game.


4.2     Constructing Equilibria with Simple and Rich Evidence
This section constructs equilibria of the disclosure game with simple and rich disclosure
technologies for any distribution of consumer types. In both cases, we use the following
  19
      See Osborne and Pitchik (1987), Caplin and Nalebuff (1991), Bester (1992), and Peitz (1997). For
most of our analysis, it suffices for V  2, so that a consumer is always willing to purchase the good
from the most distant firm if that distant firm sets a price of 0.
   20
      Our analysis is also compatible with a setting where all that a consumer observes is a signal with her
posterior expected location, like Armstrong and Zhou (2019), and chooses whether and how to disclose
that expected location using simple or rich evidence.


                                                    20
strategic logic. Each consumer reveals her type to the firm that is more distant from
her, indicating that she is "out of reach." This distant firm then competes heavily for
her business by setting a low price, which in equilibrium equals 0. The seller who does
not obtain a fully revealing message infers that the consumer is closer to his location.
Based on that inference, this seller sets a profit-maximizing price subject to the consumer
having the option to buy from the other seller at a price of 0. We use the assumption
that V  2 to guarantee that the consumer weakly prefers purchasing the good from the
distant firm at a price of 0 to not purchasing it at all. We begin our analysis with a fully
revealing equilibrium in both simple and rich evidence environments, and then show how
to improve upon it.

Proposition 5. There exists a fully revealing equilibrium in both simple and rich evidence
games: every type of consumer t sends the message {t} to each firm, and purchases from
the firm nearer to her at a price of 2|t|.

    The logic of Proposition 5 is straightforward. In an equilibrium where the consumer
reveals her location to each firm, both firms do not charge her strictly positive prices
in equilibrium. Standard Bertrand logic implies that the distant firm must charge her
a price of 0 and the closer firm charges her the highest price that it can subject to the
constraint that the consumer finds it incentive-compatible to purchase from the closer
firm at that price.21 If the consumer deviates by sending a message M that isn't a
singleton to firm i, then firm i believes that the consumer's type is the one in M closest
to i and that the consumer has revealed her location to firm j . This equilibrium, thus,
involves each seller holding skeptical beliefs that the consumer is as close as possible
(given the message that is sent).
    This fully revealing equilibrium serves central types very well because they benefit
from intense price competition. However, extreme types suffer from the firm closer to
them being able to charge a high price. Ideally, types that are located close to firm i
would benefit from pooling with types more distant from firm i. The next result uses
simple evidence to construct a partial pooling equilibrium that improves upon the fully
revealing equilibrium for a strictly positive measure of types without making any type
worse off.
    Our construction uses the following notation. Let pi     1 be the lowest maximizer of
pi (F (i ) - F (pi /2)), and let t1  p1 i /2. To provide some intuition, pi
                                  i    i
                                                                           1 is the (lowest)
optimal price that firm i charges if he has no information about the consumer's type and
firm j charges a price of 0; in other words, this is firm i's optimal local monopoly price
  21
    Once types are revealed, these equilibrium prices necessarily coincide with those of Thisse and Vives
(1988), where the consumer's type is common knowledge.

                                                   21
against an outside option where firm j charges a price of 0. At those prices, firm i expects
a probability of trade i (F (i ) - F (pi /2)) and ti
                                                   1 is the most distant type from firm i
that still purchases from firm i. It is necessarily the case that -1 < tL             R
                                                                          1 < 0 < t1 < 1.
We use these types to describe our equilibrium.

Proposition 6. With simple evidence, there exists a partially pooling equilibrium in
which the consumer's reporting strategy is
                                       (             )
                                         [-1, 1], {t}           if - 1  t  tL
                                                                            1,
                     (         
                                    ) (           )
                      ML (t), MR (t) =   {t}, {t}               if tL        R
                                                                    1 < t < t1 ,
                                       
                                       ({t}, [-1, 1])
                                       
                                                                    1  t  1,
                                                                if tR

and the prices charged by firm i are
                                        
                                        max{2t , 0}          if M = {t},
                                              i
                             p  ( M ) =
                              i
                                        pi                   otherwise.
                                            1


In equilibrium, every consumer type purchases from the seller nearer to her.

     An intuition for Proposition 6 is as follows. If the consumer is centrally located--
i.e., in (t1    1
           L , tR )--she disclose her type ("track") to both firms. These consumers then
benefit from intense price competition, exactly as in the fully revealing equilibrium of
Proposition 5. If the consumer is not centrally located, she reveals her location to the
firm farther from her but not to the nearer one. This private messaging strategy guar-
antees that the distant firm prices at zero and offers an attractive outside option. The
firm that receives an uninformative ("don't track") message infers that the consumer is
located sufficiently close but does not learn where. That firm then chooses an optimal
local monopoly price given the outside-option price of zero. This pool of extreme types
improves consumer welfare by guaranteeing that extreme consumer types can pool with
moderate types thereby decreasing type-contingent prices relative to the fully revealing
equilibrium.22 We depict this disclosure strategy in Figure 3.
     One can do even better with rich evidence by using a segmentation that is analogous
to the "Zeno Partition" constructed in the monopolistic market. In this case, the central
type, t = 0, obtains equilibrium prices of 0 from each firm, and plays a role similar to
the lowest type in the monopolistic setting. Accordingly, one sees a segmentation that
  22
     When types are uniformly distributed, this equilibrium has a particularly intuitive form. The cutoff
                                      L = -1/2 and tR = 1/2. Consequently, types t  [-1, -1/2] and
types in this case are symmetrically t1                1

t  [1/2, 1] purchase the good at a price of 1, rather than 2|t|.


                                                   22
        Reveals to only R        Consumer reveals location to both firms         Reveals to only L

  L        ([-1, 1], {t})                        ({t}, {t})                        ({t}, [-1, 1])        R
   -1                       tL
                             1                       0                      tR
                                                                             1                       1
Figure 3: The figure shows disclosure strategies for every type. Centrally located types fully reveal location
to both firms. Extreme types reveal location only to the distant firm and conceal it from the closer firm


goes from the extremes to the center, and becomes arbitrarily fine as one approaches
the center. To develop notation for this argument, let us define a sequence of types
{ti
  s }s=0,1,2,... and prices and messages {ps , Ms }s=1,2,... where for every firm i in {L, R}:
                                           i    i


   · ti                            i    i
      0 = i and for every s > 0, ts = ps i /2.
   · pis is the lowest maximizer of pi (F (ts-1 ) - F (pi /2)).
                                            i

   · Ms  i
            {t  [-1, 1] : ti
                           s i  ti  ts-1 i }.
                                      i


Let pi   = 0 and let M = {0}. We have thus defined a sequences of cutoffs, prices, and
                          i

messages where at every stage, we are constructing segments greedily: given a segment
   i
Ms   , firm i is charging the price that is the optimal local monopoly price (assuming that
the other firm charges a price of 0), and at this price, firm i is servicing all consumer
               i
types in Ms      . Because rich evidence allows consumers to disclose intervals directly, our
disclosure strategy need not be asymmetric (unlike our analysis of the segmentation with
                                                                   i
simple evidence): a consumer of type t can send the message Ms       that contains t to both
firms. We use this notation to prove our result below.

Proposition 7. With rich evidence, there exists a segmentation equilibrium in which a
consumer's reporting strategy is to send message M  (t) to both firms where
                                           
                                           M i
                                                         s i < ti  ts-1 i
                                                     if ti          i
                                                s
                                 M (t) =
                                           M i       if t = 0.
                                                


                                                      i
When receiving an equilibrium disclosure of the form Ms , firm i charges a price of pi
                                                                                     s and
firm j charges a price of 0.

    This equilibrium construction highlights the versatility of rich evidence disclosure.
While the competitive environment differs from the monopolistic setting in many ways,
the logic of the "Zeno Partition" strategy follows in much the same way. Consumers with
the highest willingness to pay for the good from firm i are segmented together and send
              i
messages M1     . That message induces a price of 0 by firm j and given that outside option,
                                                                          i
firm i charges a price that makes indifferent the consumer type in M1       with the lowest
willingness to pay for firm i's product. Prices diminish as the consumer types become

                                                     23
               L                  L       L                  R            R                   R
  L           M1                 M2      M3                 M3           M2                  M1                 R
   -1                      tL
                            1          tL
                                        2       tL
                                                 3   0     tR
                                                            3    tR
                                                                  2            tR
                                                                                1                           1
Figure 4: The figure shows a segmentation using rich evidence. The types in         (tL    R
                                                                                      3 , t3 )   are partitioned into
countably infinitely many segments, and hence these segments are omitted.


closer to the center. As such, the segmentation follows iteratively from both sides of 0
exactly as in "Zeno."23 We depict this segmentation strategy in Figure 4.
    We have constructed equilibria with simple and rich evidence but we do not ar-
gue that these equilibria are consumer-optimal for an important reason: an equilibrium
segmentation (with either simple or rich evidence) may generate segments that induce
each firm to randomize in its pricing strategy. Characterizing or bounding prices across
mixed strategy equilibria across segments appears intractable.24 Instead, we compare
these equilibria to that of a benchmark model without personalized pricing and show
that these equilibria generate strict interim Pareto gains.


4.3     Benefits of Personalized Pricing in Competitive Markets
The benchmark is the standard model of Bertrand pricing with horizontal differentiation:
each firm i sets a uniform price pi and the consumer buys from one of the firms. Unfortu-
nately, this game may lack a pure-strategy equilibrium (in prices), and characterizing the
mixed strategy equilibria is challenging. Accordingly, we impose a distributional assump-
tion that is standard in this setting, namely that f is symmetric around 0 and is strictly
log-concave. This assumption guarantees the existence and uniqueness of a symmetric
pure strategy equilibrium (Caplin and Nalebuff, 1991), and is compatible with a range of
distributions, including uniform and Beta distributions (Bagnoli and Bergstrom, 2005).
    With this assumption, a symmetric pure-strategy equilibrium in this benchmark set-
ting exists and involves each firm charging a price of p where
                                                     (           )
                                                         p - p           2F (0)
                                p  arg max pF                        =          ,
                                            p              2              f (0)

where the first equality is firm L's profit maximization problem, and the second comes
from solving its first-order condition and substituting p = p .25 Our welfare result com-
  23
     For the uniform distribution, the construction mirrors that in Section 2 where ti           s
                                                                                      s = i (1/2) .
  24
     Restricting attention to segmentations that generate pure-strategy equilibria, we conjecture that the
equilibrium that we construct in Proposition 6 is consumer-optimal in the game with simple evidence;
similarly, we conjecture the same regarding the equilibrium constructed in the game with rich evidence
whenever the greedy algorithm yields an optimal segmentation.
  25
     As before, we assume that V is sufficiently high that all consumers purchase at these prices. It



                                                     24
                                       3

                                                 No Personalized Pricing


              Price + Transport Cost   2



                                       1
                                                    Simple Evidence




                                       -1   -1               0             1            1
                                             2                             2
                                            Consumer's Type / Location
Figure 5: The figure compares the interim equilibrium cost (incl. price and transport cost) in the
setting without personalized pricing with that of the equilibrium constructed in the simple evidence game
(Proposition 6) for uniformly distributed types. Simple evidence reduces the expected cost by 50%.


pares this price to those of the equilibria constructed in Section 4.2.

Proposition 8. If f is symmetric around 0 and log-concave, then every type has a
strictly higher payoff in the equilibria of the simple and rich evidence games constructed
in Propositions 6 and 7 than in the benchmark setting without personalized pricing.

    The logic of Proposition 8 is that the price in the benchmark setting (p ) is strictly
higher than pi1 , the price charged by firm i to a consumer who conceals her type from firm
i in the equilibrium of the simple evidence game (Proposition 6). The consumer must
then be better off because this price (pi   1 ) is strictly higher than all other equilibrium
path prices both in this equilibrium and in the equilibrium that we construct in the rich
evidence game. We illustrate the welfare gains from simple evidence in Figure 5.
    We note that the ability to pool is needed for these interim Pareto gains and these
gains would not generally emerge if the consumer fully revealed her type: apart from
the uniform distribution, any symmetric log-concave density must involve f (0) > 1/2
and therefore, prices in the benchmark are strictly less than 2. By contrast, in the fully
revealing equilibrium, the extreme types pay a price of 2. Thus, these interim Pareto
gains emerge when consumers can disclose or conceal evidence about their type, and not
necessarily when types are commonly known.


suffices that V > (f (0))-1 + 1.



                                                        25
5    Conclusion
As the digital economy matures, policymakers and industry leaders alike are working
to establish norms and regulations to govern data ownership and transmission. In light
of the privacy and distributional concerns that this issue raises, we set out to study
the question: do consumers benefit from personalized pricing when they have control
over their data? We frame and answer this question using the language of voluntary
disclosure, building on a rich theoretical literature on evidence and hard information.
    Our initial instinct was that voluntary disclosure would not help. As the market
draws inferences based on information that is not disclosed, giving consumers the ability
to separate themselves would seem to be self-defeating. To put it differently, if the market
necessarily unravels as in Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981), consumers retain no
surplus and may be worse off with personalized pricing. We show that this conclusion is
incorrect because it omits two important strategic forces present in market interactions.
    First, one can construct pools in both monopolistic and competitive settings in which
the consumer lacks an incentive to separate herself from the pool. These pools are
simple, do not require commitment, and depend only on the willingness-to-pay rather
than on intricate details of the type space. Second, when facing multiple firms, voluntary
disclosure and personalized pricing amplify competitive forces. By revealing features of
one's preferences to the market, the consumer obtains a significant price concession from
a less competitive firm that forces the more competitive firm to also lower her price.
    We have examined these basic strategic considerations through the lens of a stylized
model. A separate question is about the technological feasibility of various data-sharing
arrangements. As argued by Goldfarb and Tucker (2019) and others, an important
element in the ongoing evolution of the digital economy is its increasing ability to verify
information. These advances suggest that it may be technologically feasible for consumers
to use intermediaries or platforms to verifiably disclose aspects of their preference, or at
the very least, decide how much they would like to be tracked, and by whom. Offering
consumers control over their data--and giving them tools to coordinate their sharing of
data--may make personalized pricing attractive and improve consumer welfare.


References
Acemoglu, D., A. Makhdoumi, A. Malekian, and A. Ozdaglar (2019): "Too Much
  Data: Prices and Inefficiencies in Data Markets," Working Paper.

Acquisti, A., C. Taylor, and L. Wagman (2016): "The Economics of Privacy," Journal of
  Economic Literature, 54, 442­492.


                                            26
Acquisti, A. and H. R. Varian (2005): "Conditioning prices on purchase history," Marketing
  Science, 24, 367­381.

Armstrong, M. (2006): Recent Developments in the Economics of Price Discrimination,
 Cambridge University Press, vol. 2 of Econometric Society Monographs, 97­141.

Armstrong, M. and J. Zhou (2019): "Information Structure and Price Competition," Work-
 ing Paper.

Bagnoli, M. and T. Bergstrom (2005): "Log-concave probability and its applications,"
  Economic theory, 26, 445­469.

Ben-Porath, E., E. Dekel, and B. L. Lipman (2017): "Disclosure and choice," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 85, 1471­1501.

------ (2019): "Mechanisms with evidence: Commitment and robustness," Econometrica, 87,
  529­566.

Ben-Porath, E. and B. L. Lipman (2012): "Implementation with partial provability," Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory, 147, 1689­1724.

Bergemann, D. and A. Bonatti (2019): "Markets for Information: An Introduction,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 11, 85­107.

Bergemann, D., A. Bonatti, and T. Gan (2019): "The Economics of Social Data," Working
  Paper.

Bergemann, D., B. Brooks, and S. Morris (2015): "The limits of price discrimination,"
  The American Economic Review, 105, 921­957.

Bester, H. (1992): "Bertrand Equilibrium in a Differentiated Duopoly," International Eco-
  nomic Review, 33, 433­448.

Bhaskar, V. and N. Roketskiy (2019): "Consumer Privacy and Serial Monopoly," Working
  Paper.

Bonatti, A. and G. Cisternas (2019): "Consumer Scores and Price Discrimination," Review
  of Economic Studies.

Calzolari, G. and A. Pavan (2006): "On the optimality of privacy in sequential contracting,"
  Journal of Economic theory, 130, 168­204.

Caplin, A. and B. Nalebuff (1991): "Aggregation and imperfect competition: On the
  existence of equilibrium," Econometrica, 59, 25­59.

Choi, J. P., D.-S. Jeon, and B.-C. Kim (2019): "Privacy and personal data collection with
  information externalities," Journal of Public Economics, 173, 113­124.

Conitzer, V., C. R. Taylor, and L. Wagman (2012): "Hide and seek: Costly consumer
 privacy in a market with repeat purchases," Marketing Science, 31, 277­292.

Dye, R. A. (1985): "Disclosure of nonproprietary information," Journal of accounting research,
 123­145.

                                             27
Elliott, M. and A. Galeotti (2019): "Market segmentation through information," Working
  Paper.

Fainmesser, I. P. and A. Galeotti (2016): "Pricing network effects," The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 83, 165­198.

------ (2019): "Pricing network effects: Competition," American Economic Journal: Microe-
  conomics.

Federal Trade Commission (2012): "Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid
  Change," https://tinyurl.com/y6euao98.

Glode, V., C. C. Opp, and X. Zhang (2018): "Voluntary disclosure in bilateral transac-
 tions," Journal of Economic Theory, 175, 652­688.

Goldfarb, A. and C. Tucker (2019): "Digital Economics," Journal of Economic Literature,
 57, 3­43.

Grossman, S. J. (1981): "The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about
 Product Quality," Journal of Law and Economics, 24, 461­483.

Hagenbach, J. and F. Koessler (2017): "Simple versus rich language in disclosure games,"
 Review of Economic Design, 21, 163­175.

Hagenbach, J., F. Koessler, and E. Perez-Richet (2014): "Certifiable Pre-Play Com-
 munication: Full Disclosure," Econometrica, 82, 1093­1131.

Haghpanah, N. and R. Siegel (2019): "Pareto Improving Segmentation of Multi-product
 Markets," Working Paper.

Hart, S., I. Kremer, and M. Perry (2017): "Evidence games: Truth and commitment,"
 American Economic Review, 107, 690­713.

Hern, A. (2018): "No tracking, no revenue: Apple's privacy feature costs ad companies mil-
  lions," https://tinyurl.com/y9a9u4jm.

Hidir, S. and N. Vellodi (2019): "Personalization, Discrimination and Information Revela-
  tion," Working Paper.

Ichihashi, S. (2019): "Online Privacy and Information Disclosure by Consumers," American
  Economic Review.

Jones, C. I. and C. Tonetti (2019): "Nonrivalry and the Economics of Data," Working
  Paper.

Jovanovic, B. (1982): "Truthful disclosure of information," The Bell Journal of Economics,
  36­44.

Kartik, N. and O. Tercieux (2012): "Implementation with evidence," Theoretical Eco-
 nomics, 7, 323­355.

Koessler, F. and V. Skreta (2019): "Selling with evidence," Theoretical Economics, 14,
 345­371.

                                           28
Liu, Q. and K. Serfes (2004): "Quality of Information and Oligopolistic Price Discrimina-
  tion," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 13, 671­702.

Lizzeri, A. (1999): "Information revelation and certification intermediaries," The RAND Jour-
  nal of Economics, 214­231.

Milgrom, P. R. (1981): "Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applica-
 tions," Bell Journal of Economics, 12, 380­391.

Osborne, M. J. and C. Pitchik (1987): "Equilibrium in Hotelling's Model of Spatial Com-
  petition," Econometrica, 55, 911­922.

Peitz, M. (1997): "Differentiated Bertrand duopoly with variable demand," Research in Eco-
  nomics, 51, 85­100.

Roesler, A.-K. and B. Szentes (2017): "Buyer-optimal learning and monopoly pricing,"
  American Economic Review, 107, 2072­80.

Sher, I. and R. Vohra (2015): "Price discrimination through communication," Theoretical
  Economics, 10, 597­648.

Shin, H. S. (1994): "The burden of proof in a game of persuasion," Journal of Economic
  Theory, 64, 253­264.

Stahl, K. and R. Strausz (2017): "Certification and market transparency," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 84, 1842­1868.

Taylor, C. R. (2004): "Consumer privacy and the market for customer information," RAND
  Journal of Economics, 631­650.

Thisse, J.-F. and X. Vives (1988): "On The Strategic Choice of Spatial Price Policy," The
  American Economic Review, 78, 122­137.

Verrecchia, R. E. (1983): "Discretionary disclosure," Journal of accounting and economics,
  5, 179­194.

Villas-Boas, J. M. (2004): "Price Cycles in Markets with Customer Recognition," The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 35, 486­501.

Wallheimer, B. (2018): "Are you ready for personalized pricing?" Chicago Booth Review.




A     Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1 on p. 14. Consider an equilibrium. Let T    ~ be the set of types
that in equilibrium send the non-disclosure message, T . Thus, every type in T \T~ sends
a message that fully reveals itself. Sequential rationality demands that the monopolist
charges a price of v (t) to every such type, leading to an interim payoff of 0. We prove
below that the non-disclosure message must induce a price that is no less than p .

                                             29
                                                             ~ that is strictly less than p .
    Suppose towards a contradiction that it leads to a price p
In equilibrium, if v (t) > p
                           ~, the consumer must be sending the non-disclosure message T
(because sending the message {t} leads to a payoff of 0). Therefore, in equilibrium,

                                         ~}  {t  T : v (t)  p }.
                      ~  {t  T : v (t) > p
                      T

By charging a price of p
                       ~, the firm's payoff is

                    ~µ({t  T
                    p      ~ : v (t)  p
                                      ~})  p
                                           ~µ({t  T : v (t)  p
                                                             ~})
                                            < p µ({t  T : v (t)  p })
                                            = p µ({t  T
                                                      ~ : v (t)  p }),

                                       ~  T , the strict inequality follows from p being
where the weak inequality follows from T
the (lowest) optimal price, and the equality follows from {t  T : v (t)  p }  T         ~.
Therefore, the monopolist gains from profitably deviating from charging p  ~ to a price of
 
p when facing the non-disclosure measure, thereby rendering a contradiction.            

Proof of Proposition 2 on p. 15. We augment the description of the strategy-profile with
the off-path belief system where when the seller receives an off-path message M            /
(s=1,...,S Ms )  M , she puts probability 1 on a type in M with the highest valuation
(i.e. a type in arg maxtM v (t)), and charges a price equal to that valuation.
     Observe that the seller has no incentive to deviate from this strategy-profile because
for each (on- or off-path) message, the price that he is prescribed to charge in equilibrium
is her optimal price given the beliefs that are induced by that message.
     We consider whether the consumer has a strictly profitable deviation. Let us consider
on-path messages first. Consider a consumer type t that is prescribed to send message
Ms where ps < v (t)  ps-1 . Sending any message of the form Ms where s < s results
in a higher price and therefore is not a profitable deviation. All messages of the form
Ms where s > s are infeasible because t        / Ms for any s > s. Finally, if the type
t is such that she is prescribed to send message M , her equilibrium payoff is 0, and
sending any other message results in a weakly higher price. Thus, the consumer has no
profitable deviation to any other on-path message. There is also no profitable deviation
to any off-path message: because for any set M that contains t, v (t)  maxt M v (t ),
any off-path message is guaranteed to result in a payoff of 0.                             

Proof of Proposition 3 on p. 17. Consider an equilibrium  . Let m (t) denote the mes-
                              
sage reported by type t, let Fm  [0, 1] denote the firm's belief when receiving message



                                             30
m and t (m) be the lowest type in the support of that belief, and let p (m) be the sequen-
tially rational price that he charges. In any equilibrium, p (m)  t (m), because other-
wise the firm has a profitable deviation. We say that a message is an equilibrium-path
message if there exists at least one type that sends it, and a price is an equilibrium-path
price if there exists at least one equilibrium-path message that induces the firm to charge
that price.
Lemma 1 (Efficiency Lemma). For any equilibrium  , there exists an equilibrium that
is efficient that results in the same payoff for every consumer type.

Proof. Consider an equilibrium  . Define a strategy profile ~ in which
                                   
                                   m (t) if v (t)  p (m (t)),
                          m~
                             (t) =
                                   {t}   otherwise,
                         p~
                            (m) = p (m).

In this disclosure strategy profile, a consumer-type that doesn't buy in equilibrium  is
fully revealing herself in ~ . Because  is an equilibrium, and the pricing strategy remains
unchanged, such a type purchases in       ~ at price v , and thus, efficiency is guaranteed
without a change in payoffs.
    We argue that   ~ is an equilibrium. Note that because  is an equilibrium, and we
have not changed the price for any message, no consumer-type has a motive to deviate.
We also argue that the monopolist has no incentive to change prices. Because p (m) is
an optimal price for the firm to charge in the equilibrium  when receiving message m,

                   p (m)(1 - Fm
                               
                                (p (m)))  p(1 - Fm
                                                 
                                                   (p)) for every p.                    (1)

After receiving message m in   ~ , the monopolist's payoff from setting a price of p~
                                                                                      (m) is
 ~         
p (m) = p (m) (because that price is accepted for sure), and the payoff from setting a
higher price is p(1 - Fm
                       ~
                         (p)). But observe that by Baye's Rule, for every p  p   ~
                                                                                   (m),

                                               1 - Fm
                                                      (p)
                              1 - Fm
                                   ~
                                     (p) =                  .
                                             1 - Fm (p (m))
                                                      



Thus (1) implies that p ~
                          (m)  p(1 - Fm    ~
                                           
                                             (p)) for every p > p~
                                                                   (m), and clearly the
                                                     ~
monopolist has no incentive to reduce prices below p (m). Therefore, the monopolist has
no motive to deviate.




                                             31
Lemma 2 (Partitional Lemma). For every efficient equilibrium  , there exists a parti-
tional equilibrium ~ that results in the same payoff for almost every type.

Proof. In an efficient equilibrium  , trade occurs with probability 1. Therefore, for every
equilibrium-path message, m, the price charged by the monopolist after that message,
p (m), must be no more than the lowest type in the support of his beliefs after receiving
message m, t (m) (recall that v (t) = t). Sequential rationality of the monopolist demands
that p (m) is at least t (m) (because charging strictly below can always be improved),
and therefore, in an efficient equilibrium, p (m) = t (m).
Step 1: We first prove that the set of types being charged an equilibrium-path price
p is a connected set. Suppose that types t and t > t are sending (possibly distinct)
equilibrium-path messages m and m such that p (m) = p (m ). Because p (m) = t (m)
and p (m ) = t (m ), it follows that t (m) = v  (m ) < v < v  . Because types arbitrarily
close to t (m ) and v  are both sending the message m , the message m contains the
interval [t (m ), t ].
    Consider any type t in [t, t ]: because [t, t ]  [t (m ), v  ]  m , it follows that m
is a feasible message for type t . Therefore, denoting m as the equilibrium-path message
of type t , type t does not have a profitable deviation to sending message m only if
p (m )  p (m).
    We argue that this weak inequality holds as an equality. Suppose towards a con-
tradiction that p (m ) < p (m). Then it follows from p (m ) = t (m ) that t (m ) <
t (m)  t  t . Therefore, the interval [t (m ), t ] is both a subset of m and contains
t, and hence, m is a feasible message for type t. But then, type t has an incentive to
deviate from her equilibrium-path message m to m , which is a contradiction.
Step 2: For every equilibrium-path price p, let

        M  (p)  {m  M : p (m) = p and m is an equilibrium-path message},
         T  (p)  {t : p (m (t)) = p}.

Observe that for every message m in M  (p), the monopolist's optimal price is p. Because
the monopolist's payoff from charging any price is linear in his beliefs, and the belief
induced by knowing that the type is in T  (p) is a convex combination of beliefs in the
   
set mM  (p) {F  (m)}, it follows that the monopolist's optimal price remains p when all
he knows is that the type is in T  (p).
   Now consider the collection of sets

          P   {m  M : m = cl(T  (p)) for some equilibrium-path price p},

                                            32
where cl(·) is the closure of a set. We argue that P  is a partition of [v, v ]: clearly,
         
[v, v ]  mP  m, and because each of T  (p) and T  (p ) are connected for equilibrium-
                                  
path prices p and p , cl(T  (p)) cl(T  (p )) is at most a singleton.
                                  ~ where each type t sends the message mP (t). Fix such a
                                                                              
     Consider a strategy-profile 
message m generated by     ~ ; there exists a price p that is on the equilibrium path (in the
equilibrium  ) such that m = cl(T  (p)). Because the prior is atomless, the monopolist's
optimal price when receiving message m in        ~ is equivalent to setting the optimal price
                                        
when knowing that the type is in T (p), which as established above, is p. If any other
message m = [a, b] is reported, the monopolist believes that the consumer's type is b with
probability 1.
     We argue that this is an equilibrium. We first consider deviations to other messages
that are equilibrium-path for    ~ . For any type t such that there exists a unique element
in P  that contains t, there exists no other feasible message that is an equilibrium-path
             ~ . For any other type t, the strategy of sending the message mP (t) ensures
                                                                                 
message for 
that type t is sending the equilibrium-path message that induces the lower price. Finally,
no type gains from sending an off-path message. Observe that all but a measure-0 set of
types are charged the same price in     ~ as they are in  .                                

Proof of Proposition 4 on p. 18. Since all partitional equilibria involve trade with prob-
ability 1, a partitional equilibrium  has higher ex ante consumer welfare than the par-
titional equilibrium  ~ if the average price in  is lower than that in ~:
                                  1                      1
                                      p (m (t))dt 
                                          
                                                             p~
                                                                (m~
                                                                    (t))dt.
                              0                      0


Thus, it suffices to prove that the greedy segmentation attains the lowest average price
attainable by any partitional equilibrium.
      We first describe the greedy segmentation. For a truncation of valuations [0, v ] where
v  1, let p(v ) solve pf (p) = F (v ) - F (p), which implies that p(v ) =  k
                                                                             v
                                                                                 ; let us denote
                                                                             k+1
the denominator of p(v ) by  , and note that  > 1. The greedy   [   segmentation
                                                                         ]           divides the
                                           
[0, 1] interval into sets of the form {0} =0 S where S   1             1
                                                                  +1 ,   .

      We prove that no partitional equilibrium generates a lower average price on the seg-
ment S than  1        . Consider an arbitrary   0. Consider dividing S into two segments
[          ]     ( +1 ]                 (         )
   
    1
    +1 , v
         ~   and  ~
                  v , 
                      1
                         for some  v
                                   ~      
                                           1
                                           +1 , 
                                                1
                                                    . The higher segment is charged v    ~. The
                                                              v
                                                              ~
lowest possible price that the lower segment is charged is  , which is achieved if all types




                                                33
     [      ]
         v
         ~
in       
           ,v
            ~   send the same message. The resulting average price in the segment S is

                                                       v
                                                       ~
                            v ) (F (~
                         ¯ (~
                         P            v ) - F (1/ +1 )) + (F (1/  ) - F (~
                                                                         v ))~
                                                                             v
                                                       
                                                  v
                                                  ~
                                  v k -  -k(+1) ) + ( -k - v
                                =(~                           ~k )~
                                                                  v
                                                 

where the first equality substitutes F (v ) = v k . Taking derivatives,

                                    ¯                   (       )
                                 d2 P                       1
                                                 ~k-1
                                      = (k + 1)k v            -1 <0
                                  ~2
                                 dv                         

where the inequality follows from  > 1. Therefore, P   ¯ is concave in v~. The boundary
condition that P¯ ( - ) = P¯ ( -(+1) ) =  -(+1) coupled with concavity of P ¯ implies that
                              (          )
P   v )   -(+1) for every v
 ¯ (~                     ~   1        1
                                 +1 ,   . Therefore, no partitional equilibrium generates

a lower average price than  -(+1) for the set of types in S . Because the greedy seg-
mentation attains this lowerbound pointwise on every interval S for every , it is the
consumer-optimal partitional equilibrium.                                          

Proof of Proposition 5 on p. 21. Given a message M , let  (i, M )  arg mintM |t - i |
denote the closest type in M to seller i; this type is well-defined because M is closed.
Let t denote the degenerate probability distribution that places probability 1 on type t.
We use this notation to construct a fully revealing equilibrium:

     · The consumer of type t always sends message {t}.
     · If seller i receives message M , his beliefs are  (i,M ) and that the other seller has
       received a fully revealing message.
     · If seller i holds belief  (i,M ) , he charges a price pi (M ) = max{2 (i, M )i , 0}.
     · If V - pi - |t - i | > V - pj - |t - j | and V - pi - |t - i |  0, then the consumer
       purchases from firm i.
     · If V - pL - |t - L | = V - pR - |t - R |  0, the consumer purchases from firm L
       if and only if t  0, and otherwise, the consumer purchases from firm R.

We argue that this is an equilibrium. Observe that each seller's on-path beliefs are
consistent with Bayes rule, since t =  (i, {t}). In the case of an off-path message M ,
Bayes rule does not restrict the set of possible beliefs, and therefore, the above off-path
belief assessment is feasible.
    To see that each firm does not wish to deviate from charging the above prices, suppose
that firm i receives message M . He believes with probability 1 (on or off-path) that the
consumer's type is  (i, M ) with probability 1 and that the other firm j has received a

                                                  34
message { (i, M )}. Denote this type by t. If 2ti > 0 then the consumer is closer in
location to firm i and therefore 2tj < 0. In this case, firm i believes that firm j is charging
a price of 0. Charging a price strictly higher than 2ti leads to a payoff of 0 (because
the consumer will reject such an offer and purchase instead from the other firm), and
charging a price p weakly below 2ti leads to a payoff of p (because the consumer always
breaks ties in favor of the closer firm). Therefore, firm i has no incentive to deviate. If
2ti  0, then the consumer is located closer to the other firm j and is being charged a
price equal to 2tj . In this case, charging any strictly positive price leads to a payoff of 0
(because the consumer will purchase the good from the other firm). Therefore, in either
case, firm i has no incentive to deviate.
    Finally, we argue that the consumer has no incentive to deviate. By sending a fully
revealing message, {t}, the consumer obtains an equilibrium payoff of V - (|t| + 1). If
t  0, the consumer obtains a price of 0 from firm R, which is the lowest possible price.
Therefore, there is no incentive to send any other message to firm R. Sending any other
message M  M (t) to firm L induces a weakly higher price because for any feasible
message M  M (t),  (L, M )  t, and therefore, 2 (L, M )L  2tL . Thus, the consumer
has no strictly profitable deviation from sending any other message M  M (t) to firm
L. An analogous argument implies that if the consumer's type is t > 0, she also does not
gain from deviating to any other feasible disclosure strategy.
                                                                                             

Proof of Proposition 6 on p. 22. We first show given the pricing strategies that the con-
sumer has no incentive to deviate.
    Consider a consumer type t such that t  (tL                R                                 i
                                                          1 , t1 ), or in other words, ti < t1 i .
The equilibrium strategies are that the consumer sends the message {t} to each firm.
Given these equilibrium strategies, the consumer is quoted a price of max{2ti , 0} by
firm i. If the consumer deviates and sends message [-1, 1] to firm i, she induces a price
of pi      i
    1 = 2t1 i , which is strictly higher. Therefore, this deviation is not strictly profitable.
    Now suppose that ti  ti     1 i . The equilibrium strategies are that the consumer sends
message [-1, 1] to firm i and {t} to firm j . Because the consumer, in equilibrium, is
quoted a price of 0 by firm j , sending the other message cannot lower that price. Given
the equilibrium message, the consumer is quoted a price of 2ti          1 i by firm i, and deviating
leads to a weakly higher price of 2ti . Therefore, this deviation is not strictly profitable.
    We now consider whether firm i has an incentive to deviate. It follows from the proof
of Proposition 5 that the prices are optimal whenever firm i receives an (equilibrium-
path) message of {t} for t  (tL        R
                                  1 , t1 ). An identical argument applies when firm i receives
an (off-path) message of {t} for ti  ti        1 i : in this case, firm i believes that firm j is


                                                35
charging a price of 0, and thus, the optimal price is 2ti (because the consumer always
breaks ties in favor of firm i). When firm i receives an (equilibrium-path) message of
{t} for tj  tj                                                            j
               1 j , firm i believes that firm j is charging a price of 2t1 . The equilibrium
prescribes that firm i charges a price of 0, which leads to a payoff of 0 (because the
consumer breaks ties in favor of firm j ), and any strictly positive price also leads to a
payoff of 0. Finally, consider the case when firm i receives an (equilibrium-path) message
of [-1, 1]. Firm i infers that ti  ti  1 i and believes that firm j is charging a price of 0.
           i
Because p1 is, by definition, a profit-maximizing price in response to a price of 0, firm i
has no strictly profitable deviation.                                                       

Proof of Proposition 7 on p. 23. We use an off-path belief system where if firm i receives
an off-path message M , she holds degenerate beliefs  (i,M ) that put probability 1 on type
 (i, M ) where recall that  (i, M ) is defined as the type in M that is located closest to
firm i (this was defined in the proof of Proposition 5). Given such beliefs, the firm charges
a price pi (M ) = max{2 (i, M )i , 0} for an off-path message M .
    First, we prove that given the pricing strategies, no consumer has an incentive to
deviate. Consider a consumer type t such that ti     s i < ti  ts-1 i for some s = 1, 2, . . ..
                                                                   i

                                                   i
Such a consumer should be sending message Ms          to both firms. Such a message induces
                                i     i
a price of 0 from firm j and ps = 2ts i from firm i. No message can induce a lower price
from firm j . Therefore, any strictly profitable deviation must induce a strictly lower price
from firm i. We show that this is not possible.
    We first argue that the consumer does not have a profitable deviation to any other
equilibrium-path message. Suppose that ti < ti                                    i
                                                        s-1 i . In this case, Ms is the only
equilibrium-path message that type t can send to firm i. If ti = ti     s-1 i , then type t can
send either message Ms or Ms-1 but because ps  ps-1 , this is not a strictly profitable
                         i       i                 i      i

deviation.
    We now argue that the consumer does not have a profitable deviation to any off-path
message. Any feasible message M  M(t) satisfies the property that the closest type in
M to firm i is at least as close as t to firm i; or formally: ti   (i, M )i . In that case,
the price that the consumer is charged is 2 (i, M )i  2ti > 2ti             i
                                                                     s i = ps . Therefore, this
deviation is not strictly profitable.
    Finally, we argue that the firms have no incentive to deviate in their pricing strategies.
For any equilibrium-path message, the prices charged by firms are (by construction) equi-
librium prices. For any off-path message M , each firm assumes that the consumer sent
the equilibrium-path message to the other firm. If  (i, M )i > 0 then firm i assumes that
firm j is charging a price of 0, and then charging a price of 2 (i, M )i is a best-response
(assuming that the consumer breaks ties in favor of the closer firm). If  (i, M )i  0,

                                              36
then firm i believes that the consumer is being charged a price pj  s by firm j for some s
where ts i <  (i, M )i  ts-1 i . Because the consumer breaks ties in favor of the closer
         i                  i

firm, firm i anticipates that the consumer will reject any strictly positive price.     

Proof of Proposition 8 on p. 25. We show that p > pi
                                                   1 for every i. Observe that


                                     2F (-pL1 /2)   2F (0)
                              pL
                               1 =                <        = p
                                      f (-p1 /2)
                                           L
                                                     f (0)

where the first equality follows from the first-order condition that pL  1 solves, the inequal-
ity follows from F being strictly log-concave, and the second equality follows from the
definition of p . A symmetric argument shows that pR     1 < p .
                                                                

     Now we prove that all consumers are better off in the equilibrium we construct in the
game with simple evidence (Proposition 6). All types where ti  ti           1 i are buying the
                                        
good at a lower price because p1 < p . Consider any other type, i.e., where ti < ti
                                   i
                                                                                         1 i for
every i  {L, R}. Suppose that ti > 0. That type in equilibrium buys the good from
firm i at the price 2ti < 2ti                    i
                             1 i , which equals p1 . Therefore, it obtains the good at a lower
price than p . Finally, if t = 0, that type obtains the good at a price equal to 0.
     An analogous argument ranks prices relative to the equilibrium constructed in the
game with rich evidence (Proposition 7). All types in that equilibrium pay a price that
                                                                         
is less than pi
              1 , and therefore, buy the good at a price lower than p .
                                                                                              




                                              37
