                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ECONOMETRICS FOR DECISION MAKING:
         BUILDING FOUNDATIONS SKETCHED BY HAAVELMO AND WALD

                                      Charles F. Manski

                                     Working Paper 26596
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26596


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




This paper provides the source material for my Haavelmo Lecture at the University of Oslo,
December 3, 2019. Earlier drafts were circulated under the title "Statistical Inference for
Statistical Decisions." I am grateful to Olav Bjerkholt, Ivan Canay, Gary Chamberlain, Kei
Hirano, Joel Horowitz, Valentyn Litvin, Bruce Spencer, and Alex Tetenov for comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2019 by Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including 
notice, is given to the source.
Econometrics For Decision Making: Building Foundations Sketched By Haavelmo And Wald
Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 26596
December 2019
JEL No. B23,C1,C5

                                            ABSTRACT

In the early 1940s, Haavelmo proposed a probabilistic structure for econometric modeling,
aiming to make econometrics useful for public decision making. His fundamental contribution
has become thoroughly embedded in subsequent econometric research, yet it could not fully
answer all the deep issues that the author raised. Notably, Haavelmo struggled to formalize the
implications for decision making of the fact that models can at most approximate actuality. In the
same period, Wald initiated his own seminal development of statistical decision theory.
Haavelmo favorably cited Wald, but econometrics subsequently did not embrace statistical
decision theory. Instead, it focused on study of identification, estimation, and statistical inference.
This paper proposes statistical decision theory as a framework for evaluation of the performance
of models in decision making. I particularly consider the common practice of as-if optimization:
specification of a model, point estimation of its parameters, and use of the point estimate to make
a decision that would be optimal if the estimate were accurate. A central theme is that one should
evaluate as-if optimization or any other model-based decision rule by its performance across the
state space, not the model space. I use prediction and treatment choice to illustrate. Statistical
decision theory is conceptually simple, but application is often challenging. Advancement of
computation is the primary task to continue building the foundations sketched by Haavelmo and
Wald.


Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu
                                                       1


1. Introduction: Joining Haavelmo and Wald



        Early in the modern development of econometrics, Trygve Haavelmo compared astronomy and

planning to differentiate two objectives for econometric modeling: to advance science and to inform

decision making. He wrote (Haavelmo, 1943, p. 10):

        "The economist may have two different purposes in mind when he constructs a model . . . . First,
        he may consider himself in the same position as an astronomer; he cannot interfere with the actual
        course of events. So he sets up the system . . . . as a tentative description of the economy. If he finds
        that it fits the past, he hopes that it will fit the future. On that basis he wants to make predictions,
        assuming that no one will interfere with the game. Next, he may consider himself as having the
        power to change certain aspects of the economy in the future. If then the system . . . . has worked
        in the past, he may be interested in knowing it as an aid in judging the effect of his intended future
        planning, because he thinks that certain elements of the old system will remain invariant."
Jacob Marschak, supporting Haavelmo's work, made a related distinction between meteorological and

engineering types of econometric inference; see Bjerkholt (2010) and Marschak and Andrews (1944).

        Comparing astronomy and planning provides a nice metaphor for two branches of econometrics.

In 1943, before the advent of space flight, an astronomer might model a solar system or galaxy to advance

physical science, but the effort could have no practical impact on decision making. An economist might

similarly model a local or national economy to advance social science. However, an economist might also

model to inform society about the consequences of contemplated public or private decisions that would

change aspects of the economy.

        Haavelmo's seminal doctoral thesis (Haavelmo, 1944), initiated when he worked as an assistant to

Ragnar Frisch, proposed a formal probabilistic structure for econometric modeling that aimed to make

econometrics useful for public decision making. To conclude, he wrote (p. 114-115):

        "In other quantitative sciences the discovery of "laws," even in highly specialized fields, has moved
        from the private study into huge scientific laboratories where scores of experts are engaged, not
        only in carrying out actual measurements, but also in working out, with painstaking precision, the
        formulae to be tested and the plans for crucial experiments to be made. Should we expect less in
                                                      2


        economic research, if its results are to be the basis for economic policy upon which might depend
        billions of dollars of national income and the general economic welfare of millions of people?"
Haavelmo's thesis made fundamental contributions that became thoroughly embedded in subsequent

econometric research. Nevertheless, it is unsurprising to find that it did not fully answer all the deep issues

that the author raised. Notably, Haavelmo struggled to formalize the implications for decision making of

the fact that models can at most seek to approximate actuality. He called attention to the broad issue in his

opening chapters on "Abstract Models and Reality" and "The Degree of Permanence of Economic Laws,"

but the later chapters did not resolve the matter.

        Haavelmo devoted a long chapter to "The Testing of Hypotheses," expositing the then recent work

of Neyman-Pearson and considering its potential use to evaluate the consistency of models with observed

sample data. Testing models subsequently became widespread in economics, both as a topic of study in

econometric theory and as a practice in empirical research. However, Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing

does not provide satisfactory guidance for decision making. See Section 2.3 below.

        While Haavelmo was writing his thesis, Abraham Wald was initiating his own seminal

development of statistical decision theory in Wald (1939, 1945) and elsewhere, which later culminated in

his own treatise (Wald, 1950). Wald's work has broad potential application. Indeed, it implicitly provides

an appealing formal framework for evaluation of the use of models in decision making. I say that Wald

"implicitly" provides this framework because, writing in an abstract mathematical manner, he appears not

to have explicitly examined decision making with models. Yet it is conceptually straightforward to use

statistical decision theory in this way. Explaining this motivates the present paper.

        I find it intriguing to join the contributions of Haavelmo and Wald because these pioneering

econometrician and statistician interacted to a considerable degree in the United States during the wartime

period when both were developing their ideas. Wald came to the U.S. in 1938 as a refugee from Austria.

Haavelmo did so in 1939 for what was intended to be a short-term professional visit, but which lasted the

entire war when he was unable to return to occupied Norway. Bjerkholt (2007, 2015), in biographical essays

on Haavelmo's period in the United States, describes the many interactions of Haavelmo and Wald, not
                                                      3


only at professional conferences but also in hiking expeditions in Colorado and Maine. Bjerkholt observes

that Haavelmo visited Neyman as well, the latter being in Berkeley by then.

        Haavelmo's appreciation of Wald is clear. In the preface of Haavelmo (1944), he wrote (p. v):

        "My most sincere thanks are due to Professor Abraham Wald of Columbia University for numerous
        suggestions and for help on many points in preparing the manuscript. Upon his unique knowledge
        of modern statistical theory and mathematics in general I have drawn very heavily. Many of the
        statistical sections in this study have been formulated, and others have been reformulated, after
        discussions with him."
The text of the thesis cites several of Wald's papers. Most relevant is the final chapter on "Problems of

Prediction," where Haavelmo suggests application of the framework in Wald (1939) to choose a predictor

of a future random outcome. I discuss this in Section 3.3 below.

        Despite Haavelmo's favorable citations of Wald=s ideas, econometrics in the period following

publication of Haavelmo (1944) did not embrace statistical decision theory. Instead, it focused on study of

identification, estimation, and statistical inference. None of the contributions in the seminal Cowles

Monograph 10 (Koopmans, 1950) mentions statistical decision theory. Only one does so briefly in Cowles

Monograph 14 (Hood and Koopmans, 1953). This appears in a chapter by Koopmans and Hood (1953),

who refer to estimates of structural parameters as "raw materials, to be processed further into solutions of

a wide variety of prediction problems." See Section 3.3 for further discussion.

        Modern econometricians continue to view parameter estimates as "raw materials" that may be used

to solve prediction and other decision problems. A widespread practice has been as-if optimization:

specification of a model, point estimation of its parameters, and use of the point estimate to make a decision

that would be optimal if the estimate were accurate. As-if optimization has heuristic appeal, but econometric

theory has not provided a well-grounded mechanism to evaluate its performance in decision making.

Statistical decision theory does so.

        Beginning in Manski (2000, 2004) and then in a sequence of subsequent articles, I have argued that

econometrics can and should make productive use of statistical decision theory. Until now, I have not
                                                      4


specifically addressed the potential use of statistical decision theory to evaluate the performance of as-if

optimization and other applications of econometric models in decision making. This paper does so.

        Section 2 reviews the core elements of statistical decision theory and uses choice between two

actions to illustrate. The basic idea is simple, although it may be challenging to implement. One specifies a

state space, listing all the states of nature that one believes feasible. One considers alternative statistical

decision functions (SDFs), which map potentially observed data into decisions. One evaluates an SDF in

each state of nature ex ante, by its mean performance across repeated samples. The true state of nature is

not known. Hence, one evaluates the performance of an SDF across all the elements of the state space.

Three decision criteria have drawn much attention: maximization of subjective expected welfare (aka

minimization of Bayes risk), the maximin criterion, and the minimax-regret criterion.

        Section 3 shows how the Wald framework may be used to evaluate decision making with models.

One specifies a model space, which simplifies or approximates the state space in some manner. A model-

based decision uses the model space as if it were the state space. I particularly consider the use of models

to perform as-if optimization. A central theme is that one should evaluate as-if optimization or any other

model-based decision rule by its performance across the state space, not the model space. I use prediction

of a real-valued outcome to illustrate.

        To illustrate further, Section 4 considers use of the empirical success (ES) rule in treatment choice.

Recent econometric research has shown that this application of as-if optimization is well-grounded in

statistical decision theory when the data are generated by an ideal randomized trial; see Manski (2004),

Hirano and Porter (2009, 2019), Stoye (2009, 2012), Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019), and Kitagawa and

Tetenov (2018). When the ES rule is used with observational data, it exemplifies a controversial modeling

practice, wherein one assumes without good justification that realized treatments are statistically

independent of treatment response. Decision-theoretic analysis shows when use of the ES rule with

observational data does and does not yield desirable treatment choices.
                                                       5


        Although statistical decision theory is conceptually simple, application is computationally

challenging in many contexts. Section 5 cites advancement of computation as the primary task to continue

building the foundations sketched by Haavelmo and Wald.




2. Statistical Decision Theory: Concepts and Practicalities



        The Wald development of statistical decision theory directly addresses decision making with

sample data. Wald began with the standard decision theoretic problem of a planner (equivalently, decision

maker or agent) who must choose an action yielding welfare that depends on an unknown state of nature.

The planner specifies a state space listing the states that he considers possible. He must choose an action

without knowing the true state.

        Wald added to this standard problem by supposing that the planner observes sample data that may

be informative about the true state. He studied choice of a statistical decision function (SDF), which maps

each potential data realization into a feasible action. He proposed evaluation of SDFs as procedures, chosen

prior to observation of the data, specifying how a planner would use whatever data may be realized. Thus,

Wald=s theory is frequentist.

        I describe general decision problems without sample data in Section 2.1 and with such data in

Section 2.2. Section 2.3 examines the important special case of decisions that choose between two actions.

Section 2.4 discusses the practical issues that challenge application of statistical decision theory.



2.1. Decisions Under Uncertainty



        Consider a planner who must choose an action yielding welfare that varies with the state of nature.

The planner has an objective function and beliefs about the true state. These are considered primitives. He

must choose an action without knowing the true state.
                                                       6


        Formally, the planner faces choice set C and believes that the true state lies in set S, called the state

space. The objective function w(, ): C     S  R1 maps actions and states into welfare. The planner ideally

would maximize w(, s*), where s* is the true state. However, he only knows that s*  S.

        The choice set is commonly considered to be predetermined. The welfare function and the state

space are subjective. The former formalizes what the planner wants to achieve and the latter expresses the

states of nature he believes could possibly occur.

        As far as I am aware, Wald did not address how a planner might formalize a welfare function and

state space in practice. I find it interesting to mention that Frisch proposed late in his career that

econometricians wanting to help planners make policy decisions might perform what is now called stated-

preference elicitation; see, for example, Ben-Akiva, McFadden, and Train (2019). In a lecture titled

"Cooperation between Politicians and Econometricians on the Formalization of Political Preferences,"

Frisch (1971) proposed that an econometrician could elicit the "preference function" of a politician by

posing a sequence of hypothetical policy-choice scenarios and asking the politician to choose between the

policy options specified in each scenario.

        While the state space ultimately is subjective, its structure may use observed data that are

informative about features of the true state. This idea is central to econometric analysis of identification.

Haavelmo's formalization of econometrics initially considers the state space to be a set of probability

distributions that one thinks may possibly describe the economic system under study. The Koopmans (1949)

formalization of identification contemplates unlimited data collection that enables one to shrink the state

space, eliminating distributions that are inconsistent with the information revealed by observation.

Koopmans put it this way (p. 132):

        "we shall base our discussion on a hypothetical knowledge of the probability distribution of the
        observations . . . . Such knowledge is the limit approachable but not attainable by extended
        observation. By hypothesizing nevertheless the full availability of such knowledge, we obtain a
        clear separation between problems of statistical inference arising from the variability of finite
        samples, and problems of identification in which we explore the limits to which inference even
        from an infinite number of observations is suspect."
                                                       7


In modern econometric language, the true state of nature is point identified if the contemplated

observational process eliminates all but one probability distribution for the economic system. It is partially

identified if observation eliminates some but not all the distributions initially deemed possible.

        Given a welfare function and state space, a close to universally accepted prescription for decision

making is that choice should respect dominance. Action c  C is weakly dominated if there exists a d  C

such that w(d, s)  w(c, s) for all s  S and w(d, s) > w(c, s) for some s  S. Even though the true state s* is

unknown, choice of d is certain to weakly improve on choice of c.

        There is no clearly best way to choose among undominated actions, but decision theorists have not

wanted to abandon the idea of optimization. So they have proposed various ways of using the objective

function w(A, ) to form functions of actions alone, which can be optimized. In principle one should only

consider undominated actions, but it may be difficult to determine which actions are undominated. Hence,

it is common to optimize over the full set of feasible actions. I define decision criteria accordingly in this

paper. I also use max and min notation, without concern for the mathematical subtleties that sometime make

it necessary to suffice with sup and inf operations.

        One broad idea is to place a subjective probability distribution on the state space, average state-

dependent welfare with respect to this distribution and maximize the resulting function. This yields

maximization of subjective average welfare. Let  be the specified distribution on S. For each feasible

action c, w(c, s)d is the mean of w(c, s) with respect to . The criterion solves the problem



(1)   max w(c, s)d.
       cC



        Another broad idea is to seek an action that, in some well-defined sense, works uniformly well over

all elements of S. This yields the maximin and minimax-regret (MMR) criteria. The maximin criterion

maximizes the minimum welfare attainable across the elements of S. For each feasible action c, consider

the minimum feasible value of w(c, s); that is, min s  S w(c, s). A maximin rule chooses an action that solves

the problem
                                                         8




(2)       max     min    w(c, s).
          cC      sS



        The MMR criterion chooses an action that minimizes the maximum loss to welfare that can result

from not knowing the true state. An MMR choice solves the problem



(3)    min max [max w(d, s) - w(c, s)].
      cC sS         dC


Here max d  C w(d, s) - w(c, s) is the regret of action c in state of nature s; that is, the welfare loss associated

with choice of c relative to an action that maximizes welfare in state s. The true state being unknown, one

evaluates c by its maximum regret over all states and selects an action that minimizes maximum regret. The

maximum regret of an action measures its maximum distance from optimality across all states. Hence, an

MMR choice is uniformly nearest to optimal among all feasible actions.

        A planner who asserts a partial subjective distribution on the states of nature could maximize

minimum subjective average welfare or minimize maximum average regret. These hybrid criteria combine

elements of averaging across states and concern with uniform performance across states. Hybrid criteria

have drawn attention in decision theory. However, I will confine discussion to the polar cases in which the

planner asserts a complete subjective distribution or none.



2.2. Statistical Decision Problems



        Statistical decision problems add to the above structure by supposing that the planner observes

finite-sample data generated by some sampling distribution. Sample data may be informative but, unlike

the unlimited data contemplated in identification analysis, they do not enable one to shrink the state space.

        In practice, knowledge of the sampling distribution is generally incomplete. To express this, one

extends the concept of the state space S to list the set of feasible sampling distributions, denoted (Qs, s 
                                                        9


S). Let s denote the sample space in state s; that is, s is the set of samples that may be drawn under

sampling distribution Qs. The literature typically assumes that the sample space does not vary with s and is

known. I maintain this assumption and denote the known sample space as , without the s subscript. Then

a statistical decision function c(@):   C maps the sample data into a chosen action.

          Wald's concept of a statistical decision function embraces all mappings of the form [data  action].

An SDF need not perform inference; that is, it need not use data to draw conclusions about the true state of

nature. None of the prominent decision criteria that have been studied from Wald=s perspective -- maximin,

minimax-regret, and maximization of subjective average welfare -- refer to inference. The general absence

of inference in statistical decision theory is striking and has been noticed; see Neyman (1962) and Blyth

(1970).

          Although SDFs need not perform inference, some do so. That is, some have the sequential form

[data  inference  action], first performing some form of inference and then using the inference to make

a decision. There seems to be no accepted term for such SDFs, so I will call them inference-based.

          SDF c(@) is a deterministic function after realization of the sample data, but it is a random function

ex ante. Hence, the welfare achieved by c(@) is a random variable ex ante. Wald=s central idea was to evaluate

the performance of c(@) in state s by Qs{w[c(), s]}, the ex-ante distribution of welfare that it yields across

realizations  of the sampling process.

          It remains to ask how a planner might compare the welfare distributions yielded by different SDFs.

The planner wants to maximize welfare, so it seems self-evident that he should prefer SDF d(@) to c(@) in

state s if Qs{w[d(), s]} stochastically dominates Qs{w[c(), s]}. It is less obvious how he should compare

SDFs whose welfare distributions do not stochastically dominate one another.

          Wald proposed measurement of the performance of c(@) in state s by its expected welfare across

samples; that is, Es{w[c(), s]} / w[c(), s]dQs. An alternative that has drawn only slight attention is to

measure performance by quantile welfare (Manski and Tetenov, 2014). Writing in a context where one
                                                       10


wants to minimize loss rather than maximize welfare, Wald used the term risk to denote the mean

performance of an SDF across samples.

        In practice, one does not know the true state. Hence, one evaluates c(@) by the state-dependent

expected welfare vector (Es{w[c(), s]}, s  S). Using the term inadmissible to denote weak dominance

when evaluating performance by risk, Wald recommended elimination of inadmissible SDFs from

consideration. As in decision problems without sample data, there is no clearly best way to choose among

admissible SDFs. Ferguson (1967) nicely put it this way (p. 28):

        "It is a natural reaction to search for a `best' decision rule, a rule that has the smallest risk no matter
        what the true state of nature. Unfortunately, situations in which a best decision rule exists are rare
        and uninteresting. For each fixed state of nature there may be a best action for the statistician to
        take. However, this best action will differ, in general, for different states of nature, so that no one
        action can be presumed best overall."
He went on to write (p. 29): "A reasonable rule is one that is better than just guessing."

        Statistical decision theory has mainly studied the same decision criteria as has decision theory

without sample data. Let  be a specified set of feasible SDFs, each mapping   C. The statistical versions

of decision criteria (1), (2), and (3) are



(4)       max Es{w[c(), s]} d,
          c(@)  



(5)       max       min Es{w[c(), s]},
          c(@)      sS



(6)       min      max ( max w(d, s) - Es{w[c(), s]}).
         c(@)      sS    dC



I discuss these criteria below, focusing on (4) and (6).
                                                     11


2.2.1. Bayes Decisions

        Considering contexts where one wants to minimize loss rather than maximize welfare, research in

statistical decision theory often refers to criterion (4) as minimization of Bayes risk. This term may seem

odd given the absence of any reference in (4) to Bayesian inference. Criterion (4) simply places a subjective

distribution on the state space and optimizes the resulting subjective average welfare.

        Justification for use of the word Bayes when considering (4) rests on an important mathematical

result. When the set of feasible statistical decision functions is unconstrained and certain regularity

conditions hold, it follows from Fubini's Theorem that criterion (4) yields the same solution as is obtained

in conditional Bayes decision making. Conditional Bayes decision making calls on one to first perform

Bayesian inference, which uses the likelihood function for the observed data to transform the prior

distribution on the state space into a posterior distribution, without reference to a decision problem. One

then chooses an action that maximizes posterior subjective average welfare. It turns out that this sequential

procedure, applied to each possible data realization, solves Wald's problem of maximization of subjective

average welfare. See, for example, Berger (1985, Section 4.4.1).

        The equivalence of Wald's decision criterion (4) and conditional Bayes decisions holds under

specified conditions. Advocates of conditional Bayes decision making go beyond the mathematics. They

assert as a self-evident axiom that decision making should condition on observed data and should not

perform frequentist thought experiments that contemplate how statistical decision functions perform in

repeated sampling; see, for example, Berger (1985, Chapter 1).

        Considering the mathematical equivalence of minimization of Bayes risk and conditional Bayes

decisions, Berger asserts that that the conditional Bayes perspective is normatively "correct" and that the

Wald frequentist perspective is "bizarre." He states (p. 160):

        "Note that, from the conditional perspective together with the utility development of loss, the

        correct way to view the situation is that of minimizing ((|x), a). One should condition on what

        is known, namely x . . . . and average the utility over what is unknown, namely . The desire to

        minimize r(, ) would be deemed rather bizarre from this perspective."
                                                       12


In this passage, a is an action, x is data,  is a state of nature, (|x) is the posterior distribution on the state

space,  is posterior loss with choice of action a,  is a statistical decision function,  is the prior distribution

on the state space, and r(, ) is the Bayes risk of .

        I view Berger's normative statement to be overly enthusiastic for two distinct reasons. First, the

statement does not address how decisions should be made when part of the decision is choice of a procedure

for collection of data, as in experimental or sample design. Such decisions must be made ex ante, before

collecting the data. Hence, frequentist consideration of the performance of decision functions across

possible realizations of the data is inevitable. Berger recognizes this later, in his chapter on "Preposterior

and Sequential Analysis."

        Second, the Bayesian prescription for conditioning decision making on sample data presumes that

the planner feels able to place a credible subjective prior distribution on the state space. However, Bayesians

have long struggled to provide guidance on specification of priors and the matter continues to be

controversial. The controversy suggests that inability to express a credible prior is common in actual

decision settings.

        When one finds it difficult to assert a credible subjective distribution, Bayesians may suggest use

of some default distribution, variously called a "reference" or "conventional" or "objective" prior; see, for

example, Berger (2006). However, there is no consensus on the prior that should play this role. The chosen

prior matters for decision making.



2.2.2. Focus on Maximum Regret

        Concern with specification of priors motivated Wald (1950) to study the minimax criterion. He

wrote (p. 18): "a minimax solution seems, in general, to be a reasonable solution of the decision problem

when an a priori distribution . . . . does not exist or is unknown to the experimenter."

        I similarly am concerned with decision making in the absence of a subjective distribution on the

state space. However, I have mainly measured the performance of SDFs by maximum regret rather than by

minimum expected welfare. Practical and conceptual reasons motivate focus on maximum regret.
                                                      13


        From a practical perspective, it has been found that MMR decisions behave more reasonably than

do maximin ones in the important context of treatment choice. In common settings of treatment choice with

data from randomized trials, it has been found that the MMR rule is well approximated by the empirical

success rule, which chooses the treatment with the highest observed average outcome in the trial; see

Section 4 for further discussion. In contrast, the maximin criterion commonly ignores the trial data,

whatever they may be. This was recognized verbally by Savage (1951), who stated that the criterion is

"ultrapessimistic" and wrote (p. 63): "it can lead to the absurd conclusion in some cases that no amount of

relevant experimentation should deter the actor from behaving as though he were in complete ignorance."

Savage did not flesh out this statement, but it is easy to show that this occurs with trial data. Manski (2004)

provides a simple example.

        The conceptual appeal of using maximum regret to measure performance is that maximum regret

quantifies how lack of knowledge of the true state of nature diminishes the quality of decisions. While the

term "maximum regret" has become standard in the literature, this term is a shorthand for the maximum

sub-optimality of a decision criterion across the feasible states of nature. An SDF with small maximum

regret is uniformly near-optimal across all states. This is a desirable property.

        In a literature distinct from statistical decision theory, minimax regret has drawn diverse reactions

from axiomatic decision theorists. In a famous early critique, Chernoff (1954) observed that MMR

decisions are not always consistent with the choice axiom known as independence of irrelevant alternatives

(IIA). He considered this a serious deficiency, writing (p. 426):

        "A third objection which the author considers very serious is the following. In some examples, the
        min max regret criterion may select a strategy d3 among the available strategies d1, d2, d3, and d4.
        On the other hand, if for some reason d4 is made unavailable, the min max regret criterion will
        select d2 among d1, d2, and d3. The author feels that for a reasonable criterion the presence of an
        undesirable strategy d4 should not have an influence on the choice among the remaining strategies."
This passage is the totality of Chernoff's argument. He introspected and concluded that any reasonable

decision criterion should always adhere to the IIA axiom, but he did not explain why he felt this way.

Chernoff's view has been endorsed by some modern axiomatic decision theorists, such as Binmore (2009).
                                                      14


On the other hand, Sen (1993) argued that adherence to axioms such as IIA does not per se provide a sound

basis for evaluation of decision criteria. He asserted that consideration of the context of decision making is

essential.

        Manski (2011) also argues that adherence to the IIA axiom is not a virtue per se. What matters is

how violation of the axiom affects welfare. I observed that the MMR violation of the IIA axiom does not

yield choice of a dominated SDF. The MMR decision is always undominated when it is unique. There

generically exists an undominated MMR decision when the criterion has multiple solutions. Hence, I

concluded that violation of the IIA axiom is not a sound rationale to dismiss minimax regret.



2.3. Binary Choice Problems



        SDFs for binary choice problems are simple and interesting. They can always be viewed as

hypothesis tests. Yet the Wald perspective on testing differs considerably from that of Neyman-Pearson.

        Let choice set C contain two actions, say C = {a, b}. A SDF c() partitions  into two regions that

separate the data yielding choice of each action. These regions are c(@)a  [ 0 : c() = a] and c(@)b  [

0 : c() = b].

        A hypothesis test motivated by the choice problem partitions state space S into two regions, say Sa

and Sb, that separate the states in which actions a and b are uniquely optimal. Thus, Sa contains the states [s

 S: w(a, s) > w(b, s)] and Sb contains [s  S: w(b, s) > w(a, s)]. The choice problem does not provide a

rationale for allocation of states in which the two actions yield equal welfare. The standard practice in

testing is to give one action, say a, a privileged status and to place all states yielding equal welfare in Sa.

Then Sa  [s  S: w(a, s)  w(b, s)] and Sb  [s  S: w(b, s) > w(a, s)].

        In the language of hypothesis testing, SDF c() performs a test with acceptance regions c()a and

c()b. When   c()a, c() accepts the hypothesis {s  Sa} by setting c() = a. When   c()b, c() accepts
                                                        15


the hypothesis {s  Sb} by setting c() = b. I use the word "accepts" rather than the traditional term "does

not reject" because choice of a or b is an affirmative action.

        Although all SDFs for binary choice are interpretable as tests, Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing

and statistical decision theory evaluate tests in fundamentally different ways. Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2

contrast the two paradigms in general terms. Section 2.3.3 illustrates.



2.3.1. Neyman-Pearson Testing

        Let us review the basic practices of classical hypothesis testing, developed by Neyman and Pearson

(1928, 1933). These tests view the hypotheses {s  Sa} and {s  Sb} asymmetrically, calling the former the

null hypothesis and the latter the alternative. The sampling probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when

it is correct is called the probability of a Type I error. A longstanding convention has been to restrict

attention to tests in which the probability of a Type I error is no larger than a predetermined value , usually

0.05, for all s  Sa. In the notation of statistical decision theory, one restricts attentions to SDFs c() for

which Qs[c() = b]   for all s  Sa.

        Among tests that satisfy this restriction, Neyman-Pearson testing seeks ones that give small

probability of rejecting the alternative hypothesis when it is correct, the probability of a Type II error.

However, it generally is not possible to attain small probability of a Type II error for all s  Sb. Letting S

be a metric space, the probability of a Type II error typically approaches 1 -  as s  Sb nears the boundary

of Sa. See, for example, Manski and Tetenov (2016), Figure 1. Given this, the convention has been to restrict

attention to states in Sb that lie at least a specified distance from Sa.

        Let  be the metric measuring distance on S. Let a > 0 be the specified minimum distance from Sa.

In the notation of statistical decision theory, Neyman-Pearson testing seeks small values for the maximum

value of Qs[c() = a] over s  Sb s. t. (s, Sa)  a.
                                                        16


2.3.2. Expected Welfare of Tests

        Decision theoretic evaluation of tests does not restrict attention to tests that yield a predetermined

upper bound on the probability of a Type I error. Nor does it aim to minimize the maximum value of the

probability of a Type II error when more than a specified minimum distance from the null hypothesis.

Wald's central idea, for binary choice as elsewhere. is to evaluate the performance of SDF c() in state s by

the distribution of welfare that it yields across realizations of the sampling process. He first addressed

hypothesis testing this way in Wald (1939).

        The welfare distribution in state s in a binary choice problem is Bernoulli, with mass points max

[w(a, s), w(b, s)] and min [w(a, s), w(b, s)]. These mass points coincide if w(a, s) = w(b, s). When s is a

state where w(a, s)  w(b, s), let Rc()s denote the probability that c() yields an error, choosing the inferior

treatment over the superior one. That is,



(7)         Rc()s = Qs[c() = b] if w(a, s) > w(b, s),

                   = Qs[c() = a] if w(b, s) > w(a, s).



The former and latter are the probabilities of Type I and Type II errors. Whereas Neyman-Pearson testing

treats these error probabilities differently, statistical decision theory views them symmetrically.

        The probabilities that welfare equals max [w(a, s), w(b, s)] and min [w(a, s), w(b, s)] are 1 - Rc()s

and Rc()s. Hence, expected welfare in state s is



(8)       Es{w[c(), s]} = Rc()s{min [w(a, s), w(b, s)]} + [1 - Rc()s]{max [w(a, s), w(b, s)]}


                           = max [w(a, s), w(b, s)] - Rc()s@|w(a, s) - w(b, s)|.



The expression Rc()s@|w(a, s) - w(b, s)| is the regret of c() in state s. Thus, regret is the product of the error

probability and the magnitude of the welfare loss when an error occurs.
                                                       17


        Evaluation of hypothesis tests by expected welfare constitutes a fundamental difference between

the perspectives of Wald and of Neyman-Pearson. A planner should care about more than the probabilities

of Type I and II error. He should care as well about the magnitudes of the losses to welfare that arise when

errors occur. A given error probability should be less acceptable when the welfare difference between

actions is larger. The Neyman-Pearson theory of hypothesis testing does not recognize this.

        Computation of regret in a specified state is usually practical. The welfare magnitudes w(a, s) and

w(b, s) are usually easy to compute. The error probability Rc()s typically does not have a simple explicit

form, but it can be approximated to any desired precision by Monte Carlo integration. That is, one draws

repeated pseudo-realizations of  from the distribution Qs, computes the fraction of cases in which the

resulting c() selects the inferior action, and uses this to estimate Rc()s.

        Whereas computation of regret in one state is not problematic, computation of maximum regret

across all feasible states may be burdensome. The state space commonly is uncountable in applications. A

pragmatic process for coping with uncountable state spaces is to discretize the space, computing regret on

a finite subset of states that reasonably approximate the full state space.



2.3.3. Illustration: Comparing a Neyman-Pearson Test with an MMR Decision

        Manski and Tetenov (2016) compare a Neyman-Pearson test with a decision that minimizes

maximum regret, in a simple context where the MMR decision is known. The context is choice between

two treatments, say t = a and t = b, when the outcome of interest is binary, with y(t) = 1 denoting success

and y(t) = 0 failure. State s indexes a possible value for the pair of outcome probabilities {Ps[y(a) = 1],

Ps[y(b) = 1]}. The welfare yielded by treatment t in state s is w(t, s) = Ps[y(t) = 1]. The sample data are the

findings of a balanced randomized trial, assigning the same number N of subjects to each treatment. In this

setting, a widely used test is a one-sided two-sample z-test, which asymptotically makes the probability of

a Type I error equal to 0.05. See Fleiss (1973) for details.

        The regret of any test c(@) in any state s is Rc(@)s@|Ps[y(a) = 1] - Ps[y(b) = 1]|. In the language of

analysis of treatment response, |Ps[y(a) = 1] - Ps[y(b) = 1]| is the absolute value of the average treatment
                                                        18


effect comparing the two treatments. We suppose that the planner has no a priori knowledge of the outcome

probabilities. Hence, the state space is the rectangle [0, 1]2. We approximate maximum regret by computing

regret over a finite grid of states, thus discretizing the state space. Stoye (2009) shows that the MMR

decision is the empirical success (ES) rule. This rule, which will be discussed more fully in Section 4,

chooses a treatment that maximizes the average sample outcome in the trial.

         Figure 1 of Manski and Tetenov (2016) shows how the regret incurred by the ES rule and the z-test

rule varies across states for a sample size of N = 145 per treatment arm. With this sample size, maximum

regret is 0.01 for the ES rule and 0.05 for the z-test. Maximum regret for each test occurs at an intermediate

value of the effect size. Regret is necessarily small for small effect sizes. Regret is also small for large effect

sizes, because the probability of error declines with the effect size. The intermediate effect sizes at which

regret is maximized differ for the two tests, reflecting the differences in their state-specific error

probabilities.



2.4. Practicalities



         Statistical decision theory has breathtaking generality. It enables comparison of all SDFs whose

risk functions exist. It applies to any sample size, without asymptotic approximations.

         The state space may take any form. In Haavelmo's formalization of econometrics, S is a space of

probability distributions that may describe the economic system under study. The state space may be finite

dimensional or larger. The theory is applicable when unlimited data collection would point or partially

identify the true state.

         Given these features, one might anticipate that statistical decision theory would play a central role

in modern statistics and econometrics. Notable contributions by statisticians emerged in the 1950s and

1960s, as described in the monographs of Ferguson (1967) and Berger (1985). However, the early period

of development of statistical decision theory largely closed by the 1970s, except for the conditional Bayes
                                                      19


version of Bayesian theory. Conditional Bayes analysis has continued to develop, but as a self-contained

field of study disconnected from Wald's frequentist idea of maximization of subjective average welfare.

        Why did statistical decision theory lose momentum? One reason may have been diminishing

interest in decision making as the motivation for analysis of sample data. Many modern statisticians and

econometricians view the objective of empirical research as inference for scientific understanding, rather

than use of data in decision making. Another reason may have been the technical difficulty of the subject.

Wald's ideas are easy to describe abstractly, but they can be difficult to apply in practice.

        Consider the mathematical problems (4) through (6). These problems are generally well-posed in

principle, but they may not be solvable in practice. Each problem requires performance of three nested

operations. The most basic inner operation integrates across the sampling distribution of the data to

determine expected welfare when a specified SDF c() is used in each feasible state of nature s  S. The

result is evaluation of c(@) by the state-dependent expected welfare vector (Es{w[c(), s]}, s  S). The

middle operation averages or finds an extremum of the result of the inner operation across the state space.

The outer operation finds an extremum of the result of the middle operation across all SDFs.

        Analytical arguments and numerical computation sometimes yield tractable solutions to these

problems. Early analytical work in the conditional Bayes paradigm studied conjugate priors, which pair

certain prior distributions on the state space with certain state-dependent sampling distributions for the data

to yield simple posterior distributions.

        An important early analytical solution of an MMR problem was the study by Hodges and Lehmann

(1950) of point prediction of a bounded outcome under square loss, with data from a random sample.

Recently, Dominitz and Manski (2017, 2019) have derived analytical findings on the maximum regret of

certain tractable point predictors of bounded outcomes with data from random samples when some

outcomes are missing. See Section 3.4 below for further discussion.

        In another domain, econometricians have proved a sequence of analytical findings on tractable

decision rules for treatment choice with data from a randomized experiment. See Manski (2004, 2005,
                                                      20


2007), Hirano and Porter (2009, 2019), Stoye (2009, 2012), Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019), and

Kitagawa and Tetenov (2018). This decision problem will be discussed further in Section 4.

        Numerical computation often was infeasible when statistical decision theory developed in the

1940s, but it has become increasingly possible since then. Modern conditional Bayes analysis has

increasingly moved away from use of conjugate priors to numerical computation of posterior distributions.

Numerical determination of some maximin and MMR decisions has also become feasible. For example,

Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019) present in tabular form the MMR solutions to certain treatment choice

problems with data from a randomized experiment. Computation of state-dependent expected welfare, the

inner operation in problems (4) through (6), can now be accomplished numerically by Monte Carlo

integration methods. Manski and Tabord-Meehan (2017) do this in the context of point prediction with

random-sample data when some outcomes are missing; see Section 3.4 for further discussion.




3. Decision Making with Models



3.1. Basic Ideas



        I stated at the outset that standard decision theory begins with a planner who "specifies a state space

listing the states that he considers possible." Thus, the state space should include all states that the planner

believes feasible and no others. The state space may be a large set that is difficult to contemplate in its

entirety. Hence, it is common to make decisions using a model.

        The word "model" is commonly used informally to connote a simplification or approximation of

reality. Formally, a model specifies an alternative to the state space. Thus, model m replaces S with a model

space Sm. A planner using a model acts as if the model space is the state space. For example, the planner

might solve problem (4), (5), or (6) with Sm replacing S. Section 3.2 discusses other possibilities.
                                                      21


        The states contained in a model space may or may not be elements of the state space. The statistician

George Box famously wrote (Box, 1979): "All models are wrong, but some are useful." The phrase "all

models are wrong" indicates that Box was thinking of models that simplify or approximate reality in a way

that one believes could not possibly be correct; then Sm  S = . On the other hand, researchers often use

models that they believe could possibly be correct but that are not necessarily so; then Sm  S.

        Economists have long used models of the second type, ones they believe could be correct but are

not necessarily so. A persistent concern of econometric theory has been to determine when such models

have implications that may potentially be inconsistent with observable data. These models are called

testable, refutable, or over-identified.

        Working within the paradigm of Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing, econometricians have

developed specification tests which take the null hypothesis to be that the model is correct and the

alternative to be that it is incorrect. Formally, the null is {s*  Sm} and the alternative is {s*  Sm}. However,

econometricians have struggled to answer persuasively a central question raised by Haavelmo (1944) in his

opening chapter on "Abstract Models and Reality" and restated succinctly in a recent paper by Masten and

Poirier (2019). The latter authors write (p. 1): "What should researchers do when their baseline model is

refuted?" They discuss the many ways that econometricians have sought to answer the question, and they

offer some new suggestions of their own.

        The literature on specification testing has not sought to evaluate the performance of models in

decision making. Statistical decision theory accomplishes this in a straightforward way. What matters is the

SDF, say cm(), that one chooses using a model. As with any SDF, one measures the performance of cm()

by its vector of state-dependent expected welfares (Es{w[cm(), s]}, s  S). Importantly, the relevant states

for evaluation of performance are those in the state space S, not those in the model space Sm.

        Thus, statistical decision theory enables one to operationalize Box=s assertion that some models are

useful. Useful model-based decision rules yield acceptably high state-dependent expected welfare across

the state space, relative to what is possible in principle. From this perspective, one should not make an

abstract assertion that a model is or is not useful. Usefulness depends on the decision context.
                                                        22




3.2. As-If Optimization



        A familiar econometric practice specifies a model space, typically called the parameter space. The

parameter space is often finite-dimensional in applied research, but this is not essential. Sample data are

used to select a point in the parameter space, called a point estimate of the parameter. The econometric

method used to compute the point estimate typically is motivated by reference to desirable statistical

properties that hold if the model is correct; that is, if the true state of nature lies within the parameter space.

As-if optimization chooses an action that optimizes welfare as if the estimate is the true state.

        As-if optimization is a type of inference-based SDF. Whereas Wald supposed that a planner both

performs research and makes a decision, in practice there commonly is an institutional separation between

research and decision making. Researchers report inferences and planners use them to make decisions.

Thus, planners perform the mapping [inference 6 decision] rather than the more basic mapping [data 6

decision]. Having researchers report point estimates and planners use them as if they are accurate

exemplifies this process.

        Formally, a point estimate is a function s(@):   Sm that maps data into a point in a model space.

As-if optimization means solution of the problem max          cC   w[c, s()]. When as-if optimization yields

multiple solutions, one may use some auxiliary rule to select one. The result is an SDF c[s(@)], where



(9)   c[s()]  argmax w[c, s()],            .
                    cC



        Solving problem (9) is often simpler than solving problems (4) through (6). Selecting a point

estimate and using it to maximize welfare is easier than performing the nested operations requires to solve

problems (4) through (6). However, computational appeal does not suffice to justify this approach to

decision making.
                                                      23


        To motivate as-if optimization, econometricians often cite limit theorems of asymptotic theory that

hold if the model is correct. They hypothesize a sequence of sampling processes indexed by sample size N

and a corresponding sequence of point estimates sN(@): N  Sm. They show that the sequence is consistent

when specified assumptions hold. That is, sN()  s* as N  4, in probability or almost surely. They may

prove further results regarding rate of convergence and the limiting distribution of the estimate.

        These asymptotic arguments may be suggestive, but they do not prove that as-if optimization

provides a well-performing SDF in practice. Statistical decision theory evaluates as-if optimization in state

s by the expected welfare Es{w{c[s()], s}} that it yields across samples of size N, not asymptotically. It

calls for study of expected welfare across the state space, not the model space.



3.2.1. As-If Optimization with Analog Estimates

        Econometric research from Haavelmo onward has focused to a considerable degree on a class of

problems that connect the state space and the sampling distribution in a simple way. These are problems in

which states are probability distributions and the data are a random sample drawn from the true distribution.

In such problems, a natural form of as-if optimization is to act as if the empirical distribution of the data is

the true population distribution. Thus, one specifies the model space as the set of all possible empirical

distributions and uses the observed empirical distribution as the point estimate of the true state.

        Goldberger (1968) called this the analogy principle. He wrote (p. 4): "The analogy principle of

estimation . . . . proposes that population parameters be estimated by sample statistics which have the same

property in the sample as the parameters do in the population." The empirical distribution consistently

estimates the population distribution and has further desirable asymptotic properties. This suggests decision

making using the empirical distribution as if it were the true population distribution.



3.2.2. As-If Decisions with Set Estimates

        As-if optimization uses data to compute a point estimate of the true state of nature and chooses an

action that optimizes welfare as if this estimate is accurate. An obvious, but rarely applied, extension is to
                                                      24


use data to compute a set-valued estimate of the true state and then act as if the set estimate is accurate.

Whereas a point estimate s() maps data into an element of Sm, a set estimate S() maps data into a subset

of Sm. For example, S() could be a confidence set reported by researchers.

        Given data , one could act as if the state space is S() rather than the larger set S. Specifically,

one could solve these data-dependent versions of problems (1) through (3):



(1')       max    w(c, s)d(),
           cC



(2')       max    min      w(c, s),
           cC     s  S()



(3')       min    max      [max w(d, s) - w(c, s)].
           cC    s  S() d  C



In the case of (1'), () is a subjective distribution on the set S().

        These as-if problems are generally easier to solve than are problems (4) to (6). The as-if problems

fix  and select one action c, whereas problems (4) to (6) require one to consider all potential samples and

choose a decision function c(@). The as-if problems compute welfare values w(c, s), whereas (4) to (6)

compute more complex expected welfare values Es{w[c(), s]}. Section 3.4.1 provides an example.



3.3. Prediction with Sample Data



        A familiar case of as-if optimization occurs when states are distributions for a real random variable

and the decision problem is to predict the value of a realization drawn from the true distribution. When

welfare is measured by square and absolute loss, the best predictors are well-known to be the population

mean and median. When the true distribution is not known but data from a random sample are observed,

the analogy principle suggests use of the sample average and median as predictors.
                                                         25


         In his final chapter on "Problems of Prediction," Haavelmo (1944) questioned this common

application of as-if optimization and instead recommended application of the Wald theory. This final

chapter was added by Haavelmo after his distribution, in 1941, of an early version of the thesis. In his

section on "General Formulation of the Problem of Prediction," he wrote (p. 109): "We see therefore that

the seemingly logical `two-step' procedure of first estimating the unknown distribution of the variables to

be predicted and then using this estimate to derive a prediction formula for the variables may not be very

efficient." Citing Wald (1939), he next proposed computation of the state-dependent risk for any proposed

predictor function.

         Letting E2 denote a predictor function and (x1, x2, . . , , xN) the sample data, he wrote (p. 109): "We

have to choose E2 as a function of x1, x2, . . , , xN, and we should, naturally, try to choose E2(x1, x2, . . , , xN)

in such a way that r (the `risk') becomes as small as possible." But he immediately recognized that there

generally does not exist a predictor function that minimizes risk across all states of nature. Hence, he went

on to suggest a feasible approach. I quote in full this key passage, which uses the notation 1 to denote the

state space (p. 116):

                 "In general, however, we may expect that no uniformly best prediction function exists.
        Then we have to introduce some additional principles in order to choose a prediction function. We
        may then, first, obviously disregard all those prediction functions that are such that there exists
        another prediction function that makes r smaller for every member of 1. If this is not the case we
        call the prediction function considered an admissible prediction function. To choose between
        several admissible prediction functions we might adopt the following principle, introduced by
        Wald: For every admissible prediction function E2 the `risk' r is a function of the true distribution
         p. Consider that prediction function E2, among the admissible ones, for which the largest value of
         r is at a minimum (i.e., smaller than or at most equal to the largest value of r for any other admissible
         E2). Such a prediction function, if it exists, may be said to be the least risky among the admissible
         prediction functions."
Thus, following Wald, Haavelmo suggested elimination of inadmissible predictors followed by choice of a

minimax predictor among those that are admissible.
                                                     26


        It may be that econometrics would have progressed to make productive use of statistical decision

theory if Haavelmo had been able to pursue the above idea further. However, in his next section on "Some

Practical Suggestions for the Derivation of Prediction Formulae," he cautioned regarding the practicality

of the idea, writing (p. 111): "The apparatus set up in the preceding section, although simple in principle,

will in general involve considerable mathematical problems and heavy algebra."

        Aiming for tractability, Haavelmo went on to sketch an example of as-if optimization that chooses

an action using a maximum likelihood estimate of a specific finite-dimensional parametric model. He noted

that one could study the state-dependent risk of the resulting SDF, but he did not provide any analysis. With

this, his chapter on prediction ended. Thus, Haavelmo initiated econometric consideration of statistical

decision theory but, stymied by computational intractability, he found himself unable to follow through.

        Nor did other econometricians apply statistical decision theory to prediction in the period after

publication of Haavelmo (1944). I observed earlier that no contribution in Cowles Monograph 10 mentioned

statistical decision theory and only one did so briefly in Cowles 14. Cowles 10 and 14 contain several

chapters by Haavelmo and by Wald, but these concern different subjects. The only mention in Cowles 14

appeared in Koopmans and Hood (1953). Considering "The Purpose of Estimation," they wrote (p. 127):

        "if a direct prediction problem . . . . can be isolated and specified, the choice of a method of
        estimation should be discussed in terms of desired properties of the joint distribution of the
        prediction(s) made and the realized values(s) of the variables(s) predicted. In particular, in a
        precisely defined prediction problem of this type, one may know the consequence of various
        possible errors of prediction and would then be able to use predictors minimizing the mathematical
        expectation of losses due to such errors. Abraham Wald [1939, 1945, 1950c], among others, has
        proposed methods of statistical decision-making designed to accomplish this."
However, they immediately went on to state that neither they nor the other contributors to Cowles 14 apply

statistical decision theory to prediction. They wrote (p. 127):

        "The more classical methods of estimation applied in this volume are not as closely tailored to any
        one particular prediction problem. Directed to the estimation of structural parameters rather than
        values of endogenous variables, they yield estimates that can be regarded as raw materials, to be
                                                    27


        processed further into solutions of a wide variety of prediction problems---in particular, problems
        involving prediction of the effects of known changes in structure."
This passage expresses the broad thinking that econometricians have used to motivate as-if optimization.



3.4. Prediction under Square Loss



        Haavelmo discussed application of statistical decision theory to prediction briefly and abstractly.

Subsequent research has focused on the special case of square loss. In this case, the risk of a candidate

predictor using sample data is the sum of the population variance of the outcome and the mean square error

(MSE) of the predictor as an estimate of the mean outcome. The regret of a predictor is its MSE as an

estimate of the mean. An MMR predictor minimizes maximum mean square error. MMR prediction of the

outcome is equivalent to minimax estimation of the population mean.

        Among the earliest important practical findings of statistical decision theory was reported by

Hodges and Lehman (1950). They derived the MMR predictor under square loss with data from a random

sample, when the outcome has known bounded range and all sample data are observed. They assumed no

knowledge of the outcome distribution beyond its bounded support. Normalizing the support to be the

interval [0, 1], they proved that the MMR predictor is (NN + )/(N + 1), where N is sample size and N

is the sample average outcome.



3.4.1. Prediction with Missing Data

        Dominitz and Manski (2017, 2019) have recently extended study of prediction of a bounded

outcome under square loss to settings in which a random sample is drawn but some realized outcomes are

unobserved. It is challenging to determine the MMR predictor when some data are missing. Seeking an

approach that is both tractable and reasonable, the paper studies as-if MMR prediction. The analysis

assumes knowledge of the fraction of the population with missing data, but it assumes no knowledge of the
                                                     28


distributions of observed and missing outcomes beyond their bounded support. It uses the empirical

distribution of the observed sample data as if it were the population distribution of observable outcomes.

        In the absence of knowledge of the distribution of missing outcomes, the population mean outcome

is partially identified when the outcome is bounded. Its identification region is an easy-to-compute interval

derived in Manski (1989). If this interval were known, the MMR predictor would be its midpoint. The

identification interval is not known with sample data, but one can compute its sample analog and use the

midpoint of the sample-analog interval as the predictor.

        This midpoint predictor is easy to compute. Its maximum regret is shown to have a simple form.

Let  indicate the observability of an outcome. Let P( = 1) and P( = 0) denote the fractions of the

population whose outcomes are and are not observable. Let N be the number of observed sample outcomes,

which is fixed rather than random under the assumed survey design. The paper proves that the maximum

regret of the midpoint predictor is [P( = 1)2/N + P( = 0)2].

        The analysis in Dominitz and Manski (2017) presumes a state space that places no restrictions on

the distributions of observable and unobservable outcomes. Researchers often assume that data are missing

at random. That is, they invoke a model space in which the distributions of observable and unobservable

outcomes are the same. They then use the sample average of observed outcomes as the predictor. Dominitz

and Manski caution against this application of modeling when the distributions of observable and

unobservable outcomes may differ arbitrarily. They show that the maximum regret of the model-based

predictor necessarily exceeds that of the midpoint predictor, in some cases substantially so.



3.4.2. Numerical Computation of Maximum Regret in Prediction with Missing Data

        The analytical finding on the maximum regret of the midpoint predictor described above assumes

knowledge of the fraction of the population with missing data. A midpoint predictor remains easy to

compute when P( = 0) is not known and instead is estimated by its sample analog. In this case, derivation

of an analytical expression for maximum regret does not seem possible, but numerical computation is
                                                      29


tractable. I summarize here. This demonstrate how advances in numerical analysis now enable applications

of statistical decision theory that were impractical when Haavelmo and Wald made their contributions.

        Manski and Tabord-Meehan (2017) describe an algorithm coded in STATA for numerical

computation of the maximum regret of the midpoint predictor and other user-specified predictors in the

setting of Dominitz and Manski (2017). The program, named wald_mse, does not require knowledge of the

population fraction of missing data. Instead, P( = 0) may be estimated by its sample analog.

        Letting y denote the outcome of interest, the state space has the form [Ps(y| = 1), Ps(y| = 0), Ps(

= 0)], s 0 S]. An important feature of wald_mse is that the user can specify the state space flexibly. For

example, the user may assume that nonresponse will be no higher than 80% or that the mean value of the

outcome for nonresponders will be no lower than 0.5. The user may impose no restrictions connecting the

two outcome distributions Ps(y| = 1) and Ps(y| = 0), or he may bound the difference between these

distributions.

        In any given state s, the algorithm uses Monte Carlo integration to approximate the MSE of the

user-specified predictor. The quality of the approximation is controlled by user specification of the number

of pseudo realizations of (y, ) that are drawn. Increasing the number yields a better approximation at the

cost of longer computation time.

        The algorithm embodies two approaches to maximize MSE across the state space, one applicable

when the outcome is binary and the other when the outcome has a continuous distribution. When y is binary,

Ps(y| = 1), Ps(y| = 0), and Ps( = 0) are all Bernoulli distributions. The algorithm approximates the state

space by a finite grid over the possible Bernoulli parameters for each distribution. It then maximizes MSE

over the grid. The user controls the quality of the approximation to the state space by specifying the density

of the grid. Increasing the density yields a better approximation at the cost of longer computation time.

        When y is continuous, the algorithm presumes that Ps(y| = 1) and Ps(y| = 0) are Beta distributions,

while Ps( = 0) is a Bernoulli distribution. Supposing that the two outcome distributions are Beta is a

substantive restriction, aiming to provide a relatively flexible and tractable approximation to the state space

that a user of the program may perceive. The algorithm computes mean square error on a finite grid over
                                                     30


the possible shape parameters of the Beta distributions and over the possible values of the Bernoulli

parameter. As before, the user specifies the density of the grid and the algorithm maximizes mean square

error over the grid.




4. Maximum Regret of the Empirical Success Rule for Treatment Choice



4.1. Background



        To further flesh out the abstract discussion of Section 3, this section provides decision-theoretic

analysis of an important instance of as-if optimization, summarizing findings to date and adding new ones.

        A large body of empirical research performed by econometricians, statisticians, and others has

studied treatment response in randomized trials and observational settings. The objective of some of this

research has been to perform so-called causal inference, without reference to an explicit decision problem.

However, much of the research has aimed to inform treatment choice by planners acting in public health or

public policy settings. I am concerned with the latter.

        I discuss a standard formalization studied in many sources; see, for example, Manski (2004). States

of nature are possible distributions of treatment response for the members of a population of observationally

identical persons who are subject to treatment. The term "observationally identical" means that these

persons share the same observed covariates. Groups of persons with different observed covariates are

considered as separate populations.

         The decision problem is to choose treatments for the members of a population. It is assumed that

treatment response is individualistic, meaning that each person's outcome may depend on the treatment he

receives but not on the treatments received by others. Welfare is measured by the mean outcome of

treatment across the population. In this setting, optimal treatment choice maximizes the mean outcome.
                                                      31


        In practice, optimal treatment is infeasible because the true distribution of treatment response is not

known. Decision making may use data on the outcomes realized by a sample of the population. Some

research studies data from randomized trials, and some studies observational data. Either way, statistical

decision theory may be used to evaluate the performance of SDFs, which have been called statistical

treatment rules in this context.

        A simple way to use sample data to make treatment choices is as-if optimization. Applying the

analogy principle, one acts as if the empirical outcome distribution for each treatment equals the population

distribution of outcomes for this treatment. Emulating the fact that it is optimal to chooses a treatment that

maximizes the mean population outcome, one chooses a treatment that maximizes the average sample

outcome. This has been called the empirical success (ES) rule in Manski (2004) and elsewhere.

        When analyzing data from randomized trials, econometricians and statisticians have long used

asymptotic arguments to motivate the ES rule, citing laws of large numbers and central limit theorems for

convergence of sample averages to population means. In contrast, a small but growing recent econometric

literature studies the maximum regret of the ES rule with trial data. Maximum regret quantifies how lack

of knowledge of the true state of nature diminishes the quality of decisions. An SDF with small maximum

regret is uniformly near-optimal across all states.

        Section 4.2 summarizes findings on the performance of the ES rule with trial data. Section 4.3

provides new analysis of its performance with observational data. In both cases, the analysis assumes that

treatment outcomes have known bounded range but otherwise places no restrictions on the distribution of

treatment response. Section 4.4 relates the analysis to the early literature in econometrics.



4.2. Maximum Regret of the ES Rule with Trial Data



        Consider a classical randomized trial, where all subjects comply with assigned treatments and all

sample realized outcomes are observed. Then the only feasible states of nature are ones in which, for each

treatment, the population distribution of counterfactual outcomes equals that of realized outcomes.
                                                     32


        Study of the regret performance of the ES rule with trial data was initiated by Manski (2004), who

used a large-deviations inequality for sample averages of bounded outcomes to derive an upper bound on

maximum regret in problems of choice between two treatments. Subsequently, Stoye (2009) showed that

in trials with moderate sample size, the ES rule either exactly or approximately minimizes maximum regret

in cases with two treatments and a balanced design. Hirano and Porter (2009) showed that the ES rule is

asymptotically optimal in a formal decision-theoretic sense.

         Considering problems with multiple treatments or unbalanced designs, Manski and Tetenov (2016)

use large deviations inequalities for sample averages of bounded outcomes to obtain upper bounds on the

maximum regret of the ES rule. Their Proposition 1 extends the early finding of Manski (2004) from two

to multiple treatments. Proposition 2 derives a new large-deviations bound for multiple treatments.

        Let L be the number of treatment arms and let V be the range of the bounded outcome. When the

trial has a balanced design, with n subjects per treatment arm, the bounds on maximum regret proved in

Propositions 1 and 2 have particularly simple forms, being



(10)       (2e) B2V(L - 1)n-2



(11)       V(ln L)2nB2.



Result (10) provides a tighter bound than (11) for two or three treatments. Result (11) gives a tighter bound

for four or more treatments.



4.3. Maximum Regret of the ES Rule with Observational Data



        In observational studies of treatment response, distributions of counterfactual and realized

outcomes need not coincide. A researcher might nevertheless apply the ES rule, viewing equality of

counterfactual and realized outcome distributions as a model that may or may not be correct. I consider this
                                                      33


practice here, determining when use of the ES rule does and does not yield a desirable treatment choice

from the perspective of maximum regret.

        Consider an observational study with two treatments, say {a, b}, and bounded outcomes taking

values in the interval [0, 1]. The planner's problem is to choose between the two treatments. Each member

of the study population has potential outcomes [y(a), y(b)]. Binary indicators [(a), (b)] denote whether

these outcomes are observable. Realized outcomes are observed, but counterfactual outcomes are not.

Hence, the possible values for the observability indicators are [(a) = 1, (b) = 0] and [(a) = 0, (b) = 1].

Each element s of the state space denotes a possible distribution Ps[y(a), y(b), (a), (b)] of outcomes and

observability.

        As shown in Section 2.3, in states of nature where treatment a is better, the regret of any SDF is the

product of the sampling probability that the rule commits a Type I error (choosing b) and the magnitude of

the loss in welfare that occurs when choosing B. Similarly, in states where b is better, regret is the

probability of a Type II error (choosing a) times the magnitude of the loss in welfare when choosing a.

Thus, regret in state s is Rc()s|Es[y(b)] - Es[y(a)]|, where Rc()s denotes the error probability. Regret is zero

in states where Es[y(b)] = Es[y(a)]. Hence, it suffices to consider states where Es[y(b)]  Es[y(a)].

        With finite sample data, the state-dependent error probabilities for the ES rule do not have simple

explicit forms, but they may be computed numerically by Monte Carlo integration. The maximum regret of

the ES rule can be approximated by computing regret numerically on a finite grid that discretizes the state

space. An algorithm akin to that described by Manski and Tabord-Meehan (2017) can be developed to

perform the computations.

        Rather than pursue numerical computation here, I derive simple analytical results that hold in the

limit, when all population realized outcomes are observed. Given that realized outcomes are observed while

counterfactual ones are not, P[(a) = 1] + P[(b) = 1] = 1. I suppose that P[(a) = 1] > 0 and P[(b) =1] > 0.

Then the data reveal the true values of P[y(a)|(a) = 1], P[y(b)|(b) = 1], P[(a) = 1], and P[(b) = 1]. This

setting has long been studied in partial identification analysis of treatment response, beginning with Manski

(1990). I proceed likewise here.
                                                      34




4.3.1. MMR Treatment Choice

        The data do not reveal the counterfactual outcome distributions P[y(a)|(a) = 0] and P[y(b)|(b) =

0]. Outcomes have bounded domain [0, 1], hence 0  E[y(a)|(a) = 0]  1 and 0  E[y(b)|(b) = 0]  1. By

the Law of Iterated Expectations, the feasible values of E[y(a)] and E[y(b)] are



(12a)   E[y(a)]  [E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1], E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1] + P[(a) = 0]],

(12b)   E[y(b)]  [E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1], E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1] + P[(b) = 0]].



        Consider choice of treatment a or b. With choice of a, the error probability Ras = 0 in states where

Es[y(b)] < Es[y(a)] and Ras = 1 in states where Es[y(b)] > Es[y(a)]. Maximum regret occurs in the state where

Es[y(a)|(a) = 0] = 0 and Es[y(b)|(b) = 0] = 1. In this state, regret is



(13a)     Ras|Es[y(b)] - Es[y(a)]| = E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1] + P[(b) = 0]

                                                     - E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1].



With choice of b, maximum regret is



(13b)     Rbs|Es[y(b)] - Es[y(a)]| = E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1] + P[(a) = 0]

                                                 - E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1].



The difference between these maximum-regret expressions is



(14)      E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1] + P[(b) = 0] - E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1]

               - E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1] - P[(a) = 0] + E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1]
                                                    35




     = 2{E[y(b)|(b) = 1]P[(b) = 1] - E[y(a)|(a) = 1]P[(a) = 1]} + P[(b) = 0] - P[(a) = 0].



Treatment b (a) uniquely minimizes maximum regret if the value of (14) is positive (negative). The

treatments yield the same maximum regret if the value of (14) is zero.



4.3.2. Maximum Regret of the ES Rule

          Now consider treatment choice with the ES rule. I show below that this rule minimizes maximum

regret for some but not all values of the observable quantities. It selects the inferior treatment for other

values.

          The ES rule chooses treatment a if E[y(a)|(a) =1] > E[y(b)|(b) = 1] and chooses b if E[y(a)|(a)

=1] < E[y(b)|(b) = 1]. The ES rule does not prescribe a treatment if E[y(a)|(a) = 1] = E[y(b)|(b) = 1].

Then some auxiliary criterion must be used. I henceforth consider the cases where the ES rule yields a

determinate choice.

          The ES rule yields the MMR choice when the ordering of E[y(a)|(a) =1] and E[y(b)|(b) = 1]

reverses the ordering of maximum regret across the two treatments. This necessarily occurs when P[(a) =

1] = P[(b) = 1] = . Then (14) reduces to E[y(b)|(b) = 1] - E[y(a)|(a) = 1].

          When P[(a) = 1]  P[(b) = 1], the ES rule may minimize or maximize maximum regret, depending

on the values of the observable quantities E[y(a)|(a) = 1], E[y(b)|(b) = 1], P[(a)], and P[(b)]. I consider

here cases in which treatment b has greater empirical success than a, so the ES rule chooses b. Analysis of

the contrary case is symmetric.

          To simplify notation, let E[y(b)|(b) = 1] = m and E[y(a)|(a) = 1] = m - , where 0 <   m  1.

First consider cases where P[(b) = 1] =  + k and P[(a) = 1] =  - k, where 0 < k < . Then the value of

(14) is



     2[m( + k) - (m - )( - k) - k)] = 2[2mk + ( - k) - k] = 2[( - k) - k(1 - 2m)].
                                                      36




Hence, treatment b uniquely minimizes maximum regret if  > k(1 - 2m)/( - k) and treatment a does so

if  < k(1 - 2m)/( - k). A sufficient condition for the former result is that m  . The latter result occurs

if m < , k is sufficiently large, and  is sufficiently small.

        Now consider cases where P[(b) = 1] =  - k and P[(a) = 1] =  + k, where 0 < k < . Then the

value of (14) is



     2[m( - k) - (m - )( + k) + k)] = 2[-2mk + ( + k) + k] = 2[( + k) - k(2m - 1)].



Hence, treatment b uniquely minimizes maximum regret if  > k(2m - 1)/( + k) and treatment a does so

if  < k(2m - 1)/( + k). A sufficient condition for the former result is that m  . The latter result occurs

if m > , k is sufficiently large, and  is sufficiently small.

        Recall Box's statement that a model may be wrong but useful. The above derivation shows that

using the model of random treatment selection to motivate the ES rule minimizes maximum regret when

similar fractions of the population receive each treatment and/or the treatments differ greatly in empirical

success. However, it maximizes maximum regret when treatment shares are sufficiently different and the

treatments have sufficiently similar empirical success. Thus, the model is useful for treatment choice in

some contexts but is harmful in others.



4.3.3. Illustration: Sentencing and Recidivism

        To illustrate, I use the Manski and Nagin (1998) analysis of sentencing and recidivism of juvenile

offenders in the state of Utah. The feasible treatments are alternative sentencing options. Judges in Utah

have had the discretion to order varying sentences for juvenile offenders. Some offenders have been

sentenced to residential confinement (treatment a) and others have been given sentences with no

confinement (treatment b). A possible policy would be to replace judicial discretion with a mandate that all

offenders be confined. Another would be to mandate that no offenders be confined.
                                                     37


           To compare these alternative mandates, we took the outcome of interest to be recidivism in the

two-year period following sentencing. Let y = 1 if an offender commits no new offense and y = 0 otherwise.

No new offense was interpreted as treatment success, and commission of a new offense was interpreted as

failure.

           We obtained data on the sentences received and the recidivism outcomes realized by all male

offenders in Utah who were born from 1970 through 1974 and who were convicted of offenses before they

reached age 16. The Utah data reveal that 11 percent of the offenders were sentenced to confinement and

that 23 percent of these persons did not offend again in the two years following sentencing. The remaining

89 percent were sentenced to non-confinement and 41 percent of these persons did not offend again. Thus,

P[y(a)|(a) = 1] = 0.23, P[y(b)|(b) = 1] = 0.41, P[(a) = 1] = 0.11, and P[(b) = 1] = 0.89.

           Reviewing the criminology literature on sentencing and recidivism, we found little research on

sentencing practices and disparate predictions of treatment response. Hence, we deemed it relevant to

perform partial identification analysis of treatment response, assuming no knowledge of counterfactual

outcomes. This makes the analysis of Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 applicable.

           Equation (13a) show that the maximum regret of treatment a is (0.41)(0.89) + 0.11  (0.23)(0.11)

= 0.45. Equation (13b) shows that the maximum regret of b is (0.23)(0.11) + 0.89 - (0.41)(0.89) = 0.55.

Hence, treatment a minimizes maximum regret.

           One might assume that Utah judges have sentenced offenders randomly to treatments and b. One

consequently might use the ES rule to choose between the two. Given that 0.41 > 0.23, the result is choice

of treatment b. Thus, in this setting, the ES rule selects the treatment that is inferior from the minimax-

regret perspective.



4.4. Analysis of Treatment Response and Study of Systems of Jointly Determined Variables



           The terminology "analysis of treatment response" has become widespread in empirical

microeconomics since the 1990s, but it does not appear in early writing on econometrics. At time of
                                                     38


Haavelmo (1944), a central focus was identification and estimation of models of systems of jointly

determined variables. An important objective was to use estimated models to predict the impacts of

contemplated public policies. Using further notation to denote realized treatments and outcomes, it is easy

to see that analysis of treatment response lies within this longstanding concern of econometrics.

        Let z denote the treatment that a person in the study population receives; thus, z = 1 if (b) = 1 and

z = 0 if (b) = 0. Let y denote the outcome that a person realizes; thus, y = y(b) if z = 1 and y = y(a) if z =

0. Realizations of (y, z) are observable. Random sampling of the study population asymptotically reveals

the distribution P(y, z).

        Early econometricians analyzed data on realized treatments and outcomes in settings where

treatments are chosen purposefully rather than randomly. Haavelmo (1944) put it this way (p. 7): "the

economist is usually a rather passive observer with respect to important economic phenomena; he usually

does not control the actual collection of economic statistics. He is not in a position to enforce the

prescriptions of his own designs of ideal experiments."

        Analyzing settings with passive observation of treatments and outcomes, econometricians found it

sensible to model y and z as jointly determined variables. When treatment selection is random, E(y|z = 1)

= E[y(b)] and E(y|z = 0) = E[y(a)]. Among the central contributions of early econometrics was to show that

these equalities do not generally hold when y and y are jointly determined. Haavelmo (1943), Section 1

showed this in a simple context.

        Viewing random treatment selection as implausible in settings with passive observation,

econometricians have long studied other models that point-identify E[y(b)] and E[y(a)], given empirical

knowledge of P(y, z). The early literature mainly studied linear models and distributional assumptions

involving instrumental variables. Recent research weakens the assumption that relations are linear but

continues to use instrumental variables. Throughout all this long period, econometricians have struggled to

measure model performance in decision making. Statistical decision theory provides a coherent framework

for model evaluation.
                                                       39


4.4.1. Illustration: Classical Linear Models

        Consider classical linear models that assume homogeneous treatment response and use a binary

instrumental variable to point-identify the treatment effect. In settings with two treatments, the model

assumes that yj(t) = 1[t = b] + j for each t  {a, b} and each member j of the study population. The

homogeneous treatment effect is the parameter  = yj(b) - yj(a), whose value does not vary with j.

        Let vj denote the binary instrumental variable, whose value varies across j. The earliest econometric

literature assumed that Cov(v, ) = 0 and Cov(v, z)          0. This implies that  = Cov(v, y)/Cov(v, z). Later

econometricians assumed that E(|v = 1) = E(|v = 0) and E(z|v = 1)            E(z|v = 0). This implies that  =

[E(y|v = 1)  E(y|v = 0)]/[E(z|v = 1)  E(z|v = 0)].

        Whichever version of the model is assumed, it has been common to use the resulting value of  to

recommend a treatment, namely treatment a if  < 0 and b if  > 0. Applied researchers have long recognized

that the assumed model may be incorrect, but the econometric literature has not shown how to evaluate the

consequences of using incorrect models to make decisions. Statistical decision theory does so.




5. Conclusion



        To reiterate the central theme of this paper, use of statistical decision theory to evaluate econometric

models is conceptually coherent and simple. A planner specifies a state space listing all the states of nature

deemed feasible. One evaluates the performance of any contemplated SDF by the state-dependent vector

of expected welfare that it yields. Decisions made using models are evaluated in this manner. Statistical

decision theory evaluates model-based decision rules by their performance across the state space, not across

the model space.

        The primary challenge to use of statistical decision theory in practice is computational. Recall that,

in his discussion sketching application of statistical decision theory to prediction, Haavelmo (1944)
                                                    40


remarked that such application (p. 111): "although simple in principle, will in general involve considerable

mathematical problems and heavy algebra."

        Many mathematical operations that were infeasible in 1944 are tractable now, as a result of

advances in analytical methods and numerical computation. Hence, it has increasingly become possible to

use statistical decision theory when performing econometric research that aims to inform decision making.

Future advances in analysis and numerical computation should continue to expand the scope of applications.
                                                   41


References


Ben-Akiva, M., D. McFadden, and K. Train (2019), Foundations of Stated Preference Elicitation:
Consumer Behavior and Choice-Based Conjoint Analysis, Foundations and Trends in Econometrics, 10, 1-
144.

Berger, J. (1985), Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, New York: Springer-Verlag.

Berger, J. (2006), "The Case for Objective Bayesian Analysis," Bayesian Analysis, 1, 385-402.

Binmore, K. (2009), Rational Decisions, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bjerkholt, O. (2007), "Writing `The Probability Approach' With Nowhere to Go: Haavelmo in The United
States, 1939-1944," Econometric Theory, 23, 775-837.

Bjerkholt, O. (2010), "The 'meteorological' and the 'engineering' type of econometric inference: A 1943
exchange between Trygve Haavelmo and Jakob Marschak," Memorandum, No. 2010,07, University of
Oslo, Department of Economics, Oslo.

Bjerkholt, O. (2015), "Trygve Haavelmo at the Cowles Commission," Econometric Theory, 31, 1-84.

Blyth, C. (1970), "On the Inference and Decision Models of Statistics," The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 41, 1034-1058.

Box, G. (1979), "Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building," in R. Launer and G. Wilkinson
(eds.), Robustness in Statistics, New York: Academic Press, 201-236.

Chernoff, H. (1954), "Rational Selection of Decision Functions," Econometrica, 22, 422-443.

Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2017), "More Data or Better Data? A Statistical Decision Problem," Review
of Economic Studies, 84, 1583-1605.

Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2019), "Minimax-Regret Sample Design in Anticipation of Missing Data,
With Application to Panel Data," Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Ferguson, T. (1967), Mathematical Statistics: A Decision Theoretic Approach, Academic Press: San Diego.

Fleiss, J. (1973), Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, Wiley: New York.

Frisch, R. (1971), "Cooperation between Politicians and Econometricians on the Formalization of Political
Preferences," The Federation of Swedish Industries, Stockholm.

Goldberger, A. (1968), Topics in Regression Analysis, New York: McMillan.

Haavelmo, T. (1943), "The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations," Econometrica,
11, 1-12.

Haavelmo, T. (1944), "The Probability Approach in Econometrics," Econometrica, 12, Supplement, iii-vi
and 1-115.
                                                  42


Hirano, K. and J. Porter (2009), "Asymptotics for Statistical Treatment Rules," Econometrica, 77,1683-
1701.

Hirano, K. and J. Porter (2019), "Statistical Decision Rules in Econometrics," in Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol. 7, edited by S. Durlauf, L. Hansen, J. Heckman, and R. Matzkin, Amsterdam: North
Holland, forthcoming.

Hood, W. and T. Koopmans (editors) (1953), Studies in Econometric Method, Cowles Commission
Monograph No. 14. New York: Wiley.

Kitagawa, T. and A. Tetenov (2018), "Who Should be Treated? Empirical Welfare Maximization Methods
for Treatment Choice," Econometrica, 86, 591-616.

Koopmans, T. (editor) (1950), Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, Cowles Commission
Monograph No. 10. New York: Wiley.

Koopmans, T. and W. Hood (1953), "The Estimation of Simultaneous Linear Economic Relationships,"
Chapter 6 in Hood, W. and T. Koopmans (editors) Studies in Econometric Method, Cowles Commission
Monograph No. 14. New York: Wiley, 112-199.

Mann, H. and A. Wald (1943), "On the Statistical Treatment of Linear Stochastic Difference Equations,"
Econometrica, 11, 173-220.

Manski, C. (1988), Analog Estimation Methods in Econometrics, New York: Chapman & Hall.

Manski, C. (1989), AAnatomy of the Selection Problem,@ Journal of Human Resources, 24, 343-360.

Manski, C. (1990), "Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects," American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 80, 319-323.

Manski, C. (2000), "Identification Problems and Decisions Under Ambiguity: Empirical Analysis of
Treatment Response and Normative Analysis of Treatment Choice," Journal of Econometrics, 95, 415-442.

Manski, C. (2004), "Statistical Treatment Rules for Heterogeneous Populations," Econometrica, 72, 221-
246.

Manski, C. (2005), Social Choice with Partial Knowledge of Treatment Response, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Manski, C. (2007), "Minimax-Regret Treatment Choice with Missing Outcome Data," Journal of
Econometrics, 139, 105-115.

Manski, C. (2011), "Actualist Rationality," Theory and Decision, 71, 195-210.

Manski, C. (2019), ATreatment Choice with Trial Data: Statistical Decision Theory Should Supplant
Hypothesis Testing,@ The American Statistician, 73, 296-304.

Manski, C. and D. Nagin (1998), "Bounding Disagreements about Treatment Effects: a Case Study of
Sentencing and Recidivism," Sociological Methodology, 28, 99-137.
                                                   43


Manski, C. and M. Tabord-Meehan (2017), "Wald MSE: Evaluating the Maximum MSE of Mean Estimates
with Missing Data," STATA Journal, 17, 723-735.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2007), "Admissible Treatment Rules for a Risk-Averse Planner with
Experimental Data on an Innovation," Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 137, 1998-2010.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2014), "The Quantile Performance of Statistical Treatment Rules Using
Hypothesis Tests to Allocate a Population to Two Treatments," Cemmap working paper CWP44/14.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2016), "Sufficient Trial Size to Inform Clinical Practice," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113, 10518-10523.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2019), "Trial Size for Near-Optimal Choice Between Surveillance and
Aggressive Treatment: Reconsidering MSLT-II," The American Statistician, 73, S1, 305-311.

Marschak, J. and W. Andrews (1944), "Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory of Production,"
Econometrica, 12, 143-205.

Masten, M. and A. Poirier (2019), "Salvaging Falsified Instrumental Variables Models," Department of
Economics, Duke University.

Neyman, J. (1962), "Two Breakthroughs in the Theory of Statistical Decision Making," Review of the
International Statistical Institute, 30, 11-27.

Neyman, J., and E. Pearson (1928), "On the Use and Interpretation of Certain Test Criteria for Purposes of
Statistical Inference," Biometrika, 20A, 175-240, 263-294.

Neyman, J., and E. Pearson (1933), "On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical Hypotheses,"
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Ser. A, 231, 289-337.

Savage, L. (1951), "The Theory of Statistical Decision," Journal of the American Statistical Association,
46, 55-67.

Sen, A. (1993), "Internal Consistency of Choice," Econometrica, 61, 495-521.

Stoye, J. (2009), "Minimax Regret Treatment Choice with Finite Samples," Journal of Econometrics, 151,
70-81.

Stoye, J. (2012), "Minimax Regret Treatment Choice with Covariates or with Limited Validity of
Experiments," Journal of Econometrics, 166, 138-156.

Wald, A. (1939), "Contribution to the Theory of Statistical Estimation and Testing Hypotheses," Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 10, 299-326.

Wald, A. (1945), "Statistical Decision Functions Which Minimize the Maximum Risk," Annals of
Mathematics, 46, 265-280.

Wald A. (1950), Statistical Decision Functions, New York: Wiley.
