                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            EVALUATING STATE AND LOCAL BUSINESS TAX INCENTIVES

                                        Cailin R. Slattery
                                         Owen M. Zidar

                                       Working Paper 26603
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26603


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We are especially grateful for helpful comments on an early draft from Tim Bartik, Pat Kline,
Ilyana Kuziemko, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Dan Wilson as well as the editorial team--
Gordon Hanson, Enrico Moretti, Tim Taylor, and Heidi Williams. We also thank Daron
Acemoglu, Leah Boustan, Nick Buchholz, Janet Currie, Hank Farber, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Thomas
Fujiwara, Henrik Kleven, Carlianne Patrick, Jim Poterba, Steve Redding, Stefanie Stantcheva,
Matt Turner, John Van Reenen, and Eric Zwick for helpful comments and discussions. Stephanie
Kestelman and Dustin Swonder provided excellent research assistance. We thank Carlianne
Patrick for providing us data on million-dollar plants. This work is supported by National Science
Foundation under Grant Number 1752431. We declare that we have no relevant or material
financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cailin R. Slattery and Owen M. Zidar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating State and Local Business Tax Incentives
Cailin R. Slattery and Owen M. Zidar
NBER Working Paper No. 26603
January 2020
JEL No. H2,H25,H71,R11,R3,R5

                                          ABSTRACT

This essay describes and evaluates state and local business tax incentives in the United States. In
2014, states spent between $5 and $216 per capita on incentives for firms in the form of firm-
specific subsidies and general tax credits, which mostly target investment, job creation, and
research and development. Collectively, these incentives amounted to nearly 40% of state
corporate tax revenues for the typical state, but some states' incentive spending exceeded their
corporate tax revenues. States with higher per capita incentives tend to have higher state
corporate tax rates. Recipients of firm-specific incentives are usually large establishments in
manufacturing, technology, and high-skilled service industries, and the average discretionary
subsidy is $178M for 1,500 promised jobs. Firms tend to accept subsidy deals from places that
are richer, larger, and more urban than the average county, and poor places provide larger
incentives and spend more per job. Comparing "winning" and runner-up locations for each deal
in a bigger and more recent sample than in prior work, we find that average employment within
the 3-digit industry of the deal increases by roughly 1,500 jobs. While we find some evidence of
direct employment gains from attracting a firm, we do not find strong evidence that firm-specific
tax incentives increase broader economic growth at the state and local level. Although these
incentives are often intended to attract and retain high-spillover firms, the evidence on spillovers
and productivity effects of incentives appears mixed. As subsidy-giving has become more
prevalent, subsidies are no longer as closely tied to firm investment. If subsidy deals do not lead
to high spillovers, justifying these incentives requires substantial equity gains, which are also
unclear empirically.


Cailin R. Slattery
Columbia University
cailin.slattery@columbia.edu

Owen M. Zidar
Department of Economics & Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
ozidar@princeton.edu
   Income and opportunity vary substantially across regions. After decades of skepticism (Glaeser and Gottlieb,
2008), there is now growing enthusiasm among many policymakers and academics for using place-based policies
to address these regional disparities (Austin, Glaeser and Summers, 2018; Bartik, 2019b; Kline and Moretti,
2014). Summers (2019), for example, discusses the widely uneven incidence of distress, the inability of natural
economic forces and migration to address these disparities, and the political ramifications of growing disaffection
of non-cosmopolitans. Others emphasize that place-based policies can have unique targeting benefits that
transfer resources to distressed regions and can create substantial welfare gains (Gaubert, Kline and Yagan,
2019).
   The primary place-based policy in the United States is state and local business tax incentives. Bartik (2019b)
estimates that these incentives amount to approximately $46B out of $60B of local economic development
spending and have tripled since the 1990s. Despite the growing enthusiasm for place-based policies in general,
many question the effectiveness of these business incentives and whether the mounting costs are justified.
Unlike many other federal place-based policies that focus on infrastructure improvements, hiring subsidies, or
place-specific tax credits, these business tax incentives are controlled and implemented at the state and local
level. This autonomy has led some policymakers to propose banning these incentives out of concerns over the
race to the bottom and beggar-thy-neighbor behavior.
   This essay describes and evaluates state and local business tax incentives in the United States. We consider
three types of tax incentives--state corporate taxes, state tax credits, and firm-specific incentives--and the
tradeoffs involved with using them to achieve local and national objectives. Across types of incentives, the key
tradeoff is between targeting versus discretion. Firm-specific incentives can attract marginal firms at lower cost
than a corporate tax cut for all firms, but local discretion reduces transparency and its effectiveness relies on
politicians picking winners based on economic rather than political reasons. Across levels of government, local
discretion can align with local preferences, technologies, and economic conditions (Oates, 1972), but can also
result in excessive subsidies, misallocated funds, and negative externalities on other locations (Gordon, 1983).
Across locations, the key tension is between productive efficiency versus equity.
   We use new datasets from Slattery (2019) to characterize these incentive policies, to describe the selection
process that determines which places and firms give and receive incentives, and then to evaluate the economic
consequences. In 2014, states spent between $5 and $216 per capita on incentives for firms in the form of
firm-specific subsidies and general tax credits, which mostly target investment, job creation, and research and
development. Collectively, these incentives amounted to nearly 40% of state corporate tax revenues for the
typical state, but some states' incentive spending exceeded their corporate tax revenues. States with higher
per capita incentives tend to have higher state corporate tax rates. Recipients of firm-specific incentives are
usually large establishments in manufacturing, technology, and high-skilled service industries, and the average
discretionary subsidy is $178M for 1,500 promised jobs. Firms tend to accept subsidy deals from places that
are richer, larger, and more urban than the average county, and poor places provide larger incentives and spend
more per job.
   While we find some evidence of direct employment gains from attracting a firm, we do not find strong evi-



                                                        2
dence that firm-specific tax incentives increase broader economic growth at the state and local level. Although
these incentives are often intended to attract and retain high-spillover firms, the evidence on spillovers and
productivity effects of incentives appears mixed. As subsidy-giving has become more prevalent, subsidies are
no longer as closely tied to firm investment. If subsidy deals do not lead to high spillovers, justifying these
incentives requires substantial equity gains, which are also unclear empirically.
    The lack of clear spillovers and equity benefits suggest that reforms could lead to both efficiency and equity
gains. We discuss some of these reforms in the conclusion. Overall, much more work is needed to evaluate the
efficiency and distributional consequences of these policies and to design reforms that better address regional
disparities and improve the well-being of the unemployed and working class.



1     Conceptual Framework

1.1      Stated Goals of Business Incentive Programs

The stated goal of most state and local business incentives is to stimulate local economic activity, create jobs,
and boost wages. For example, the legislation enacting North Carolina's Job Development Investment Grant
(JDIG) program states:

      The purpose is to stimulate economic activity and to create new jobs for the citizens of the State
      by encouraging and promoting the expansion of existing business and industry within the State and
      by recruiting and attracting new business and industry to the State.

The goals are similar for business incentives that do not explicitly target firm entry and job creation. A report
on California's R&D tax credit reads (Hall and Wosinska, 1999):

      California is perceived as a high-tax business environment by firms contemplating setting up business
      or expanding...An R&D-related tax measure targets the particular types of firms that California
      desires to attract in spite of its relatively high position in the "tax league" tables.

In this section, we provide a framework to consider how state and local governments use different business
incentive policies to achieve their objectives of stimulating local economic activity, creating jobs, and boosting
wages.


1.2      State and Local Objective Function

Consider how business incentives affect local workers, capital owners, and politicians. All else equal, workers
benefit from employment opportunities, higher wages, lower local prices, lower taxes, high-quality government
services, and other amenities. Capital owners, who include local firm owners and landowners, benefit from
higher after-tax-and-incentive profits and rents. Profits depend on intermediate input costs, worker wages,
borrowing costs, rental rates of capital, product demand, and productivity, which may be related to gov-
ernment spending on roads and schools. Politicians value improvements in their re-election odds, campaign


                                                         3
contributions, pork provision opportunities, and other aspects of their political success. The weights that states
and local governments place on the wellbeing of these different groups may vary across places and over time,
and may also vary within groups. For example, the weight on the wellbeing of low- and high-earning residents
may differ.


1.2.1    State and Local Use of Business Tax Instruments

State and local policymakers have several policy instruments, within and outside the tax system, with which
to maximize this objective function. We focus on three instruments within the tax system: lowering corporate
tax rates, narrowing the corporate tax base, and offering firm-specific tax incentives. Table 1 shows that the
average state in 2014 has a corporate tax rate of 6.5%, spends $57 per capita on business tax incentives in
general, and offered 14 firm-specific tax incentives between 2002-2017. On average, the general and firm-specific
incentives amount to 38% of state corporate tax revenue.
   There is significant heterogeneity in business taxes and incentives across states. For example, Iowa and
Pennsylvania have corporate income tax rates of roughly 10%, whereas Nevada and Washington have no
corporate tax. State corporate tax apportionment rules and other base provisions vary widely across states as
well. Indeed Su´
               arez Serrato and Zidar (2018) show that state tax base and credit rules explain more of the
variation in state tax revenues than state corporate rates do.
   Figure 1 shows that states with high corporate tax rates tend to have narrower tax bases (measured as
business tax expenditures per capita). States with higher statutory corporate tax rates are able to offer
"larger" tax incentives because the tax incentive serves to reduce the effective corporate tax rate. However, a
large tax incentive with a high tax rate may still be less attractive than a state with a much lower corporate
tax (and no tax incentive), all else equal.
   Table 1 highlights the policy differences across eight states. West Virginia has a corporate tax rate of 6.5%
and corporate tax revenue of $118 per capita, but spends $177 per capita on business tax incentives, all through
state budget programs. Meanwhile, California has a corporate tax rate of 8.8% and double the per capita tax
revenue, and only offers $62 per capita in business tax incentives, mainly through tax credits. West Virginia
only gave four large firm-specific subsidies between 2002-2017, at a cost of $34,000 per job, while California
gave 13 subsidies, but at a much lower price of $5,000 per job.1 What are the costs and benefits of these
different approaches and why might governments adopt different policies?
    1 There is also within-state variation over time in how states finance these incentives. For example, in 2013 Michigan de-

creased per capita corporate tax expenditures from $117 to $13. However, the per capita economic development budget rose by
about $90, leaving total per capita corporate incentive spending almost unchanged. The number of subsidies and cost per job
are for a sample of large firm-specific deals, which we describe in the data measurement section. There are likely more modest
subsidy deals with lower cost per job numbers, for which we do not have data because they are not covered by the media.




                                                               4
1.3      Local Costs and Benefits of Each Policy Instrument

1.3.1    Firm-Specific Tax Incentives

State and local governments can provide firm-specific incentives in exchange for a firm's commitment to certain
levels of investment and employment. Consider the welfare of local workers if the government gives a firm-
specific tax incentive to a firm that promises 1,000 jobs at $60,000 a year. While some of these jobs go to
migrants, local residents who get these jobs will enjoy welfare gains that depend on their prior wages and
employment status.The benefits for local workers may extend beyond the directly employed group of 1,000
workers--this new firm may increase local labor demand and therefore local wages (Moretti, 2010). However,
this entry can also have negative effects. Entry can create congestion and increase land prices. If the tax
revenue generated from additional employment and economic activity falls short of paying for the incentive, it
will need to be financed through higher taxes or lower public service provision, reducing the welfare of local
workers.
   The owners of the firm receiving the incentive benefit directly. The owners of other local firms may benefit
from productivity and demand spillovers, but might face higher wages, local prices, and taxes. Local landowners
will gain to the extent that land prices increase, but may be worse off if their property tax bills increase to
finance the incentive. Local politicians may benefit from publicity of salient plant arrival, increased economic
activity, goodwill from recipient firm, and other political considerations.


1.3.2    Lower Corporate Tax Rates

Instead of lowering the tax bill of a single firm, state governments can lower corporate taxes across the board.
Lowering the corporate tax rate mechanically benefits all C-corporations in the state by decreasing their tax
bill. It also encourages the entry of new firms and the expansion of existing firms (Giroud and Rauh, 2019). Like
in the case of the firm-specific tax incentives, this new activity increases the demand for labor and other inputs,
which can increase local wages and prices (Su´
                                             arez Serrato and Zidar, 2016). To the extent that lower corporate
taxes are financed by reduced public services, a corporate tax cut may have adverse effects on productivity.
In Kansas, for example, dramatic business income tax cuts reduced state revenues by $700 million, leading to
underfunding of public schools, increases in sales taxes, and decreases in infrastructure spending (Leachman,
2017).
   For workers, the effects of a corporate tax cut depend on real wages and fiscal conditions. If labor demand
increases lead to higher wages and less unemployment, then workers will enjoy some benefit. But if wages and
employment don't increase substantially, then they may be worse off due to higher taxes or lower public service
provision. Similarly, the effects on landowners depend on local prices and property taxes.


1.3.3    Narrow Corporate Tax Base

An intermediate policy intervention often involves narrowing the corporate tax base by lowering the tax bill
for a set of firms based on their activity or industry. For instance, state investment tax credits and accelerate



                                                        5
depreciation allowances reduce the tax bill for firms that do a lot of investment (e.g., Chirinko and Wilson
(2008), Ohrn (2018)) and R&D tax credits reduce the tax bill for research-intensive firms (e.g.,Wilson (2009)).
This approach has direct effects on recipient firms that are similar to lowering the corporate tax rate, and
indirect effects on other firms that resemble those due to firm-specific incentives.2


1.4     Tradeoffs Among Policy Instruments

What are the tradeoffs among these policy instruments? Consider a typical state that both provides business in-
centives and taxes corporate income. If providing an additional firm-specific incentive attracts a "high-benefit"
firm, the firm's arrival will lead to higher productivity, more prosperity, and higher tax revenue both from
other firms and from higher incomes (Bartik, 1991; Glaeser, 2001; Garcia-Mila and McGuire, 2002; Henderson,
2003; Greenstone and Moretti, 2003; Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti, 2010). Offering a firm-specific tax
incentive also enables states to contract with firms regarding specific investment and hiring outcomes, which
they cannot do with a corporate tax cut.
    Firm-specific subsidies can also be used to target mobile firms. If some firms are more responsive to state
corporate taxes, then providing tax relief for these firms can allow governments to price discriminate, increase
economic activity, and raise revenues more efficiently (Ramsey, 1927).3 Lastly, firm-specific incentives also help
attract or retain firms without lowering revenue collected from all firms in the state. A firm that attracts skilled
workers, that broadens the industrial mix of an area, or that has hard-to-build relationship-specific capital with
local suppliers may be especially valuable (Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer, 1995; Moretti and Wilson, 2014;
Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman and Shleifer, 1992; Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Price, 2016). Base rules
share some of these benefits, such as targeting more responsive activity and linking tax benefits to desired
outcomes like investment, employment, and innovation (Su´
                                                        arez Serrato and Zidar, 2018).
    However, implementing firm-specific incentives presents many challenges. The economic rationale for tar-
geting particular firms hinges on the the assumption that state and local governments are able to pick winners
effectively. Identifying "high-benefit" firms and forecasting a firm's effect on the local economy--including
potential agglomeration economies--is a difficult problem for policymakers and academics alike. Moreover,
assessing whether the firm would locate elsewhere without the incentive is also hard; firm location decisions
are multi-dimensional and idiosyncratic. There is mixed evidence on what share of firms receiving targeted
benefits are inframarginal, and thus not influenced by the tax benefit: for example, Bartik (2019a) argues that
most deals involve inframarginal firms (Bartik, 2018), while, using revealed preference approaches, Slattery
(2019) finds that deals affect location choice among the largest establishments and Mast (Forthcoming) finds
    2 State policymakers also use base provisions to tax different sources of revenue. Through the apportionment system, state

policy makers can allocate taxes based on where goods are sold (destination), where goods are produced (source), and where the
firm owners live (residence). These options can lead to different effects on local workers, capital owners, and politicians, depend-
ing on the structure of production and the responsiveness of multi-state firms to tax provisions. In addition, state personal tax
taxes can also be an important policy instrument. The rise of pass-through businesses has made state personal income tax rules
an increasingly relevant business tax instrument as many private firms (including S-corporations and partnerships) face personal
income taxation rather than traditional corporate taxation (?). Moreover, if workers care about after-tax pay, low personal tax
rates may also enable firms to pay workers less, thus attracting firms to low personal tax rate places.
    3 Black and Hoyt (1989) make a related argument about the net fiscal contribution of new firms. If the marginal cost of pro-

viding public goods is less than tax revenues generated by the firm, then the government may want to offer the firm subsidies.
For a discussion of related considerations regarding international taxation, see Keen (2001); Dharmapala (2008).


                                                                 6
limited effects for tax exemptions for mobile firms within New York State. Firm-specific incentives have clear
fiscal costs and unclear benefits. In short, targeting specific firms may not be as effective in practice.
    Using firm-specific incentives has additional costs. The lack of transparency in subsidy-giving leaves it
more exposed to political capture and non-economic allocation of funds. An investigation of the Economic
Development Agency in New Jersey, for example, found that lobbying and corruption led to inflated subsidy
deals (Corasaniti and Haag, 2019).
    More broadly, providing generous corporate tax incentives requires raising revenue from other taxes. Figure
1 shows high-incentive states have higher tax rates on average. The social cost of higher taxes grows quickly
with the size of the tax and the benefits of incentives diminish with the size of incentives. Thus, providing
additional incentives may not always lead to higher welfare in the state, especially at high levels of incentives.
In addition, the most distressed places, where the equity gains may be largest, may not be able to afford to
compete for firms with local incentives.
    In the following section, we examine a tax incentive Volkswagen received in Tennessee to make these
considerations more concrete. Then we will move from anecdote to more comprehensive data to measure and
evaluate how these incentive policies work in practice.



2     A firm-specific incentive for Volkswagen
In 2008, Volkswagen and the state of Tennessee came to an agreement. Volkswagen (VW) would locate their
new assembly plant in Chattanooga, hire 2,000 employees and spend almost $1 billion. In exchange, VW would
receive a discretionary subsidy worth over $500 million.
    Many officials championed the deal for not only the 2,000 promised jobs and $1B investment, but also for
the expected indirect job creation and revenue effects. "The Volkswagen investment in this community is going
to have a tremendous economic gain for the entire region. I'm confident we're going to have a very reasonable
incentive package when you look at the initial costs of what is being offered compared with a much bigger long-
term return," stated Matt Kisber, the TN commissioner for Economic and Community Development (ECD).
He added "I think Gov. Bredesen and the mayors here are right to treat an assembly plant as worth a large
taxpayer investment. There's nothing quite like the automobile industry to bring in money, raise family incomes
and bring in jobs." Kisber and the ECD projected that in a few years VW would have an annual payroll of
more than $100M, help create 14,000 total jobs, and have a total economic benefit of over $600M per year
(Chattanooga Times, July 2008).
Business Incentives for Volkswagen
    Tennessee used a mix of instruments to attract VW. The $558 million incentive package consisted of state-
level tax credits and grants, as well as discretionary tax abatements and in-kind contributions from the state
and local government. Specifically, the deal consisted of property given to VW ($81M), worker training ($30M),
highway and road construction ($43M), rail line upgrades ($3.5M), "enhanced" state job and investment tax
credits over 20 years ($200M), and local property tax abatements over 30 years ($200M). Moreover, the state



                                                          7
promised specialized tax credits for any suppliers that locate immediately around the VW plant (Chattanooga
Times, July 2008).
    Some of these incentives are available to any qualifying firm in the state. For example, a Tennessee company
with at least 10 new employees and $1 million of investment qualifies for a $4,500 per job credit for one year.
These credits become more generous for larger employment and investment levels. Based on their projected
plans, VW qualified for Tennessee's "enhanced" Jobs Credit, at $5,000 per job over 20 years. Facing a state
corporate tax rate of 6.5%, VW would be able to use these credits to reduce their tax bill.
    The VW subsidy package also included state funds for worker training. More specifically, the state promised
at least $12,000 per employee to train each of the 2,000 workers, and to pay for the construction of a technical
training center. Some of this money came from Tennessee's "Fast Track" program, which typically provides
grants of $4,000 per employee for worker training.4
    In short, any manufacturing firm entering Tennessee in 2008 would receive incentives from at least three
programs: tax relief from the Jobs Credit and Industrial Machinery Credit, as well as grants for job training
from the Fast Track program. The size of their investment and the number of jobs at the plant determine the
generosity of these incentives.
    Of course, the average manufacturing firm is less likely to receive discretionary incentives such as property,
infrastructure, and property tax abatements. These discretionary components of a subsidy deal are usually
funded through the state budget. Tennessee has an "Economic Development Fund" that can provide additional
grant support to companies expanding or locating in the state, but "only used in exceptional cases where
the impact of the company on a given community is significant." Lastly, there are capital grants available to
"significant projects." Since 2011, this has only included 9 companies, including VW, Amazon, GM, and Nissan.
According to the Tennessee state budget, in 2008 the Department of Economic and Community Development
spent $109M on business attraction and recruitment. Tennessee's level of incentives is about average across
states; in 2014, the state spent $16 per capita on tax credits and $35 per capita on economic development
programs, while the national average was $19 per capita on tax credits and $34 per capita on economic
development (Table 1). However, incentive spending as a percent of corporate tax revenues in Tennessee was
only 26%, while the national average was 38%.
Volkswagen's Location Decision
    One reason that Tennessee put together a subsidy package for Volkswagen was that the automobile manu-
facturer was considering many other sites for their new assembly plant. VW's head of overseas manufacturing
described the site selection process as follows: "We took 400 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) into ac-
count. They were narrowed down by different principal criteria to 12 MSAs in seven states. Then the sites that
matched our criteria in terms of size and basic infrastructure were researched in detail and analyzed" (AreaD-
evelopment.com, 2011). VW hired a consulting firm, The Staubach Company, to assist with the site selection
    4 According to the state budget documents (Tennessee State Legislature, 2011-2012), Tennessee spent over $53M on the Fast

Track program in 2008, and allocated $71M for the program in 2009, likely increasing the available funds because of the arrival
of VW. Like the tax credits, the size of the Fast Track grant is determined by the company investment, number of new jobs, and
wages of new jobs, as well as the types of skills needed, and the location of the project. Since 2011, there have been 874 projects
in the "Fast Track" program, and firms received about $4,000 per new job.



                                                                8
process. A team of 25 consultants were employed full time, analyzing hundreds of potential sites and soliciting
proposals from the dozen locations that they short-listed. According to the director of industry-government
relations at VW, this location decision was the result of "truly a very close competition," with Chattanooga
narrowly beating out a site in Huntsville, Alabama. The Alabama subsidy offer was at least $386 million
(Bruns, September 2008; Bennett, July 2008).
    The overall attractiveness of each state depends on more factors than just tax incentives; many non-tax
considerations matter for VW's location decision. In this case, the two finalists are fairly similar. Both states
have right-to-work laws, state corporate tax rates of 6.5%, similar apportionment weights, and are in the same
region of the country ­ the drive from Chattanooga, Tennessee to Huntsville, Alabama takes under two hours.
Wages in the sector were slightly higher in Huntsville, and unemployment was slightly lower there as well.5
Other harder-to-quantify factors, such as the quality of the infrastructure, readiness for a large new assembly
plant, and time to build, also influenced VW's decision process.
The Effect of Volkswagen on the Local Economy
    We can evaluate this particular subsidy by comparing outcomes in Chattanooga, the winning city in Ten-
nessee, to outcomes in Huntsville, the runner-up in Alabama. Figure 2 plots how employment in Transportation
Equipment Manufacturing (NAICS 336, which includes motor vehicle manufacturing as NAICS 3361) evolved
from 2000 to 2017 in Hamilton County, TN and Huntsville, AL. The "winning" city Chattanooga is in Hamilton
County, and the runner-up city of Huntsville is in Madison County. Huntsville initially had roughly 10,000
employees in transportation equipment manufacturing before the VW deal in 2008, which was substantially
more than the roughly 750 employees in Hamilton county. After the VW deal in 2008, Hamilton saw a sharp
increase in employment to nearly 3,500 employees. The runner-up Huntsville experienced a short-term decline
of approximately 3,500 workers, likely due to the Great Recession, and eventual recovery back to around 9,000
workers. Thus, the difference in differences amounted to approximately 4,000 workers in transportation manu-
facturing following the VW deal. If we are concerned that some of this estimate reflects double counting (due
to business stealing affecting both the treatment and comparison group), we can use the raw difference of post
versus pre of approximately 2,750 additional jobs in Hamilton.
    Recall that the TN commissioner of local economic development projected that VW's promised 2,000-job
plant and $1B investment would increase local payroll by $100M, create 14,000 jobs, and have a total economic
benefit of $600M per year. While it is plausible that VW's plant increased auto employment by a few thousand
jobs, it is hard to detect effects on total employment.6 In terms of payroll, the direct estimates were quite
reasonable since 2000 direct jobs at an average annual salary in 2008 of $50K amounts to $100M of payroll.
The indirect spillover benefits and "trickle down" of equity impacts are harder to detect.
    5 Transportation manufacturing wages were about $50,000 in Hamilton County, and $87,000 in Huntsville. Unemployment

was higher in Hamilton, at 5.7% to Huntsville's 4.3%. Hamilton county had a population of about 320,000 whereas Huntsville
had a population of roughly 400,000. Both locales had per-capita income of roughly $40,000. Tennessee had a sales tax rate of
7% and no income tax, while Alabama had a sales tax rate of 4% and income tax rate of 3.3%.
    6 For example, a simple difference-in-differences specification run on 3 digit employment just in these two counties has a

treatment effect of 2,679 jobs, but the estimate for total employment is -8,782.




                                                               9
3     Data on State and Local Business Incentives

3.1     Measurement Challenges

The VW deal is a single case study. We need comprehensive data to evaluate these incentives in general.
Assembling such data requires addressing some key measurement challenges.
    There is substantial complexity and heterogeneity within and across the three broad policies that we con-
sider: reducing the corporate tax rate, narrowing the corporate tax base, and offering firm-specific incentives.
Discretionary tax incentives can come with many parts; the subsidy deal for VW was a function of property
tax abatements, specialized tax credits, free land, job training, and more. Also, a given firm may qualify for
different levels of non-discretionary tax credits based on its exact industry, investment, and employment, as well
as its location within a state and the allocation of activity and sales across states, which affects how multi-state
firms apportion profits for tax purposes.
    An additional measurement challenge is that states and local governments do not usually report the exact
amount of tax credits and incentives each establishment in their jurisdiction receives, but instead report tax
rates, total tax expenditures, incentive program rules, and incentive program budgets. Because there are many
different tax credits and incentive programs, and because the individual tax bill of a firm is unobserved, it is
hard to measure and compare incentives across firms and states.


3.2     Three Approaches for Measuring Business Incentives

In this subsection we describe three approaches for measuring state and local business incentives: rules-based,
expenditure-based, and a narrative approach
    The first approach is "rules-based," which involves collecting data on the rules of each tax, tax credit, and
incentive program offered in a locality, and predicting the incentives for a firm, given their activity and the
rules. Bartik (2017) applies this approach in the "Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes." This database
tracks marginal tax rates and business incentives for 45 industries in 47 cities and 33 states, from 1990 to 2015.
The focus is incentives for new and expanding businesses. Using the rules of each tax rate, tax credit, and
grant in the database, Bartik (2017) uses a simulation model to predict the level of tax incentives a firm would
receive in a certain city, given the firm's balance sheet.
    In terms of state corporate tax rates and tax base provisions, Su´
                                                                     arez Serrato and Zidar (2018) also use a
rules-based approach. They analyze how rule changes affected state corporate tax revenue over time and across
locations, but they are only able to analyze total revenue rather than more granular micro-data at the firm or
tax-rule level.
    The second approach is "expenditure-based," which measures the outlays for each program.7 Slattery
(2019) collects data on state-level business incentives expenditures from state tax expenditure reports and
budget documents by reading each document and identifying tax credits and budget items targeted at new
    7 This approach combines the size of incentives and the level of activity. For example, two states with the same investment

tax credit rates could have different investment tax credit expenditures if one state happens to have a lot more (inframarginal)
investment.



                                                               10
and expanding businesses. The state economic development spending collected from state budgets can include
grants, job training, loans, and discretionary subsidies, among other types of incentives. The final product
tracks the budget for each program (like job training grants) and expenditure on each tax incentive (e.g.,
investment tax credit) by state and year, from 2007-2014.
    The third approach is "narrative-based" (named after the approach for studying national and state tax
changes in Romer and Romer (2010) and Giroud and Rauh (2019), respectively). Because systematic reporting
on firm-level incentives does not exist, Slattery (2019) uses a variety of sources to assemble a data set on
these firm-level deals. She starts with all subsidy deals worth over $5M, as reported by the Good Jobs First
"Subsidy Tracker."8 Next, she removes any entry that does not mention expansion, relocation, or a discretionary
incentive. Finally, she adds any firm locations reported by Site Selection Magazine's "Incentives Deal of
the Month" columns and annual "Top Deals" reports, arriving at a sample of 543 establishments receiving
discretionary subsidies over the period 2002-2017.
    Given this list of 543 subsidy deals, Slattery (2019) uses press releases and news articles to fill in details on
the number of jobs promised, investment promised, runner-up location, and specific terms of the deal. Each of
these subsidy deals combine a range of various incentives, as we saw with VW. The deals often combine state-
level tax credits and grants that the state would offer to any company of a certain size, as well as discretionary
tax abatements and in-kind contributions from the state and local government. Therefore, in some cases where
the news or press release only reports the discretionary component (e.g., a discretionary tax credit from the
"California Competes" program), she uses the state-level spending data to determine what non-discretionary
incentives are available to the firm (e.g., California's R&D tax credit), and thus to estimate the tax credit for
the subsidy deal.9


3.3     The Magnitude of State and Local Business Tax Incentives

Using a rule-based approach, Bartik (2017) estimates that state and local governments spent $45B on incentives
in 2015, of which $13.5B is attributed to local property tax abatements, which together with other local
incentives make the total state incentive expenditure less than $30B. Using an expenditure-based approach,
Slattery (2019) estimates that state governments spent about $20B on incentives in 2014. Assuming the same
     8 The mission statement of Good Jobs First is "Tracking Subsidies, Promoting Accountability in Economic Development."

To this end, they publish a "Subsidy Tracker" which lists all the firm-level incentives they come across. The sources of these in-
centives include state and local government reports, newspaper articles, press releases, and the results of FOIA requests to state
governments. There is a lot of selection in the set of subsidies observed in the data, due to difference in reporting across states
or even within states but across programs. For the largest subsidy deals, where there is press available, Good Jobs First has
much better coverage. Another note is that there are often duplicates in the data, due to subsidies being reported in press re-
leases and tax expenditures being reported annually for states that report tax expenditures at the firm level. The total value of
tax incentives may also be under-reported for states like California, where the "Subsidy Tracker" has entries for the "California
Competes" discretionary tax credit program, but does not report how much firms receive from California's generous R&D tax
credit.
     9 Over 30% of the subsidy deals in our sample mention contributions to the subsidy package from local governments, e.g., the

county and city governments. This estimate is likely a lower bound on deals that involve local government spending. We do not
have a comprehensive data set on spending at the more local level. We suspect that the local contribution is reported in news
articles and press releases when it is a significant portion of the total deal. Like in the VW case, local governments usually add
to the subsidy deal by offering property tax abatements, which can be very large in localities with high property taxes. Larger
cities may have economic development offices and economic development teams of their own, who will work with the state to
develop a subsidy offer for a given firm.




                                                                11
relative contribution from local governments as the Bartik (2017) estimates would imply that total state plus
local incentives amount to $30B in 2014.
   Differing approaches and data coverage explain some of the gap between these estimates. Bartik (2017)
assumes each firm receives all of the incentives it is qualified for, and calculates the level using a simulation
model, whereas Slattery (2019) records the state reported budget for each incentive program and expenditure
for each tax credit from the annual budget documents and tax expenditure reports. The state-level dataset of
Slattery (2019) does not include local incentives, which are included in Bartik (2017), and is based on reported
spending instead of simulated spending, given rules and activity. Therefore, the state-level data from Slattery
(2019) that we present is a lower bound for total state and local business incentives.
   Previous efforts to collect data on firm-specific incentives using a narrative-based approach have found
estimates of business incentive spending that are almost twice as high. A main source for these estimates is the
non-profit Good Jobs First (Mattera and Tarczynska, 2019), and journalists at the New York Times (Storey,
Fehr and Watkins, 2012). The New York Times sourced data from Good Jobs First 's "Subsidy Tracker,"
consultants, state agencies, and government reporting to create their "United States of Subsidies" interactive
database on business incentives. The resulting database reported total business incentive spending of $80B in
2012. One reason for this difference from (Bartik, 2017) and Slattery (2019) is double counting. Firm-specific
subsidies can be recorded twice, both as the individual subsidy deal and as part of the total state spending
on an incentive program. Also, Bartik (2017) and Slattery (2019) explicitly focus on incentives for new and
expanding business, whereas the New York Times data include other components such as sales tax exemptions
that could apply to individuals and existing companies.
   In the Slattery (2019) firm-level incentive data that we use, we take the size of the subsidy as given, even
though there may be differences in reporting across localities and even industries in how much a given package
of incentives is "worth" to a firm. Furthermore, the subsidy size is normalized to 2017 dollars and a 10-year
contract. The modal subsidy deal is paid out over 10 years, but some have longer horizons, such as the 20
years of state tax credits for VW.
   With 543 firm-specific subsidies over the period of 2002-2017, the total amount of discretionary incentives
promised was $96 billion, or about $6.4 billion a year. Subsidy-giving fluctuates over time, but generally
increased from 2002 to 2014, with a minimum of 14 discretionary incentives offered in 2003, and a maximum
of 53 discretionary incentives offered in 2012.
   We use per capita incentive spending--the sum of economic development and tax expenditures--as a mea-
sure of the generosity of a state's incentives. Top per capita spenders include Michigan, West Virginia, New
York, Vermont, and New Hampshire. Their per capita incentive spending in 2014 amounts to 56 percent of
public safety expenditures, 40 percent of spending on health and hospitals, 30 percent of transportation, and
12 percent of education. For the full sample of states, it is 23 percent of public safety, 13 percent of health and
hospitals, 11 percent of transportation, and less than 5 percent of education. Compared to state corporate tax
revenues, incentive spending is about 40 percent of corporate tax revenues on average across states in 2014.
There are five states--Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming--which have zero corporate



                                                        12
income tax revenue, but spend about $44 per capita on incentives for firms. One measure of generosity of these
incentives is the ratio of subsidy to promised jobs or "cost per job." Interpreting this cost per job measure
requires care, because the subsidy is a flow over a period of ten years, so cost per job per year is lower than these
estimates. Complications with discount rates and job churn complicate estimates of cost per effective-annual-
full-time employees, but dividing by 10 provides a crude, optimistic estimate of cost per job per year. We find
that average cost per job has increased over the same period. This finding is consistent with Bartik (2017),
which shows that incentives have increased over a longer time-period--incentive spending as a percentage of
gross taxes increased from 10% in 1990 to 30% in 2015.
    At the time, the VW location deal was the largest subsidy offer made by Tennessee--$558M in 2008
dollars for a 2,000-job automobile plant, with a cost of about $279,000 per job promised. However, in terms of
discretionary subsidies offered to large firms, it is not an extreme outlier. Over the entire sample of discretionary
incentives, firms receive $178.4M on average and promise about 1,500 jobs at the establishment. The effective
cost per job is $120,000 at the mean but varies a lot over deals--from $13,300 at the 10th percentile to $1M at
the 90th percentile. In the next section we explore how differences across industries and locations help explain
variation in observed subsidy size.


3.4     The Allocation of State and Local Business Tax Incentives

This subsection uses the Slattery (2019) data to assess how well the allocation of incentives aligns with the
efficiency, equity, and political goals of policymakers. We first consider how well the allocation of incentives
aligns with employment, growth, and spillover goals, and then consider how the allocation of incentives aligns
with equity and political goals.
    Large, profitable firms are more likely to receive firm-specific subsidies. Comparing subsidy receipt by
establishment size to the universe of establishment entry in the Census Business Dynamics Statistics reveals
that more than 30 percent of all establishments with over 1,000 employees receive discretionary subsidies, while
the percentage is less than 0.2 percent for establishments with under 250 employees.10 The firms that receive
discretionary subsidies not only have larger establishments, but they are also larger than the average public
company in terms of employment, profits, revenue, and capital stock. The differences are striking. Firms
that receive discretionary subsidies from states have eight times as many employees as the average firm in
Compustat (60 times more at the median). The gross profit of the average firm in Compustat from 2001-2014
is just over $1B. The average gross profit for the subsample of firms that ever received a discretionary subsidy
in that period is $14B, and it is even higher in the year of the subsidy deal ($21B).
    The fact that larger establishments, which are part of large, profitable, firms, are most likely to receive dis-
cretionary subsidies is consistent with the following hypotheses on subsidy-giving: state and local jurisdictions
   10 We compare the size of establishments in the subsidy data with the size distribution of establishments entering the U.S.,

from the Census Business Dynamics Statistics (Appendix Table A.1). We match the firms in our sample of subsidized firms
to firms in the Compustat database (Appendix Table A.2). Our subsidy data set is selected on subsidies that are at least $5
million, so smaller firms are likely also receiving smaller discretionary subsidies. However, when we use all establishment level
tax credit and grant receipts from the state of Indiana--a state that provides more comprehensive data--we find a very similar
pattern on establishment size.




                                                                13
try to attract large productive establishments that will have generate surplus and spillovers, affect the location
decisions of other establishments, and increase demand for both labor and services. However, the fact that
only the largest firms receive large discretionary subsidies may facilitate increasing industry concentration, a
topic of much interest and concern (See, for example, De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017)).
   The prevalence of firm-specific subsidies in manufacturing, technology, and high-skilled services also appears
consistent with stated objectives. These industries represent nearly half (47%) of our sample of deals. Table 2
shows mean deal characteristics for five industries.11 Automobile manufacturing firms are the most "popular"
industry, with 56 subsidies, or 10 percent of the total sample. The average automobile manufacturer promises
to create almost 3,000 jobs, and receives over $290M, at over $100,000 per job. The Economic Policy Institute
estimates that the auto industry has the largest jobs multiplier, with 14 jobs created in the local economy for
every 1 job created at an automobile manufacturing plant (Bivens, 2019). Therefore, the prevalence of auto
subsidies is consistent with the hypothesis that policymakers target firms with large agglomeration effects.
   Other industries get large subsidies, but do not promise as many jobs. For example, basic chemical man-
ufacturing subsidies amount to over $950,000 per job. Establishments in this industry, however, often make
large capital investments, have high fixed costs to entry, reduce local energy costs for other firms, and become
settled future taxpayers. They may also lobby aggressively. In Louisiana, for example, where many chemical
manufacturers are located, a proposal to restrict the discretionary tax exemption program in the state was
met with a rush of activity from the chemical industry, and the publication of industry-backed studies on the
positive impact that they have in the state (The Advocate, 2018, 2016). An open question is how subsidy
receipt depends on the product and labor market characteristics of firms as well as the number and type of
workers it attracts.
   At the state level, we find similar patterns for non-discretionary incentives. The most popular tax credits
(in terms of both the number of credits available and total spending) target job creation, investment, and
research activity. Those three types of credits make up 75 percent of total per capita tax expenditures.
   Distressed places may enjoy larger welfare gains from increasing local economic activity. Consistent with
this observation, we find that within the sample of winning counties, poorer counties are more likely to give
larger subsidies. Figure 3 illustrates this phenomenon with a binned scatterplot, with subsidy per job plotted
against average wages in the county. It shows that counties with an average wage of less than $40,000 pay
over $350,000 per job in the mean subsidy deal. Meanwhile, counties with average wages over $100,000 pay
less than $100,000 per job in a given subsidy. This pattern may also be driven by differences in profitability --
distressed places may need to provide larger incentives to attract firms. There is little evidence on who benefits
from these policies across the income distribution and whether those experiencing wage gains were mostly prior
residents, unemployed, or working-class individuals. These are open and important questions.
   However, the most distressed locations are rarely able to attract firms with subsidies. Winning and runner-
up counties have higher per-capita income and higher average wages than the average county.12 The personal
  11 See  Appendix Table A.3 for the mean and median characteristics for the top 10 industries, by subsidy-receipt.
  12 In  2000, the winning counties had a mean population of 407,000 and an average wage of $45,500, while the runner-up coun-
ties had a mean population of 610,000 and an average wage of $48,600. Counties with at least 100,000 residents have a similar
profile to the winners: a mean population of 400,000 and an average wage bill of $44,400. Meanwhile, the average county had a


                                                             14
income per capita of the average county is $34,000, which is $7,000 lower than winning counties and more than
$10,000 lower than the runner-ups. Facing tight budgets, the most distressed places where equity gains may
be largest are not well-served by locally-financed incentive policies.
    We compare the relative importance of determinants of incentive provision at the state level and find a
strong role for political factors. In particular, we follow Slattery (2019) by estimating a linear probability
model in which the dependent variable equals 1 if the state increased per capita incentive spending by at least
20 percent. The explanatory variables of interest include whether it was an election year, state GDP per capita
in the previous year, state employment rate in the previous year, and whether the governor of the state could
run as an incumbent. This specification includes state and year fixed effects. Table 3 presents the results.
We find that a 20 percent increase in state per capita incentive spending is less likely when previous-year
employment is higher. When a state loses jobs, the fiscal externality of creating a new job is higher. While
these economic determinants are important, political factors are especially important. The interaction between
an incumbent governor and an election year is highly correlated with increases in incentive spending, suggesting
a strong role for political determinants of incentive provision. In the raw data, per capita incentive spending
increases by more than 20% in half of the cases in which it is an election year and the Governor is up for
re-election versus one-fifth of the cases otherwise. This result is consistent with Jensen and Malesky (2018),
who find that offering incentives increases the re-election odds of governors.



4     Effects of State and Local Business Incentives
What is the effect of these business tax policies on firm location, economic activity, and fiscal outcomes?
Answering this question is difficult. One approach is to measure how outcomes change after a business tax
policy change, but this approach is problematic because state and local governments may be more likely to
enact policies or give more generous incentives when economic conditions are deteriorating or are expected to
deteriorate. Indeed, in terms of generosity, Figure 3 shows that poorer places give larger subsidies per worker.
Alternatively, places may be more likely to enact policies when economic conditions give them more slack in
the budget. Thus, comparing outcomes before and after may reflect how the place was trending, rather than
the effect of the policy itself. An alternative comparison group, such as runner-up locations or states that will
adopt similar policies a few years later, can help difference out common trends and identify the effects of policy
changes.


4.1     Evidence on Discretionary Subsidies

This subsection investigates the effects of firm-specific tax incentives by comparing outcomes in "winning"
locations to runner-up locations as in Greenstone and Moretti (2003) and Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti
(2010). We examine effects on employment within the targeted industry (i.e., at the NAICS 3-digit level),
spillovers to other labor market outcomes, and overall effects on house prices. We use county-level data to look
population of 91,000 and an average wage of $34,800. See Appendix Table A.4 for more detail.



                                                             15
at these outcomes and state-level data to look at effects on government expenditures and revenues. We then
compare these results with prior results in the literature.
    Figure 4A shows how employment within the 3-digit industry of the targeted firm differs between "winning"
and "runner-up" counties in the years before and after the incentive. It shows that differences in the years
before the policy are fairly stable but then increase after the discretionary incentive to be approximately 1,500
jobs higher in the winner versus the runner-up location. This result suggests that we can detect the direct
effects of these policies on local employment within the sector of the deal.
    Table 4 shows difference-in-differences estimates for a broader set of local outcomes. The results are more
mixed and weaker for effects on employment outside the 3-digit industry as well as on county-wide outcomes. For
example, we don't see strong evidence of effects on other 2-digit, 1-digit, or county-wide employment outcomes
outside the directly affected 3-digit sector. Patterns are similar at a broader geographic (CONSPUMA) level.
While it is hard to measure distributional outcomes using publicly available data at the county level, Column
7 also finds little impact on the employment-to-population ratio, which is one of the ways to measure equity
impacts.
    Figure 4B shows the effects on county-level house prices. In the years prior to the discretionary subsidy,
winning counties had slightly higher house prices but the differences are minor. However, after the subsidy,
house prices seem to decline to about 4% relative to the runner-up locations, but the effect is marginally
significant statistically. This apparent decline in house prices, which may reflect a negative pre-trend rather
than real effects, provides some weakly suggestive evidence that the welfare effects of these deals might be
negative on average.
    Prior studies have examined the effects of firm-specific incentives using the same approach and found
somewhat different results. Greenstone and Moretti (2003) found employment effects at the 1-digit level and
small increases of 1.1-1.7% in property values in a sample of 82 primarily manufacturing deals in the 1980s
and early 1990s.13 Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010) use data on productivity of other manufacturing
plants and find quite substantial total factor productivity spillovers in winning areas. Patrick (2016) finds
that the specific estimates in Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010) are somewhat sensitive to specification
choices such as the inclusion of trends and the selection of runner-ups, and that attracting a new large plant
leads to modest increases in economic activity. Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Patnaik, Saporta-Eksten
and Van Reenen (2019) expand the million-dollar plant data set and find spillovers using establishment level
data for their sample in the 2000s.
    The difference in results across these studies is likely due to differences in the question being asked and how
the analysis samples are constructed. Asking what happens in places that had large investments is different
than asking what happens in places that gave large subsidies. Large investments may lead to spillovers, whereas
large subsidies may not.14 The Greenstone and Moretti (2003); Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010) and
   13 Note, however, that their property value measure differs from the house price index and in their Data Appendix, they note

a .54 correlation between their measure and a repeat sale house price index from OFHEO.
   14 In a recent working paper using Census micro data, Patrick and Partridge (2019) find evidence of small spillovers on in-

cumbent plans in the million-dollar plant sample, and smaller to no spillovers in a larger sample of subsidized plants. The larger
sample of subsidized firms is the million-dollar plant sample plus the Site Selection sample without runners-up plus the Good



                                                               16
Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Patnaik, Saporta-Eksten and Van Reenen (2019) sample is selected on
the size of firm investment, while our data is selected on the size of the subsidy. As subsidy-giving has become
more prevalent in the 2000s, it is not always for large investment projects.15
    Overall, our assessment of the current evidence is that the spillover effects of subsidies is mixed. While
the million-dollar plant papers find evidence of spillovers, large firms that often get large subsides may not
generate large spillovers on average in our data and in some other recent work. Criscuolo, Martin, Overman
and Van Reenen (2019), for example, examine a related policy in the UK, where firms apply for a discretionary
grant. They find employment and wage effects, but don't see any effects on total factor productivity. Their
effects are concentrated for the smallest firms, as larger firms are able to receive incentives without changing
their behavior.


4.2     Evidence on Corporate Tax Rate and Base Changes

There is also a large literature on the effect of state corporate tax policies on firm location, economic activity,
and fiscal outcomes. A number of recent papers such as show that U.S. state corporate taxes affect firm location
and FDI.16 In terms of distributional effect, most of the gains from state corporate tax cuts go to firm and
landowners (Su´
              arez Serrato and Zidar, 2016); while there are also some wage gains for workers on average, it
is not yet well-established which workers benefit and how much these benefits "trickle down" to low wage and
unemployed residents.
    Some of the more important corporate tax base provisions are those related to innovation and investment.
Wilson (2009), Moretti and Wilson (2014), Moretti and Wilson (2017), and Akcigit, Grigsby, Nicholas and
Stantcheva (2018) study the effects of state tax policies related to research and development on innovation.
Ohrn (2018) shows the effects of accelerated depreciation policies on investment at the state level, and Chirinko
and Wilson (2008) study state investment tax credits. Garrett, Ohrn and Su´
                                                                          arez Serrato (Forthcoming) show
that these investment effects also affect state employment. A full assessment of this literature is beyond the
scope of this paper, but we mention this research to highlight some of the current evidence on numerous levers
policymakers use to attract firms and increase economic activity in their jurisdictions.



5     National Welfare and Additional Considerations
In practice firm-specific incentives represent the large majority of local and economic development spending
in the United States (Bartik, 2019b). From a national perspective, we need to consider not only the effects
Jobs first sample. More generally, one potential issue with the runner-up design is that some firms may use implausible runner
up locations to game the bidding process, in which case effects may be overstated.
   15 To confirm that our specification choices were not causing the differences, we estimated them using the set of plants from

Greenstone and Moretti (2003); Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010) and Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Patnaik,
Saporta-Eksten and Van Reenen (2019) and confirmed that our approach delivers results that are consistent with this earlier
work in that we see spillovers beyond the 3-digit industry at the county level. We report these results in the appendix.
   16 Readers interested in this literature might begin with papers from the last few years like Ljungqvist and Smolyansky

(2016); Su´arez Serrato and Zidar (2016); Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018); Fajgelbaum, Morales, Su´  arez Serrato and Zidar
(2018); Curtis and Decker (2018); Giroud and Rauh (2019); Mast (Forthcoming). For foreign direct investment and state taxes,
Hines (1996) is a central reference.




                                                               17
on the agents in the location providing incentives, but also on the agents in all other locations. Much of the
literature on tax competition (for a survey, see Agrawal, Hoyt and Wilson (2019)) highlights the possibility of
a race to the bottom and over-subsidization of firms. A prisoner's dilemma perspective in which every location
acting in their own self-interest, leading to a sub-optimal equilibrium for all helps reveal why some policymakers
have called for subsidy bans in the United States (Markell, 2017) and has led to bans on such subsidies within
the European Union. In this section, we discuss the conditions under which allowing state and local business
incentives may or may not be in the national interest.
    As a baseline, consider the simplest frictionless benchmark with no externalities and the optimal level
of government service provision. In this case, business incentives likely reduce aggregate welfare. Moving a
firm to a location to which it would not go in the absence of incentives misallocates resources (Gaubert, 2018;
Fajgelbaum, Morales, Su´
                       arez Serrato and Zidar, 2018) and has fiscal costs that either raise taxes, which increase
dead weight loss, or lowers government spending below optimal levels.
    Considering fiscal externalities and productivity spillovers can change this assessment. If firms do not
internalize the externalities they provide, allowing local areas to align tax incentives and social benefits may
increase allocative efficiency (Glaeser, 2001; Ossa, 2015). For example, moving a technology firm from San
Francisco, California, to Columbus, Ohio, may lead to more service employment, wage growth, and local fiscal
benefits in Ohio. In terms of externalities across locations, reallocating activity may affect fiscal conditions
in other locations (Gordon, 1983) and can also increase overall economic activity in some circumstances. For
example, overall US innovative activity may be higher if the technology firm remains in San Francisco (Moretti,
2019; Glaeser and Hausman, 2019; Sollaci, 2019) due to gains from concentrating scientists in knowledge hubs.
It is not clear, however, if concentrating firms and workers would increase aggregate activity in most industries
or in other settings.17
    Equity considerations are the basis for some of the most compelling arguments for placed-based incentives.
Income and opportunity vary substantially across regions, and place-based policies can provide unique targeting
benefits for addressing these disparities (Gaubert, Kline and Yagan, 2019). Gaubert, Kline and Yagan (2019)
characterize these conditions, which relate to sorting, productivity differences across locations, worker mobility,
and other features affecting the equity and efficiency of the optimal income tax system.
    Moreover, these regional disparities may reflect labor market frictions or other distortions from the tax
system (Albouy, 2009; Fajgelbaum, Morales, Su´
                                             arez Serrato and Zidar, 2018), transfers (Baicker, Clemens and
Singhal, 2012), and other state and local policies and regulations (Hsieh and Moretti, 2019). For example,
search frictions can lead to large gains from incentivizing firms to move to high unemployment areas (Bilal,
2019). The underlying idea is that the shadow value of a job or resources in general is likely highly unequal
across regions. In principle, the theory of second-best suggests that incentive policies may be able to improve
welfare, because we are not starting from an undistorted frictionless benchmark. But it also not clear how
effective these policies are in increasing income and opportunity for non-employed and low-wage workers who
   17 Kline and Moretti (2013) find that the elasticity of local productivity with respect to population density is constant, sug-

gesting that at least in the context of the Tennessee Valley Authority, the gains in one location are roughly offset by losses in
the other. Some recent work on firm-specific incentives in the UK finds effects on employment and investment, but little gains in
TFP (Criscuolo, Martin, Overman and Van Reenen, 2019).


                                                               18
play a key role in these equity arguments.
    The equity gains from local business tax incentives may be limited if the most distressed places, which
may benefit most from attracting a firm, lack sufficient revenue to offer incentives to attract that firm. Other
prominent place-based policies--like the Tennessee Valley Authority discussed by Kline and Moretti (2013) and
Empowerment Zones discussed by Busso, Gregory and Kline (2013b)--avoid these limitations by using federal
funding.



6     Conclusion
State and local governments are devoting substantial resources towards attracting firms and corporate capital.
This article has discussed three different incentive policies state and local governments currently use, the
tradeoffs between these policies, and the evidence we have on the effects on local economic activity.
    We provide descriptive evidence that industries with larger multiplier effects are more likely to receive
subsidies, and receive more subsidy dollars per job. We also find that poorer places spend more per job. In
terms of local economic effects, we find limited evidence that these subsidized firms have employment spillovers
in the local economy. In that case, the argument for this place-based policy rests more heavily on equity
considerations.
    Many questions remain unanswered. How much do these policies improve the well-being of underemployed
and low-income workers? Are the most distressed places able to attract firms with tax incentives? How
effective are these approaches relative to other policies? Does targeting subsidies at the largest firms have
anticompetitive effects in the product market? At the local level, is the newly-attracted firm stimulating hiring
of local residents that were previously unemployed and working in low-wage jobs? Or as was argued in the
case of Amazon's proposal for putting a headquarters in New York City, are all the good jobs going to people
moving in from other locations, while leaving locals with more congestion and higher prices?
    Policymakers can design incentives with these considerations in mind and evaluate the extent to which
these policies actually "trickle down." Bartik (2019a) calls for targeting tax incentives to hard-hit regions, and
to employers who promise to hire local residents. He also notes that targeting marginal investments and job
creation in tradable industries with high multipliers, instead of individual firms, could reduce political influence.
More evidence on the conditions under which these policies are effective and for whom would help improve
policy recommendations.
    To the extent that well-targeted and effective policy is not feasible, recent harmonization efforts at the state
and local level could also enhance efficiency. New York state lawmakers have proposed the "End Corporate
Welfare Act" to outlaw firm-specific state tax incentives, and have urged other states to do the same. Of course,
an incentives truce is much more attractive to a state like New York than it is to states with distressed regions
that are struggling to attract firms and grow their local economies.
    Given disparate impacts of a universal ban on firm-specific incentives and regional heterogeneity, another
way to raise the efficiency of resource allocation is harmonization at a regional level. Fajgelbaum, Morales,



                                                         19
Su´
  arez Serrato and Zidar (2018) find that regional tax harmonization can achieve most of the gains of a national
tax harmonization. In 2019, Kansas and Missouri came to a truce: they would not offer tax incentives for firms
moving from the other side of the border in Kansas City. However, both states rushed to finalize large incentive
deals right before the truce was enacted.
   Avoiding these dynamics and directing funds to the most distressed regions may require a larger federal
role. However, implementation details are key. Lenient eligibility requirements for the new federal opportunity
zone program, for example, may not be as effective at targeting distressed regions as past programs with
similar goals and stricter criteria like empowerment zones, which funded places with poverty rates above 40%
and unemployment rates above 15% (Busso, Gregory and Kline, 2013a). Other countries have adopted more
centralized approaches. For example, the EU restricts state aid to reduce concerns about tax competition.
Instead, they implement EU structural funds at the super-federal level and use incentives to reduce regional
disparities by encouraging investment, capital deepening, and economic development in distressed areas.
   Given the scale and scope of state and local business tax incentives in the United States, much more work
needs to be done by academics and policymakers to analyze how these programs affect the welfare of local
areas and the nation. While there have been recent efforts to increase transparency (Governmental Accounting
Standards Board Statement 77), the new reporting requirements still give substantial discretion to governments
in terms of what to report and how to report it (Governmental Accounting Standards Board, 2015). The data
are not yet uniform, comprehensive, or high-quality. Even with these new accounting rules, roughly half of
municipalities have not disclosed any revenue lost to tax incentives in their annual financial reports (Farmer,
2018). Meanwhile, at the state level, Michigan, Kansas, and Montana recently enacted laws requiring evaluation
of business tax incentives, but many other states still do not have them.




                                                      20
References
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2016. "Import
 competition and the great US employment sag of the 2000s." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1): S141­S198.
Agrawal, David, William Hoyt, and John D. Wilson. 2019. "Local Policy Choice: Theory and Empirics."
 Working Paper.
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2018. "Taxation and Innovation
 in the 20th Century." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24982.
Albouy, David. 2009. "The unequal geographic burden of federal taxation." Journal of Political Economy,
 117(4): 635­667.
AreaDevelopment.com. 2011. "First Person: The Site Selection Process Behind VW's First U.S. Manufac-
 turing Facility."
Austin, Benjamin, Edward Glaeser, and Lawrence H Summers. 2018. "Saving the heartland: Place-
 based policies in 21st century America." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 8.
Baicker, Katherine, Jeffrey Clemens, and Monica Singhal. 2012. "The rise of the states: US fiscal
 decentralization in the postwar period." Journal of public Economics, 96(11-12): 1079­1091.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E. Upjohn
 Institute.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2017. "A New Panel Database on Business Incentives for Economic Development Offered
 by State and Local Governments in the United States." W.E. Upjohn Institute.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2018. "'But For'Percentages for Economic Development Incentives: What Percentage
 Estimates Are Plausible Based on the Research Literature?"
Bartik, Timothy J. 2019a. Making Sense of Incentives: Taming Business Incentives to Promote Prosperity.
 WE Upjohn Institute.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2019b. "Should Place-Based Jobs Policies Be Used to Help Distressed Communities?"
Bennett, Tom. July 2008. "Volkswagen's announcement of a new Tennessee plant can't speed work on
 Corridor K." Hiwassee River Watershed Coalition.
Bilal, Adrien. 2019. "The Geography of Unemployment."
Bivens, Josh. 2019. "Updated Employment Multipliers for the U.S. Economy." Economic Policy Institute
  Report.
Black, Dan A, and William H Hoyt. 1989. "Bidding for firms." The American Economic Review,
  79(5): 1249.
Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Megha Patnaik, Itay Saporta-
  Eksten, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "What Drives Differences in Management Practices?" American
  Economic Review, 109(5): 1648­83.
BLS. 1990-2017. "Local Area Unemployment Statistics."
Bruns, Adam. September 2008. "Chattanooga Stands and Delivers." Site Selection Magazine.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline. 2013a. Institute for Research on Poverty, University
 of Wisconsin Focus Newsletter/Report.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline. 2013b. "Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a
 Prominent Place Based Policy." American Economic Review, 103(2): 897­947.
Chattanooga Times. July 2008. "Chattanooga: VW incentives largest in state." Chattanooga Times Free
 Press.

                                                   21
Chirinko, Robert S, and Daniel J Wilson. 2008. "State investment tax incentives: A zero-sum game?"
 Journal of Public Economics, 92(12): 2362­2384.
Chirinko, Robert S, and Daniel J Wilson. 2010. "Can Lower Tax Rates be Bought?: Business Rent-
 seeking and Tax Competition Among US States." National Tax Journal, 63(4): 967­93.

Corasaniti, Nick, and Matthew Haag. 2019. "The Tax Break Was $260 Million. Benefit to the State Was
 Tiny: $155,520." The New York Times.
County Business Patterns. 1997-2017. Accessed January 13, 2019.
Criscuolo, Chiara, Ralf Martin, Henry G Overman, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "Some causal
 effects of an industrial policy." American Economic Review, 109(1): 48­85.
CSG Book of the State. 1950-2018. Book of the States. Council of State Governments.
Curtis, E Mark, and Ryan Decker. 2018. "Entrepreneurship and state taxation."
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. "The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implica-
 tions." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dharmapala, Dhammika. 2008. "What problems and opportunities are created by tax havens?" Oxford
 Review of Economic Policy, 24(4): 661­679.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Su´          arez Serrato, and Owen Zidar. 2018.
  "State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation." The Review of Economic Studies, 86(1): 333­376.
Farmer, Liz. 2018. "Despite New Rules to Disclose Corporate Tax Breaks, Just Half of Local Governments
  Are."
Federal Housing Finance Agency. 2014. "FHFA HPI." Accessed January 2, 2019.
Follow the Money. 2000-2016.
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch. 2018. "Do higher corporate taxes reduce
  wages? Micro evidence from Germany." American Economic Review, 108(2): 393­418.
Garcia-Mila, Teresa, and Therese McGuire. 2002. "Tax Incentives and the City." In Brookings-Wharton
 Papers on Urban Affairs. , ed. W.G. Gale and J. Rothenberg Pack. Brookings Institution Press.
Garrett, Daniel, Eric Ohrn, and Juan Carlos Su´   arez Serrato. Forthcoming. "Tax Policy and Local
 Labor Market Behavior." American Economic Review: Insights.
Gaubert, Cecile. 2018. "Firm sorting and agglomeration." American Economic Review, 108(11): 3117­53.
Gaubert, Cecile, Patrick Kline, and Danny Yagan. 2019. "Place-Based Redistribution."
Giroud, Xavier, and Joshua Rauh. 2019. "State taxation and the reallocation of business activity: Evidence
 from establishment-level data." Journal of Political Economy, 127(3): 000­000.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2001. "The economics of location-based tax incentives."
Glaeser, Edward L, and Joshua D Gottlieb. 2008. "The economics of place-making policies." National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14373.
Glaeser, Edward L, and Naomi Hausman. 2019. "The Spatial Mismatch Between Innovation and Job-
 lessness." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25913.
Glaeser, Edward L, Hedi D Kallal, Jose A Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1992. "Growth in
 cities." Journal of political economy, 100(6): 1126­1152.
Glaeser, Edward L, Jos´     e A Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1995. "Economic growth in a cross-
 section of cities." Journal of monetary economics, 36(1): 117­143.


                                                   22
Gordon, Roger H. 1983. "An optimal taxation approach to fiscal federalism." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 98(4): 567­586.
Governmental Accounting Standards Board. 2015. "Statement No. 77: Tax Abatement Disclosures."
 Accessed November 22, 2019.

Greenstone, Michael, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. "Bidding for industrial plants: Does winning a `million
 dollar plant' increase welfare?" National Bureau of Economic Research.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. "Identifying agglomeration
 spillovers: Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings." Journal of Political Economy,
 118(3): 536­598.

Hall, Bronwyn H, and Marta Wosinska. 1999. "The California R&D tax credit: Description, history, and
 economic analysis." California Council on Science and Technology Series.
Henderson, Vernon. 2003. "Marshall's Scale Economies." Journal of Urban Economics, 53: 1­28.
Hines, James R. 1996. "Altered States: Taxes and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment in America."
 American Economic Review, 86(5): 1076­1094.
Hirsch, Barry and Macpherson, David and Vroman, Wayne. 1964-2018. "Union Density Estimates by
 State, 1964-2018."
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti. 2019. "Housing constraints and spatial misallocation." American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(2): 1­39.
Jensen, Nathan M, and Edmund J Malesky. 2018. Incentives to pander: How politicians use corporate
  welfare for political gain. Cambridge University Press.
Keen, Michael. 2001. "Preferential Regimes Can Make Tax Competition Less Harmful." National Tax Jour-
 nal, 54(4): 757­762.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2013. " Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
 and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority *." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 129(1): 275­331.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. "People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare
 Economics of Local Economic Development Programs." Annual Review of Economics, 6(1): 629­662.
Leachman, Michael. 2017. "Timeline: 5 Years of Kansas' Tax Cut Disaster." Center on Budget and Policy
  Priorities Report.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and M Smolyansky. 2016. "To Cut or Not to Cut?" On the Impact of Corporate
  Taxes on Employment and Income. SSRN.
Markell, Jack. 2017. "Let's Stop Government Giveaways to Corporations." The New York Times.
Mast, Evan. Forthcoming. "Race to the Bottom?" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Mattera, Phillip, and Kasia Tarczynska. 2019. "Good Jobs First Subsidy Tracker."
Moretti, Enrico. 2010. "Local Multipliers." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100: 1­7.
Moretti, Enrico. 2019. "The Effect of High-Tech Clusters on the Productivity of Top Inventors." National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 26270.
Moretti, Enrico, and Daniel J Wilson. 2014. "State incentives for innovation, star scientists and jobs:
 Evidence from biotech." Journal of Urban Economics, 79: 20­38.
Moretti, Enrico, and Daniel J Wilson. 2017. "The effect of state taxes on the geographical location of top
 earners: evidence from star scientists." American Economic Review, 107(7): 1858­1903.



                                                   23
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. "Fiscal federalism." Books.
Ohrn, Eric. 2018. "The effect of tax incentives on US manufacturing: evidence from state accelerated depre-
 ciation policies." Working Paper.
Ossa, Ralph. 2015. "A Quantitative Analysis of Subsidy Competition in the U.S." National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Working Paper 20975.
Patrick, Carlianne. 2016. "Identifying the local economic development effects of million dollar facilities."
 Economic Inquiry, 54(4): 1737­1762.
Patrick, Carlianne, and Mark Partridge. 2019. "Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers: New Evidence
 from Large Plant Openings."
QCEW. 1990-2017. "Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages."
Ramsey, Frank P. 1927. "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." The Economic Journal, 37(145): 47­61.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Esti-
 mates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks." American Economic Review, 100(3): 763­801.
Slattery, Cailin. 2019. "Bidding for Firms: Subsidy Competition in the U.S." Columbia University.
Sollaci, Alexandre. 2019. "Agglomeration, Innovation, and Spatial Reallocation: the Aggregate Effects of R
  and D Tax Credits." University of Chicago Working Paper.
Storey, Louise, Tiff Fehr, and Derek Watkins. 2012. "United States of Subsidies." Accessed November
  12, 2019.
Su´
  arez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen Zidar. 2016. "Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A
  Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms." American Economic Review, 106(9): 2582­2624.
Su´arez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen Zidar. 2018. "The structure of state corporate taxation and its
  impact on state tax revenues and economic activity." Journal of Public Economics, 167: 158­176.
Summers, Larry. 2019. "We no longer share a common lived experience." Harvard University Blog.
Tennessee State Legislature. 2011-2012. "State of Tennessee Budget FY 2011-2012." Accessed November
  12, 2019.
The Advocate. 2016. "Lobbyists spent nearly half a million dollars to woo Louisiana legislators in 2016." The
 Louisiana Advocate.
The Advocate. 2018. "Chemical sector supports nearly 80 billion in sales in Louisiana, industry study says."
 The Louisiana Advocate.
Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center. 1977-2016. "US Survey of State and Local Government Finances."
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1967-2017. "Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by State." Ac-
 cessed January 21, 2019.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2000. "2000 U.S. Census."
Wilson, Daniel J. 2009. "Beggar thy neighbor? The in-state, out-of-state, and aggregate effects of R&D tax
 credits." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2): 431­436.




                                                     24
                                Figure 1: Corporate Tax Rates and Tax Expenditures are Positively Correlated




                          10
                                                                                                CA
                                    8


                                                                            IN
             Corporate tax rate (%)




                                                                    NY
                                                 NC

                                            VA
                        6 4
                          2




                                        0             20                 40                  60                      80
                                                           Per capita tax expenditures ($)

Notes: This figure plots state corporate income tax rates and per capita state business tax expenditures in 2014. The per capita
tax expenditure is the total amount of tax expenditures for new and expanding businesses in a state, divided by the state popu-
lation. The source of the tax expenditure data are the state tax expenditure reports compiled by Slattery (2019). Data on cor-
porate tax rates comes from Su´    arez Serrato and Zidar (2018), and population data comes from the US Census. Triangles in the
plot are specific states; circles are binned data. Best fit line estimates are from a population-weighted linear regression of corpo-
rate tax rates on per capita tax expenditures. The figure shows that per capita business tax expenditures tend to be higher in
states with higher corporate tax rates.




                                                                      25
                         Figure 2: Auto Employment in Winning and Runner-up County of 2008 VW Deal
                          10000   8000
              Employment in NAICS 336
            2000   4000   06000
                                         20

                                               20

                                                     20

                                                           20

                                                                 20

                                                                       20

                                                                             20

                                                                                   20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                               20

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                             20
                                          03

                                                04

                                                      05

                                                            06

                                                                  07

                                                                        08

                                                                              09

                                                                                    10

                                                                                          11

                                                                                                12

                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                            14

                                                                                                                  15

                                                                                                                        16

                                                                                                                              17

                                                                  Hamilton, TN                 Huntsville, AL

Notes: This figure plots total employment in transportation manufacturing (NAICS 336) in Hamilton County, TN (the county
Volkswagen chose) and Huntsville, AL (the runner-up location). The red dashed line indicates the year of the deal, 2008. Data
on industry-specific employment comes from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, 1990-2017).




                                                                              26
                                                     Figure 3: Low-Wage Locations Provide More Generous Subsidies
                                 1000
             Cost per job (1000s 2017 USD, binned)
                                    600      800




                                                                  Albany, NY (2008)
                            400




                                                          Charleston, SC (2004)
                 200




                                                                                                      Suffolk, MA (2016)
                                 0




                                                                                         San Francisco, CA (2017)

                                                        40              60             80             100                  120
                                                                    Average Wages (1000s USD, binned)

Notes: This figure shows the relationship between local average earnings and the generosity of firm-specific incentives subsidies.
The sample is firm-specific incentive deal winners 2002-2017. We calculate the cost per job for each subsidy in the firm-specific
deal data (Slattery, 2019). Cost per job is the total subsidy size divided by the number of jobs promised in the subsidy deal.
Average wages are sourced from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, 1990-2017). The figure plots total
subsidies for each deal relative to average wages in the winning county. Triangles in the plot are individual data points; circles
are binned data. Best fit line estimates are taken from a population-weighted linear regression of subsidy cost per job on average
county wages. The figure shows that lower wage counties offer larger subsidies per job.




                                                                                  27
                                                Figure 4: The Effect of Winning a Firm on County-level Outcomes

                                   (a) Employment within 3-Digit Industry                                                     (b) Log House Price Index
                3000




                                                                                                         .05
                       2000
    County-level employment




                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                   Log county HPI
             1000




                                                                                                 -.05
    0           -1000




                                                                                                         -.1




                              -5     -4   -3   -2   -1     0      1      2      3   4   5                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0      1      2      3   4   5
                                                    Years since deal                                                                    Years since deal

                                                    Impact             95% CI                                                           Impact             95% CI


Notes: This figure shows the event study estimates of the effect of winning a firm-specific deal on county level employment
within the NAICS 3-digit industry of deal in Panel (a) and on county level house prices in Panel (b). The sample is a balanced
panel of firm-specific deals taking place between 2002 and 2012 taken from Slattery (2019). The sample is restricted to deals for
which we observe employment, population, and average wages ten years before the year of deal and five years after. The out-
come data thus span 1997 to 2017, and the control for log employment, population, and average wages 10 years in advance of
the deal year are measured in 1992 or later. Housing price index data is taken from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (2014),
and employment data is taken from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, 1990-2017). The figure shows
that winning a deal increases employment in the 3-digit industry of the deal, but property values decrease.




                                                                                            28
                            Table 1: Business Tax Policy Instruments Across States in 2014

                                                    Average    AL        CA        NV      NY       PA       SC      TN       WV
 Instrument 1:
                         Corporate Tax Rate (%)       6.5      6.5       8.8       0       7.1      10       5       6.5      6.5
    Corporate Tax Revenue per capita (2017 USD)       162      90        246       0       264      193      81      193      118
 Instrument 2:
               Tax Credits per capita (2017 USD)      19       11         60       0       33       15       32      16        0
        Econ Development per capita (2017 USD)        34       15          2       5       142      25        8      35       177
 Instrument 3:
                             Number of subsidies      14        15        13        4       20       3       16       12        4
                        Cost per job (2017 USD)     45,785    12,466     4,997   42,339   11,712   93,406   6,433   11,805   34,345
 Incentives as a percent of Corp Tax Revenues (%)     38       29         25      N/A       66      20       49      26       150


Notes: This table shows differences in business tax policy instruments across states in 2014. Corporate income tax revenue is
sourced from the US Survey of State and Local Government Finance, via the Tax Policy Center (Urban-Brookings Tax Policy
Center, 1977-2016). Population data comes from the US Census and data on corporate tax rates comes from CSG Book of the
State (1950-2018). The data on tax expenditures, economic development spending, number of subsidies, and cost per job are
from Slattery (2019). The number of subsidies and cost per job statistics are available for subsidies that exceed 5 million dollars,
as described in the data section. State tax credits per capita are expenditures on tax credits for businesses divided by popula-
tion, and state economic development per capita is any spending in the state budget for new and expanding businesses, divided
by population. The number of subsidies and the average cost per job (Instrument 3) are for the entire sample (2002-2017), not
just for 2014.




                              Table 2: Select Industries Receiving Firm-Specific Incentives

                                      # of           Subsidy         Jobs Promised        Cost Per Job      Investment Promise
                                     Deals     (2017 M USD)                                (2017 USD)            (2017 M USD)
 Full sample                           543             178.4                     1,487         119,972                   757.5
 Automobile manuf. (3361)               56             293.6                     2,768         106,057                   854.8
 Aerospace manuf. (3364)                31             585.8                     2,734         214,237                   534.5
 Financial activities (5239)            25              92.3                     2,652          34,809                   286.8
 Scientific R&D svc (5417)              22             113.7                       518         219,259                   185.0
 Basic chemical manuf. (3251)           18             187.4                       196         956,701                   779.0

Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for firm-specific incentives at the industry level, for select industries mentioned
in the text. It is tabulated using firm-level subsidy data from Slattery (2019); the sample is firm-specific incentive deals from
2002-2017. This sample focuses on large subsidy deals that exceed 5 million dollars, as described in the data section. The table
reports the number of deals for each industry, and the mean subsidy size, jobs promised, cost per job, and investment promised.
See Appendix Table A.3 for more industries and for industry averages.




                                                                    29
                                  Table 3: When Do States Increase Incentive Spending?

                                                                        Per Capita Incentives Increase by 20%
      Governor can run as incumbent                           0.05                                              -0.02      -0.02
                                                             (0.06)                                            (0.06)     (0.06)
      Election year                                                        0.11*                                -0.08      -0.07
                                                                           (0.06)                              (0.10)     (0.10)
      GDP per capita ($1000) in t - 1                                                    0.00                             0.02*
                                                                                        (0.01)                            (0.01)
      % of population employed in t - 1                                                             -0.05                -0.09**
                                                                                                   (0.03)                 (0.04)
      Gov can run as incumbent × Election year                                                                 0.27**     0.25**
                                                                                                               (0.11)     (0.11)
      Observations                                               336        336         336         336          336        336
      R-squared                                                  0.17       0.18        0.17        0.18        0.20        0.21

Notes: This table shows the relationship between state characteristics and increases in state per capita incentive spending. The
sample is states between years 2007 and 2014. State per capita incentive spending includes both state tax expenditures on tax
credits for businesses, and state economic development programs for businesses. The dependent variable is an indicator for
whether per capita incentive spending increased by more than 20%. States increased per-capita spending by over 20% 63 times,
or 19% of the sample of state-years. GDP is sourced from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (U.S. Bureau of Economic Anal-
ysis, 1967-2017). Population is sourced from the US Census, while employment is sourced from the Census County Business
Patterns (County Business Patterns, 1997-2017). Data on whether the governor can run as an incumbent, or if the state is in
an election year is sourced from Follow the Money (2000-2016). State and Year Fixed Effects are included in each specification.
Standard errors reported in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.1




                 Table 4: The Effect of Winning a Firm-Specific Deal on County-Level Outcomes

                     3-D Ind.       Res. 2-D Ind.   Res. 1-D Ind.       Res. County-wide       Personal inc.   log HPI   Emp/pop
                    Employment      Employment      Employment            Employment
                       (1)               (2)             (3)                   (4)                  (5)          (6)        (7)
 Panel A. Levels Estimates
  Winner × Post      1108.287         780.238          53.154               -1920.430            -1090.989      N/A        -0.001
                      (539.686)      (1096.283)      (1928.740)            (5301.175)            (716.305)      N/A       (0.002)
 Mean of outcome      9326.605       15763.784       49393.076              2.80e+05             49826.006      N/A        0.470
 Panel B. Log Estimates
  Winner × Post       0.149             0.026           0.030                0.003                 -0.005      -0.040      -0.002
                      (0.068)          (0.027)         (0.019)              (0.013)               (0.012)      (0.021)    (0.004)
 Mean of outcome        7.965           9.037           9.922               12.006                16.667        4.858      -0.759

Notes: This table shows difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of winning a firm-specific deal on a variety of county-
level outcomes. Employment data are from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Workers (QCEW, 1990-2017), HPI data
are from the (Federal Housing Finance Agency, 2014), and employment-to-population figures are computed using BLS data for
the numerator and BEA data for the denominator. Standard errors reported in parentheses and are clustered at the state level.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.1




                                                                  30
      A                            Appendix

                                                           Figure A.1: Pairwise Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Firm-Specific Subsidies

                                                      (a) Number of Jobs Promised, Level                                                                                                                       (b) Number of Jobs Promised, Percent
                                10000




                                                                                                                                                                                            800
                                             UT5614
                                                 NY3344
                                                   NY3344 NJ5221
                                                          WI3344      NJ5231
                                                                        NJ5221
                                                                            NJ5222                     NJ5239                                         VA5415
                                                          FL5121
                                                                                                                                          MI5121
                                                              NY3344                                                                                                                                           NY3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NY3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                             WI4931     WI3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NY3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL5121  LA3365                          TX3115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AL3361
                                                                                              NJ5221
                                            OR3344                                                                                                                                                                                           TN3361
                                                NC3364                                                 NY5511
                                                     NC5415




                                                                                                                                                                                                  600
                                                                                                                                                      TX5221
                                     5000




                                                    SC3364                                                                                            DE5239




                                                                                                                                                                       % Chg in 3-D State Ind. Emp.
                                               NC3341
                                            NC5112
              Chg in 3-D State Ind. Emp.




                                                                                                  NY5614                                                                                                      NC3364               PA5511
               Pairwise D-i-D Estimate:




                                                                                OH5111AL3361




                                                                                                                                                                         Pairwise D-i-D Estimate:
                                           NC5415
                                          IN3391          OH4811
                                                            NJ5239 MO3361
                                                                       TX5411
                                        UT3344         TX5223
                                                          NC5239
                                                             AL3364        TX5231 CT5239KY5223
                                                                                      CT5239
                                           CT5417                         NC3341      AL3361                                                                                                                              SC3364




                                                                                                                                                                                        400
                                           NC5112    NC3261PA5511                  OH5416GA3333                                               TX3342MO3361                                                                          SC3222                       AL3361
                                        AL3311
                                      WI4931NC5111
                                              NC4239 AL5417
                                             NC4238
                                           CT5121
                                                         LA3365      TN3361
                                                                  NC5173
                                                                                       Volkswagen
                                                                                          NJ5222 DE3359 OH4812
                                                                                     TX3115
                                                                                      GA5242
                                                                                                                                                      KY4921                                                           AZ3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MI5121
                                          NC3254AZ3254 CT5239
                                                OH3254       AZ3344                                                                                   TX5239
                                      LA3252 OH3251 KS5239
                                                         TX4441
                                                             SC3222
                                                          GA3262   KY3311 LA3324                                                                      TX5239
                                661 NC5182
                                       IA3253
                                      MI3241
                                             NC3331
                                                FL5414
                                                MA3254
                                           IN4931
                                           TX3241
                                             NC3364
                                           CT5151
                                                      NC3352
                                                   TX3119
                                                   PA5231
                                                  OH3256
                                                             OH3313
                                                          MI3359
                                                             NJ3256 IA5415
                                                                       GA3331 SC5511 IN3361
                                                                   MO4885
                                                                                                OH3339
                                                                                                  GA3361WI3336
                                                                                                          NJ5173      MI5415                          KY5231                                                                                   Volkswagen GA3333
                                      AR3273
                                      GA3119
                                         KY3311
                                          NC3361
                                     KY3313          SC3254
                                                  DE3254CT7211
                                                    NC3341           SC3361
                                                         VA3344 WA3364                IL4931    TX4431      OH3262                                                                                                                  AZ3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MI3359
                          0




                                        NC5182     OH3262
                                                NC3254
                                               VA5511
                                                NJ3254
                                            NC3259
                                                NC3361
                                                     OR3344       MS3262
                                                                     IN4461    TX3331 OH3361                                                                                                                  AL3311
                                                   TX3312      NC5239                           NY5415
                                            MA3254CT3254                                                       NC5231                                 KS5415                                                                             NC5173
                                             NC5239 TX3361
                                        FL5417              NJ5312
                                                           NJ3254
                                                              NC3341                  MI3311       IL5182                                                                                                                                                                   DE3359
                                                        CT5241                                                     MA5241                                                                                                                         NC3341




                                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                             CA3361
                                           FL5417            NC5417                                            TX3364                                                                                           NJ5221 GA3262NJ5221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NJ5222
                                                             CT5511
                                                    NC5415UT5112                                                                                                                                        CT5121                                                                                     DE5239
                                             NC3344               CT5419                                                                                                                             UT3344NC3341                                                                                  TX5221
                                                                        MO5412                                                                                                                               OH3254               MO3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GA3331NJ5221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA3324
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OH4811
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NC3352               TX5231
                                        CT5241                                                                                                                                                         IN3391            NJ5231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AL3364              OH5111NJ5239
            -5000




                                                                                                                                                                                                             OH3251
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC5112                                                                                  MO3361
                                        FL5417                                                                                                                                                                          NC5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NC3261                                NJ5222
                                                                                                                                                                                              66OR3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                 UT5614NC5112
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC5111
                                                                                                                                                                                                    IA3253
                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA3252 NC3331
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NC5415    TX5223
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KS5239          KY3311              GA5242
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CT5239KY5223    NY5614 OH4812                     VA5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NC3254FL5414
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CT5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NC4239      TX4441
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AL5417NJ5239       TX5411
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IA5415            CT5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NY5511                                        KY4921
                                            MO4811          NC5415                                                                                                                                        NC4238
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TX3241
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MA3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                        IN4931
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MI3241 NC3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CT5241
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NC3361  OH3256
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NJ3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                            VA5511
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CT5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                TX3119
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA5231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TX3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NC3341
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CT7211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NJ3256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OH3313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WA3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CT5419
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SC3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OH5416
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SC5511  IN3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IL4931
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OH3361    OH3339
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GA3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TX4431 WI3336
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NJ5173      MI5415 TX3342 KY5231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OH3262MA5241
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KY3311
                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KY3313 MA3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CT5151
                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA3119         OR3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NC5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NC3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                               DE3254   NJ3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CT5241NC5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TX3341MI3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MO4885
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MS3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CT5511
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NC3341     MO5412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IN4461
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MI3361         MI3311    NY5415        TX3364 MI3361




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                       MI3361                                                                                                             TX3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC3259 NC5415     CA3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                               FL5417     NJ5312
                                                  FL5417
                                                     FL5417FL5417       MI3364
                                                            CA5417 TX3341
                                                       TX3344
                                                       RI5415                                                                        MI3361      SC3364                                              FL5417        SC3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RI5415        UT5112                                                                    KS5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TX3331                         NC5231
                                                                                 1233                                                                                                                            NC5239     VA3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NC5182 NC3254
                                -10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO4811
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC5182
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AR3273
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FL5417   CA5417      NC5239                                        IL5182                           SC3364




                                                                                                                                                                                            -200
                                              0                        1000                    2000                           3000                   4000                                                 0                         1000                 2000                               3000                    4000
                                                                                       Number of jobs promised                                                                                                                                   Number of jobs promised

                                                                   (c) Size of Subsidy, Level                                                                                                                              (d) Size of Subsidy, Percent
                              10000




                                                                                                                                                                                         800
                                             NJ5231
                                              VA5415
                                                 WI3344
                                                 UT5614
                                                    NJ5221
                                                    NJ5222
                                                NJ5221                      NY3344               NJ5239     NY3344
                                                                              FL5121
                                                                         MI5121
                                                                                                                     NY3344                                                                                WI4931
                                                                                                                                                                                                             WI3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX3115                    NY3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA3365 AL3361 FL5121                        NY3344       NY3344
                                                                   NJ5221
                                                                                                                                                     OR3344                                                                                                 TN3361
                                            NC3364    NY5511
                                             NC5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                600


                                               TX5221
                                   5000




                                            DE5239                            SC3364
                                                                                                                                                                     % Chg in 3-D State Ind. Emp.




                                             NC3341
                                            NC5112
            Chg in 3-D State Ind. Emp.




                                                                        NY5614                                                                                                                           NC3364   PA5511
             Pairwise D-i-D Estimate:




                                                                             OH5111
                                                                                                                                                                       Pairwise D-i-D Estimate:




                                                                      AL3361
                                             NC5415
                                                  IN3391OH4811
                                             TX5411
                                               NJ5239                                                                    MO3361
                                            TX5223
                                             NC5239
                                            TX5231  UT3344
                                               KY5223                  CT5239        AL3364
                                              CT5239
                                                                                                                CT5417
                                                                                                               NC3341
                                                                                                                AL3361                                                                                                                  SC3364
                                                                                                                                                                                      400




                                              NC5112
                                             NC3261
                                                TX3342PA5511                     MO3361                                                                                                                      SC3222                                                            AL3361
                                               WI4931
                                            NC5111
                                              NC4239         AL3311
                                                         AL5417
                                                            NJ5222
                                                 DE3359 KY4921LA3365 GA3333                         OH5416
                                                                                                  TN3361                             Volkswagen                                                          AZ3254
                                             NC4238
                                              NC5173
                                             TX3115
                                             GA5242 CT5121  OH4812                                                                                                                                                                  MI5121
                                             AZ3254  NC3254
                                                       TX5239              OH3254                                                                   AZ3344
                                               TX5239
                                             KS5239
                                             TX4441     LA3324GA3262
                                                       KY3311
                                                   SC3222              CT5239   OH3251 LA3252
661                                              NC3331
                                                FL5414
                                              OH3313
                                            OH3339
                                              TX3119
                                              NJ3256
                                             NC3364
                                                    NC3352
                                                         IA5415
                                                              GA3331
                                                   KY5231IN4931
                                                            MA3254         WI3336 IN3361     MI3359   IA3253
                                                                                                       SC5511 TX3241                                PA5231
                                                                                                                                                  GA3361                                                                           GA3333                                                          Volkswagen
                                               CT5151
                                             OH3256
                                            GA3119
                                             NC3361
                                             DE3254 AR3273
                                                     SC3361
                                                   KY3311
                                                NC3341
                                                   KY3313
                                                  VA3344
                                                           MI5415
                                                          MO4885   NJ5173
                                                                  CT7211
                                                                 IL4931 SC3254
                                                                         TX4431    OH3262 MI3241                         NC5182                                                                                                                         MI3359                                                     AZ3344
                        0




                                            NC3254
                                              MS3262
                                             TX3331
                                                 NJ3254
                                            NC3259VA5511
                                             NC3361
                                                OR3344
                                                IN4461      OH3262   OH3361                                  NC5182                                 WA3364                                                              AL3311
                                                NC5239
                                                     TX3312                     NY5415
                                                       CT3254 KS5415
                                                                   NC5231                                                                                                                                NC5173
                                             TX3361
                                             NJ5312
                                              NC3341NJ3254 MA3254
                                               NC5239                        MI3311
                                                                         IL5182
                                                                          FL5417                                                                                                                           DE3359                                                           NC3341
                                                  CT5241
                                                MA5241                                                                                                                                                                                       1233
                                                                                                                                                                            200




                                                CA3361
                                                     TX3364
                                                   NC5417       FL5417                                                                                                                                        NJ5221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NJ5222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NJ5221 GA3262
                                              NC5415   CT5511                                                                                                                                            DE5239 CT5121
                                               CT5419UT5112                                                                                                                                                  TX5221
                                              NC3344                                                                                    MO5412                                                            NC3341 UT3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA3324     NJ5221 OH3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GA3331                                                      MO3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX5231 NC3352   OH4811
                                                               CT5241                                                                                                                                    NJ5231  IN3391                        AL3364     NJ5239
          -5000




                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC5112                                 MO3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OH3251
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OH5111
                                                 FL5417                                                                                                                                                   NC5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC3261           NJ5222
                                                                                                                                          66                                                               VA5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TX5223
                                                                                                                                                                                                         GA5242
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KY5223
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC5112
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NC3331
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC5111
                                                                                                                                                                                                              UT5614
                                                                                                                                                                                                         KS5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KY3311
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OH4812
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TX5239          CT5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NY5614      LA3252       IA3253                                           OR3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NJ5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX4441
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FL5414
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX5411
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NC4239
                                                                                                                                                                                                            TX3342
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC4238        NY5511
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NC3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KY4921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IA5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AL5417                                              CT5417
                                             NC5415                  MO4811
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NJ3256
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OH3313
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TX3119
                                                                                                                                                                                                        OH3339
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OH3256
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX3361KY5231
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NJ3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                              VA5511
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NC3341
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MA5241
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT5419
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC3344KY3311
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NJ3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NC5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                            OR3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN4461
                                                                                                                                                                                                             FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MS3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC5415  SC3361 MI5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MA3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IN4931FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IL4931
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT5241
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OH3262CT7211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MA3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO4885
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CT5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NJ5173
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MI3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WI3336 IN3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TX4431
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OH3361       MI3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MI3311OH3262 MI3241 OH5416
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SC5511 TX3241                        MO5412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WA3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA5231
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT5151
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                         DE3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GA3119 CT5241
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC3341     CT5511
                                                                                                                                                                                                                KY3313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX3364                    NY5415                 TX3341                                         MI3361
                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                     MI3361                                                 CA3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC3259
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC5415      TX3344                                        FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ5312 CT3254                                                                                             FL5417
                                            CA5417    TX3344 RI5415
                                                             MI3364         FL5417 MI3361                  FL5417
                                                                                                            TX3341                                   SC3364
                                                                                                                                                     FL5417                                                                           SC3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UT5112 RI5415KS5415
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX3331                  NC5231
                                                   1233                                                                                                                                                   NC5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                             VA3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC3254
                              -10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                           NC5239
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CA5417AR3273                IL5182
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MO4811
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FL5417                              NC5182        NC5182                     SC3364
                                                                                                                                                                                         -200




                                             0                     100                        200          300                    400                500                                                 0                   100                      200          300                           400                500
                                                                                              Subsidy ($M 2017)                                                                                                                                       Subsidy ($M 2017)



      Notes: This figure plots pairwise difference-in-difference estimates for the deals in our sample whose "winner" and "runner-up"
      counties have positive pre-deal employment. Pre-deal employment is the average for the three years prior to the deal. Post-deal
      employment is the three-year average of employment 4, 5 and 6 years after the deal. The sample is winner-runner-up pairs
      whose year of deal is between 2002 and 2012. Panels A and B compares the level and percent change in employment to the
      number of jobs promised. Panels C and D replicate Panels A and B, but plot the estimates relative to the size of the subsidy
      package. Estimates are winzorized at the 5% level. The dotted light gray line denotes the average number jobs promised and the
      size of the average subsidy package. The dashed red line denotes the mean difference-in-differences estimate. We censor num-
      ber of jobs promised at 4,000 and subsidy amount to $500M for visualization's sake. Four deals promise over 4,000 jobs, and 5
      subsidies are over $500M.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1233




                                                                                                                                                               31
                        Figure A.2: State Characteristics and Per Capita Incentive Spending


                                Democrat Gov + Legislature

                                         Democrat Governor

                                    Percent Union Members

                                          Top Corp. Tax Rate

                          Biz Contrib. to Gov+Leg per-capita

                         Biz Contrib. to Governor per-capita

                                   Corp. Tax Rev. per-capita

                                    Total Tax Rev. per-capita

                                     Educ. Spend per-capita

                                     Average Compensation

                                             Average Wages

                                     Employment/Population

                                              GOS per capita

                                              GDP per capita


                                                                -.4    -.2    0      .2     .4     .6
                                                                             Correlation

                                                                      Full Sample         Only 2014

Notes: This figure plots correlations between state per capita business tax incentive spending and state characteristics. The cor-
relation coefficient and the 95% confidence interval are reported. The navy squares report the relationship over the full sample
(2007- 2014), while the maroon hollow diamonds report the results for 2014. State per capita incentive spending is from Slattery
(2019). GDP, GOS, and compensation are sourced from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (1967-2017). Corporate income
tax revenue, total tax revenue, and education expenditures are drawn from the US Survey of State and Local Government Fi-
nance, via the Tax Policy Center. Top corporate income rates from the CSG Book of the State (1950-2018). Population comes
from the US Census. Wages and employment are sourced from the Census County Business Patterns (1997-2017). Data on state
union shares come from the work of Hirsch, Barry and Macpherson, David and Vroman, Wayne (1964-2018), while campaign
contributions come from Chirinko and Wilson (2010). Lastly, data on the party of governors and state legislatures is from Fol-
low the Money (2000-2016).




                                                                32
                                              Figure A.3: Event Studies: Within-Industry Employment Effects of Winning a Subsidy Deal

                                                                 (a) Our Deals Dataset                                                                                     (b) Million-Dollar Plants Deals Dataset




                                                                                                                                                   2000
                      3000
    Employment in 3-D industry of deal




                                                                                                                                 Employment in 3-D industry of deal
                                                                                                                                                          1000
                 1000       2000




                                                                                                                                   -1000        0
        0             -1000




                                                                                                                                                   -2000
                                         -5     -4      -3         -2    -1     0      1      2        3      4         5                                             -5    -4      -3       -2    -1     0      1      2        3      4         5
                                                                         Years since deal                                                                                                          Years since deal

                                                                        Impact              95% CI                                                                                                Impact              95% CI


Notes: This figure plots event study estimates of the effect of winning a firm-specific deal on employment in NAICS 3-digit in-
dustry of deal, with employment data taken from Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, 1990-2017). We use the
same specification as Figure 4. Panel (a) shows event study coefficients estimated using firm-specific subsidy deals from Slat-
tery (2019), and Panel (b) shows more modest and less precise effects as measured using Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin,
Patnaik, Saporta-Eksten and Van Reenen (2019) deals dataset.




                                                             Figure A.4: Event Studies: Employment Effects of Winning a Subsidy Deal

                                                                 (a) Our Deals Dataset                                                                                     (b) Million-Dollar Plants Deals Dataset
                                                                                                                                                   10000
               2000   4000




                                                                                                                                          5000
    Employment




                                                                                                                                 Employment
        0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                      -2000
                      -4000




                                                                                                                                                   -5000




                                         -5      -4         -3     -2    -1     0      1      2       3       4         5                                             -5     -4         -3   -2    -1     0      1      2       3       4         5
                                                                         Years since deal                                                                                                          Years since deal

                                                      3-D               2-Digit Residual             1-Digit Residual                                                             3-D             2-Digit Residual             1-Digit Residual


Notes: This figure shows event study estimates of the effect of winning a firm-specific deal on three outcomes: employment in
3-digit industry of deal, 2-digit residual employment, and 1-digit residual employment. We use the same specification as Fig-
ure 4. Panel (a) plots event study coefficients using firm-specific subsidy deals from Slattery (2019), showing little evidence for
positive employment spillovers associated with winning a firm-specific deal. Panel (b) plots event study coefficient using Bloom,
Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Patnaik, Saporta-Eksten and Van Reenen (2019) deals dataset which covers deals in roughly the
same period. While estimates in panel (b) are imprecise, they show a rosier picture for potential spillover effects. In both panels,
employment figures are taken from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, 1990-2017).




                                                                                                                            33
                                                                       Figure A.5: Changes in State Incentive Spending, Economic Activity, and Fiscal Policy

                                                                                      (a) GDP Per Capita                                                                                                                                                            (b) Total Tax Revenue Per Capita
                                                   10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            500
                                                                                                                                                                                           Chg in Total Tax Rev Per Capita (2014-07)
                                                                                                                                                                       NY
    Chg. in GDP Per Capita (2014-07)
                                                   5000




                                                                    NE
                                                                   OK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                       IA                 PA                                                                                                                                                                   IA
                                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                                                                        VT        MN
                                                                                                                   TN        WI               WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MN
                                                                                     KS         KY MD
                                                                                                                   MTMO CAIN    AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OR
                                                   0




                                                                                                                                              RI                                                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                          CO                 ME                                                  MI                                                                                                            MD                        IN                                      NY
                                                                                           MS                                                 UT                                                                                                                                     MS
                                                                                          SC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -500
                                                            OR                                  AL                                                                                                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                            ID                                     VA                    NC        NM                                                                                                          NE
                                                                                                                   DE LA                                                                                                                                                                  KY                   MO CT          WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OH CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MT                                                            MI
                                                   -5000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AL                                            RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OK                                                TN
                                                                                                                              AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VT
                                                                                                           FL                                                                                                                                                                  KS SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ID                                                                WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UT



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VA                    NC        NM
                                                   -10000




                                                                                                                          CT                                                                                                                                                                         FL                 AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DE



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA
                                                   -15000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1500



                                                                                                                                                             Slope= 38.7 (24.1)                                                                                                                                                                             Slope= .9 (1.77)
                                                                 -40               -20                         0                         20                  40             60                                                                           -40                 -20                         0                         20                  40             60
                                                                                 Chg in Incentive Spend Per Capita (2014-07)                                                                                                                                               Chg in Incentive Spend Per Capita (2014-07)

                                                                            (c) Direct Spending Per Capita                                                                                                                                                          (d) Total Expenditures Per Capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            500
                                                                                                                                                                                           Chg in Total Gov Spending Per Capita (2014-07)




                                                            OR
    Chg in Dir Gov Spending Per Capita (2014-07)
                                                   500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                          CO                                                                                                                                                                                                        CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IA
                                                                                                                                         AR                                                                                                                                                                                        AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                       IA                                                           WI
                                                                                                                           AZ                                     MN
                                                   0




                                                                                          PA                              CA
                                                                                                                   VA     CT                                                     MI
                                                                   OK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PA                                                                      MN
                                                                                                                    OH         IN
                                                                                                KY                                                      VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NE                                                                          UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -500




                                                                       NE                            MD            MTMO                       UT                                                                                                           OK                             KY MD
                                                                                     KS                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MT          IN WI                    VT
                                                                                                                                              WA                                                                                                                                                               MO
                                                                            ID                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN
                                                   -500




                                                                                                AL                  MA
                                                                                                                   TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MI
                                                                                                           FL                            NC                                                                                                                                    KS                            OH                         WA
                                                                                                                   DE                                                                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                       NY                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                    ME                                                                                                                                ID                                                                RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA
                                                   -1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL                            NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                          SC                             LA
                                                                                                                                                   NM
                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SC                                                       NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA
                                                   -1500




                                                                                                                                                             Slope= -2.2 (2.34)                                                                                                      MS                                                                Slope= -5.0 (2.93)
                                                                 -40               -20                         0                         20                  40             60                                                                           -40                 -20                         0                         20                  40             60
                                                                                 Chg in Incentive Spend Per Capita (2014-07)                                                                                                                                               Chg in Incentive Spend Per Capita (2014-07)

Notes: This figure plots the change in per capita outcomes of each state from 2007 to 2014 versus the change in per capita in-
centive spending over the same period. Per capita incentive spending includes both state tax expenditures on tax credits for
businesses, and state economic development programs for businesses. The incentive spending data is collected by the author
from state tax expenditure reports and state budget documents (Slattery, 2019). The source of the state outcome data (GDP,
tax revenues, direct spending, and total expenditures) is the Census of Governments.




                                                                                                                                                                                      34
             Table A.1: The Size Distribution of Establishments Receiving Firm-Specific Incentives

          Employment         # of Firm-Specific Incentives          Total Establishment Entry          % Coverage
          1 - 99                                        39                          8,971,339                0.00
          100 - 249                                     47                             26,126                0.18
          250 - 499                                     80                              4,251                1.88
          500 - 999                                   141                               1,419                9.94
          1000+                                       236                                 639               36.93
Notes: This table reports the number and percentage of establishments that receive firm-specific incentives, by employment size.
The set of 543 firm-level subsidy deals is from Slattery (2019). The rows correspond to the employment level of the establish-
ment. For the subsidy deals, this is the number of jobs promised at the establishment. For the total establishment entry, it is
the actual employment at the establishment. The first column is the number of establishments of that size that received discre-
tionary subsidies over the period 2002-2016. The second column is the total number of establishments entering the U.S. over the
same period (sourced from the Census Business Dynamics Statistics). The third column is the % of total entrants that receive
firm-specific incentives (number of firm-specific incentives divided by total entry).




                     Table A.2: Characteristics of Firms that Receive Firm-Specific Incentives

                                                                                              Subsidized Firms:
                                             All Compustat           Subsidized Firms           Year of Deal
                                             Mean   Median           Mean      Median          Mean     Median
          Employees (1000s)                   9.0         0.6         71.8         34.3       102.5         64.4
          Capital Stock ($M)                1,513.3      28.2       12,221.9     3,074.5     18,473.7     8,026.0
          Revenue ($M)                      3,458.7      184.5      40,289.3     15,152.0    60,941.9     40,660.0
          Gross Profit ($M)                 1,138.8      67.5       13,128.6     4,049.4     20,846.0     9,255.8
          Market Value ($M)                 2,991.4      189.5      45,499.6     13,199.0    77,448.5     28,204.2
          State Income Taxes ($M)             5.1         0.0          57.9        8.1         99.4         13.9
          Total Income Taxes ($M)            99.8         1.0        1,226.2      276.8      1,792.3       639.3
          Observations                      107,214                  2,422                      303

Notes: This table includes descriptive statistics for all firms included in Compustat, and the Compustat firms that received dis-
cretionary subsidies, from 2002 to 2014. Compustat is a database of financial, statistical and market information on global com-
panies throughout the world. We merged the firm-level subsidy data (Slattery, 2019) to Compustat data on firm names. We
found 56% of the firms in Compustat. In the first two columns we report statistics for the full sample of 107,218 active firm-
years in Compustat. In columns 3 and 4 we report the same statistics for the sample of firms in Compustat that are observed
receiving at least one firm-specific incentive in the firm-level subsidy data. Columns 5 and 6 report the statistics for the same
subsample of firms, only for the year in which they receive the firm-specific incentive. Dollars are measured in 2017 dollars.




                                                               35
                              Table A.3: Top Industries Receiving Firm-Specific Incentives

                                                 Subsidy ($ M)   # Jobs Promised    Cost per Job ($)     Investment($ M)     # of
   Industry (NAICS)                              Mean Median     Mean    Median     Mean      Median      Mean Median        Deals


   Full sample                                   178.4    53.2   1,487       810   119,972     65,678      757.5    219.0    543
   Analysis sample                               163.3    53.8   1,229       868   132,884     62,045      765.0    236.4    196
   Manufacturing analysis sample                 214.1    57.2   1,071       738   199,907     77,532    1,004.4    389.3    101


   Automobile manuf. (3361)                      293.6   118.2   2,768     2,000   106,057      59,119     854.8     500.0    56
   Aerospace manuf. (3364)                       585.8    94.9   2,734     1,100   214,237      86,265     534.5     500.0    31
   Semiconductor/electronic manuf. (3344)        188.1    58.2     730       500   257,623     116,450   2,145.0     351.5    27
   Financial activities (5239)                    92.3    24.9   2,652     1,691    34,809      14,749     286.8      84.1    25
   Scientific R&D svc (5417)                     113.7    51.7     518       302   219,259     171,440     185.0      42.2    22
   Pharmaceutical/medicine manuf. (3254)          55.1    36.8     601       500    91,743      73,691     389.1     191.6    21
   Basic chemical manuf. (3251)                  187.4    93.2     196       126   956,701     736,516     779.0     699.8    18
   Information Technology (5415)                 143.6    29.3   2,325       800    61,756      36,648     459.8      21.5    18
   Data processing, hosting/related svc (5182)   169.4   112.7     490       110   345,513   1,024,982   1,270.5   1,000.0    14
   Rubber product manuf. (3262)                  109.1    92.1   1,465     1,200    74,447      76,776     538.9     570.0    13
   Petroleum/coal manuf. (3241)                  141.5    84.9     605       218   233,995     390,463   3,525.0     662.0    12

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for subsidy deals in the top 10 industries, by number of deals, in the subsidy
deal data set (Slattery, 2019). We report the mean and median size of the subsidy deal (2017 $M) for each industry, as well as
the mean and median number of jobs promised in those deals. We also include descriptive statistics on the cost per job (sub-
sidy over number of jobs promised), and investment promised. The top 10 industries in the table make up 47% of the sample in
terms of number of deals, and 56% of the sample in terms of dollars spent.




                                                                 36
                                        Table A.4: Comparing Winner and Runner-up Counties

                             County:      Winner (Full)          Winner (Analysis)           Runner-up                 Average             Pop > 100K
                                          Mean     Median        Mean      Median          Mean     Median          Mean     Median       Mean     Median
                Employment (1000s)          201.3      82.0         229.1      142.9         303.5      157.5          44.1     11.3        197.1     102.9
                                          (380.82)                (240.09)                 (520.81)                 (141.76)              (297.13)
                  Population (1000s)        407.0     171.2         453.9      285.1         610.0      308.1          90.9     25.2        400.8     208.6
                                          (795.29)                (479.08)                (1,093.83)                (294.84)              (623.08)
                       Wage bill (M)      10,969.5    3,403.9     12,789.2    6,751.4      17,477.6    7,689.0       2,086.8    376.7     10,059.3    4,207.9
                                        (23,012.67)             (15,973.19)              (31,657.84)               (8,236.70)           (17,826.63)
               Average wages (1000s)         45.5      42.8          48.6       45.0          48.6      45.0           34.8     33.1         44.4      42.1
                                           (11.99)                 (13.24)                  (14.84)                   (8.96)               (10.89)
                Personal income (M)       19,640.2    6,592.2     23,161.7    11,790.5     31,131.8    14,512.0      3,968.0    792.9     18,809.3    8,473.0
                                        (38,879.81)             (29,274.20)              (53,499.94)              (14,449.31)           (30,781.22)
   Personal income per capita (1000s)        40.9      39.3          44.5       41.8          45.6      41.7           34.1     32.8         42.9      40.6
                                           (12.03)                 (14.09)                  (14.64)                   (8.53)               (11.25)
                  Population density       1,096.7    285.3        1,524.9     485.2        1,702.1     506.3         229.4     42.4       1,088.6    341.0
                                         (4,765.15)              (6,439.90)               (6,302.85)               (1,674.19)            (3,926.36)
             Unemployment rate (%)            4.0       3.7           3.7       3.4            3.8       3.5            4.4      4.1          3.9       3.6
                                            (1.28)                  (1.05)                   (1.17)                   (1.69)                (1.52)
                      % emp in mfg.          21.5      18.0          20.1      16.0           17.6      15.3           19.3     17.3         16.4      14.8
                                           (13.04)                 (13.24)                   (9.87)                  (15.28)                (9.16)
             % emp info & prof svcs.         19.3      17.2          22.4      22.1           24.1      24.0            9.6      8.3         21.2      19.6
                                           (10.13)                 (10.78)                   (9.93)                   (8.18)                (8.19)
                            % urban          73.2      78.5          81.0      90.6           82.8      91.8           39.1     38.4         81.0      85.3
                                           (24.65)                 (19.77)                  (17.88)                  (30.72)               (15.89)
                % Bachelor's or more         22.1      20.3          25.4       24.6          26.9      25.4           16.5     14.5         24.9      23.4
                                            (9.55)                 (10.21)                  (10.19)                   (7.69)                (9.12)
                             % white         78.1      81.1          77.4       79.2          75.7      77.8           84.5     91.3         79.4      82.9
                                           (15.55)                 (13.73)                  (15.05)                  (16.53)               (14.90)
                          % Hispanic          7.0       3.1           8.1       3.9            8.1       3.9            6.2      1.8          9.1       4.3
                                           (10.11)                 (11.01)                   (9.39)                  (12.05)               (12.86)
                      % foreign-born          6.2       3.5           7.7       4.7            8.5       5.5            3.5      1.7          7.7       5.3
                                            (7.34)                  (7.95)                   (8.38)                   (4.85)                (7.43)
                    log housing units        11.2      11.2          11.5      11.6           11.7      11.7            9.4      9.3         11.6      11.4
                                            (1.31)                  (1.25)                   (1.23)                   (1.35)                (0.80)
                        Observations       268                     115                      126                     3,107                  533

Notes: This table summarizes employment, wage bill, average wages, personal income, population and personal income per
capita for"winning" and "runner-up" counties in our sample, and compares them to the average U.S. county. All statistics re-
ported are from the year 2000. "Winning" counties are the counties where firms locate after receiving a subsidy deal."Runner-
up" counties are the second-place location in the subsidy competition. Data on the identity of runner-up counties is collected
by the Slattery (2019) by reading news articles and press releases on each subsidy deal. At least one runner-up county is known
for 278 of the subsidy deals, or about 51% of the sample of 543 deals. Wages and personal income are measured in 2017 dol-
lars. Employment and unemployment data come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS, 1990-2017). Wage and industry
employment data come from Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, 1990-2017). Race/ethnicity, educational at-
tainment, percent urban, and housing units data come from the U.S. Census (U.S. Census Bureau, 2000). Personal income and
population data come from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (1967-2017).




                                                                               37
   Table A.5: Comparing Winner and Runner-up Counties: Population-weighted Summary Statistics

                          County:       Winner (Full)          Winner (Analysis)           Runner-up                 Average                Pop > 100K
                                       Mean      Median        Mean      Median          Mean     Median          Mean     Median          Mean     Median
             Employment (1000s)          940.9      452.0         479.0      442.2        1,228.4     511.5         502.1      200.9         656.2      333.9
                                      (1,233.41)                (301.60)                (1,384.42)                (877.23)                 (959.11)
               Population (1000s)       1,955.3     884.4         955.2      858.4        2,555.8    1,003.4       1,046.7     407.8        1,367.6     661.8
                                      (2,652.71)                (620.82)                (2,986.69)               (1,874.95)               (2,055.47)
                    Wage bill (M)      54,295.2    24,556.1     28,291.1    22,088.6     71,942.3    31,827.1     27,936.4    8,861.3      36,644.4    17,951.4
                                     (70,789.76)              (21,457.68)              (78,596.12)              (50,500.78)              (55,322.35)
            Average wages (1000s)         54.0       51.2          55.4      51.3           57.2      55.8           46.7       44.8          50.5       48.7
                                        (14.81)                  (15.44)                  (15.88)                  (13.82)                  (13.39)
             Personal income (M)       92,501.5    41,676.7     50,500.5    41,083.6    122,695.7    62,813.7     49,316.9    18,092.7     64,625.2    31,052.2
                                     (116473.85)              (39,115.76)              (129507.58)              (84,173.89)              (91,678.80)
Personal income per capita (1000s)        48.3       43.8          51.0      46.0           51.0       48.2          43.6       41.5          46.9       43.8
                                        (14.88)                  (17.97)                  (16.05)                  (13.44)                  (13.46)
               Population density       3,051.8    1,306.1       3,597.3    1,213.9       3,540.2    1,657.9       2,129.2     480.3        2,783.4     971.0
                                      (8,672.56)              (11,359.34)               (9,540.73)               (6,634.85)               (7,513.94)
          Unemployment rate (%)            3.9       3.7            3.5       3.5            3.9       3.7            4.1       3.8            4.0       3.7
                                         (1.16)                   (0.86)                   (0.97)                   (1.42)                   (1.36)
                   % emp in mfg.          15.0      14.5           14.3      13.8           14.1      13.6           16.4       14.5          14.2      13.4
                                         (8.00)                   (7.26)                   (6.31)                  (10.29)                   (7.41)
          % emp info & prof svcs.         27.6       28.6          29.0      28.6           30.1      30.0           21.8       21.4          25.5      26.3
                                         (8.66)                   (9.07)                   (7.28)                  (10.20)                   (8.35)
                         % urban          92.4      97.1           93.5      96.6           95.0      98.0           78.9      91.1           90.5       95.8
                                       (12.68)                    (9.77)                   (8.82)                  (25.85)                  (12.29)
             % Bachelor's or more         27.6      25.9           29.5      27.0           29.6      27.4           24.4      24.5           27.1       25.9
                                         (8.71)                   (9.39)                   (7.99)                   (9.48)                   (8.62)
                          % white         69.3      70.5           72.7      72.9           66.9      66.5           75.2      77.7           71.9       74.4
                                       (15.04)                   (12.05)                  (14.15)                  (17.04)                  (16.26)
                       % Hispanic         16.7      10.5           13.7       7.8           18.2      15.6           12.6       5.7           15.0       8.8
                                       (15.89)                   (15.14)                  (14.38)                  (15.07)                  (15.57)
                   % foreign-born         14.9      11.2           13.2      10.4           17.1      15.2           11.1       6.6           13.7       9.8
                                       (11.88)                   (11.12)                  (11.37)                  (10.92)                  (11.18)
                 log housing units        12.8      12.8           12.6      12.7           13.1      13.0           11.8       12.0          12.5      12.5
                                         (1.23)                   (0.85)                   (1.18)                   (1.58)                   (1.11)
                     Observations       268                      115                      126                     3,103                     533

                                     Notes: This table replicates Table A.4, with population weights.




                                                                              38
