Recovering Investor Expectations from Demand for Index Funds
Mark L. Egan, Alexander MacKay, and Hanbin Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26608
January 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. D12,D81,D84,G11,G50,L0

                                          ABSTRACT

We use a revealed-preference approach to estimate investor expectations of stock market returns.
Using data on demand for index funds that follow the S&P 500, we develop and estimate a model
of investor choice to flexibly recover the time-varying distribution of expected returns. Our
analysis is facilitated by the prevalence of "leveraged" funds that track the same underlying asset:
by choosing between higher and lower leverage, investors trade off higher return against less risk.
Although generated from a different method (realized choices) and a different population, our
quarterly estimates of investor expectations are positively and significantly correlated with the
leading surveys used to measure stock market expectations. Our estimates suggest that investor
expectations are heterogeneous, extrapolative, and persistent. Following a downturn, investors
become more pessimistic on average, but there is also an increase in disagreement among
participating investors due to the presence of a large fraction of contrarian investors.


Mark L. Egan                                     Hanbin Yang
Harvard Business School                          Harvard University
Baker Library 365                                hanbin.v.yang@gmail.com
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
megan@hbs.edu

Alexander MacKay
Morgan 242
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
amackay@hbs.edu
                      Recovering Investor Expectations from
                                  Demand for Index Funds*

                 Mark Egan                   Alexander MacKay                  Hanbin Yang
              Harvard University             Harvard University              Harvard University
                  and NBER§



                                               August 21, 2020




                                                     Abstract

          We use a revealed-preference approach to estimate investor expectations of stock market re-
      turns. Using data on demand for index funds that follow the S&P 500, we develop and estimate
      a model of investor choice to flexibly recover the time-varying distribution of expected returns.
      Our analysis is facilitated by the prevalence of "leveraged" funds that track the same underlying
      asset: by choosing between higher and lower leverage, investors trade off higher return against
      less risk. Although generated from a different method (realized choices) and a different popula-
      tion, our quarterly estimates of investor expectations are positively and significantly correlated
      with the leading surveys used to measure stock market expectations. Our estimates suggest that
      investor expectations are heterogeneous, extrapolative, and persistent. Following a downturn,
      investors become more pessimistic on average, but there is also an increase in disagreement
      among participating investors due to the presence of a large fraction of contrarian investors.


      Keywords: Stock Market Expectations, Demand Estimation, Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs)
      JEL Classification: D12, D81, D84, G11, G50, L0




   * We thank John Campbell, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Ian Martin, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Adi Sunderam
and the seminar participants at the Columbia University Discussion Group on Intermediation, Harvard Business School,
the University of Chicago Booth Household Finance Conference, and the University of Washington. We also thank John
Graham and Campbell Harvey for providing the Duke CFO Global Business Outlook Survey data.
   
     Harvard University, Harvard Business School. Email: amackay@hbs.edu.
   
     Harvard University, Harvard Business School and Department of Economics. Email: hyang1@g.harvard.edu.
   §
     Harvard University, Harvard Business School. Email: megan@hbs.edu.
1    Introduction
Understanding investor beliefs, how these beliefs are formed, and the dynamics of these beliefs is
critical for explaining investment and saving behavior and may have profound macroeconomic im-
plications. For example, beliefs that diverge from rational expectations may affect the distribution
of wealth across households or exacerbate credit cycles. Thus, a better understanding of investor
beliefs can inform macroeconomic policy and the regulation of financial markets. A number of
surveys have been designed to elicit beliefs about the future performance of the stock market from
households, investment professionals, and managers. While recent evidence suggests that these
surveys produce consistent and valuable information, surveys can be criticized for being noisy and
sensitive to interpretation (Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Giglio et al., 2019). To complement this
literature, we propose a method to recover investor beliefs about future returns based on observed
investment decisions.
    Specifically, we develop a parsimonious model of demand for exchange-traded funds (ETFs)
that reflect the performance of the stock market. By revealed preference, estimation of the model
allows us to recover the underlying distribution of investor expectations of future returns. Our
framework builds on the industrial organization literature on estimating demand with heteroge-
neous investors (Koijen and Yogo, 2019a). In the context of demand for ETFs, heterogeneity in
beliefs about the future performance of an underlying asset will lead to different investment deci-
sions. Identification in our setting is conceptually related to Barseghyan et al. (2013), who show
how beliefs can be separately and nonparametrically identified from risk aversion in the context of
insurance choice. Similar to Barseghyan et al. (2013), the key feature of our data for identification
is that investors choose investment options from a menu of several (more than two) ETFs with
different risk/return profiles and fee structures.
    This paper has three empirical contributions. First, we use our framework to construct a time
series of expected stock market returns. At each point in time, we recover the distribution of expec-
tations across investors. We find that heterogeneity in expectations is meaningful and varies over
time. Our estimates are aligned with the survey evidence commonly used in the literature (Green-
wood and Shleifer, 2014; Nagel and Xu, 2019). Second, we examine how investor expectations
are formed. We confirm a prior finding that average beliefs are extrapolative, but our estimated
distribution also suggests the presence of a large fraction of contrarian investors. Both types con-
tribute to how the dispersion in beliefs, or investor disagreement, evolves over time. Finally, we
develop and estimate a simple model of belief formation that allows us to decompose the distribu-
tion of investors into three types: investors with adaptive expectations, with either contrarian or
extrapolative beliefs, and investors that believe the market follows a random walk with drift. The
presence of both contrarian and extrapolative investors is necessary to explain the evolution of the
distribution of investor beliefs.
    To implement the approach, we apply a model of investor choice to observed market shares for
investments linked to the performance of the S&P 500. Our data on market shares comes from
monthly purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) by retail (non-institutional) investors. ETFs

                                                     1
are passive investment funds designed to track another underlying asset. In our sample, ETFs
linked to the S&P 500 average $71 billion in assets under management, and they provide varying
levels of leverage for the same benchmark.1 The ETFs are designed to (a) track the return of
the S&P 500, (b) provide leveraged return (2x or 3x return) of the S&P 500, or (c) provide inverse
leveraged return (-3x, -2x, or -1x) of the S&P 500. Leveraged ETFs are popular investment products
among retail investors. Relative to all S&P 500 linked ETFs held by retail investors, leveraged ETFs
accounted for roughly one quarter of assets under management (AUM) and almost half of retail
trading volume during the financial crisis. In each month, we observe the fraction of investors
purchasing S&P 500 linked ETFs in each leverage category.
    Studying leveraged index funds offers a clean setting for identifying investor expectations of
stock market returns. By choosing among different leverage exposures to the same underlying
asset, the investor reveals information about her expectations for the future performance of the
asset and her risk preferences. With higher leverage, an investor increases the expected mean
return, but also the risk associated with the investment. We model this decision and estimate the
model to recover a time-varying distribution of investor expectations of stock market returns that
rationalize aggregate choices.
    Identification of the model works conceptually as follows. Consider an investor who elects
to purchase a 2x leveraged ETF, and for simplicity, assume the investor has no other wealth or
investments. Compared to a 1x ETF, the investor has doubled the mean (expected) return and
taken on twice the risk. Thus, the investor's purchase indicates that the investor is either relatively
more optimistic about the return of the stock market or relatively more risk tolerant compared to
an investor that chooses a 1x ETF. Because the investor could have further increased the mean
return and the risk by purchasing a 3x ETF but chose not to, we have a second restriction on
the investor's expectation and risk aversion. Full nonparametric identification can be facilitated
by empirical variation in fees or perceived risk, as these inform the mean expectation and risk
aversion, respectively.
    Using maximum likelihood, we estimate a flexible, time-varying distribution of expectations
at a quarterly frequency over the period 2008-2018. Our framework allows us to quantify those
expectations in terms of the expected annualized return of the stock market. The results suggest
that accounting for belief heterogeneity across investors is of first-order importance, as in Meeuwis
et al. (2018) and Brunnermeier et al. (2014). For example, we find that, while the median investor
in December 2009 expected a market risk premium of 3 percent, roughly 10 percent of investors
expected the stock market to fall by more than 10 percent. To validate our results, we compare our
estimates to widely used surveys of investor sentiment (e.g., the Shiller index). Despite the fact
that these two approaches draw on different populations and are collected with different methods,
we find that our estimates are positively correlated with existing surveys.
    Consistent with the survey data results, we interpret our revealed-preference estimates as in-
   1
     Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) develop and estimate a sequential search model to understand price dispersion within
the 1x leverage funds designed to track the S&P 500. We broaden the set of funds to include leveraged ETFs in order to
study the "first-stage" decision of which leverage category to invest in.


                                                          2
vestors' beliefs about the expected future return of the stock market. However, this interpretation
has two important caveats. First, we do not observe investors' portfolios; we only observe pur-
chases of S&P 500 ETFs. If investors use leveraged S&P 500 ETFs to hedge other investments, our
estimated risk parameter would capture a mix of risk aversion and hedging demand. To address
this, we estimate an extension of our model where investors account for the risk of the ETF both
in terms of the variance of the ETF and the covariance of the ETF with the rest of the investors'
wealth (i.e., hedging demand). We find little evidence of hedging demand, and our estimated time
series of beliefs remain similar. Second, we are studying a subset of retail investors who choose to
invest in leveraged ETFs. Even though the market for leveraged ETFs is quite large,2 one may be
concerned that our estimated beliefs are not representative of a general population. As discussed
above, we find that our estimates of investor expectations are highly correlated with survey esti-
mates, which suggests that ETF investors in our sample have similar expectations to broader groups
of market participants. We conclude that our parsimonious model generates reasonable estimates
of investor beliefs.
    Our methodology provides a straightforward way of measuring the time-varying distribution of
investor expectations using readily available aggregate data. This methodology can be particularly
useful when high-frequency survey or micro data is unavailable. Survey expectations are also often
criticized for being potentially unreliable and unrelated to the portfolio decisions of households
(Cochrane, 2011). In contrast, our methodology extracts investor beliefs directly from household
investment decisions. While the bulk of our analysis focuses on S&P 500 linked ETFs and investor
expectations of stock market returns, our approach readily extends to other asset classes. We use
our model to recover the time-varying distribution of investor expectations for gold, oil, European
equities, emerging markets equities, US real estate, medium-term (7-10 year) Treasury, and long-
term (20+ year) Treasury using ETFs linked to the primary benchmarks in these asset classes.
    We recover the distribution of investor beliefs at monthly and quarterly frequencies in our
baseline analysis. However, our methodology, in principle, allows us to recover the distribution
of beliefs at the same frequency as ETF flow data. As an extension, we use daily ETF flow data
to recover the distribution of investor beliefs at a daily level during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our
results suggest that news of the first recorded death in the US in late February coincided with a
substantial increase in the dispersion of investor beliefs that peaked in mid-March and persisted
through June. The average retail investor appeared cautiously optimistic until US states started
imposing lockdowns in mid-to-late March, after which the average expected return fell by more
than 20 percent. Negative mean expectations lasted until mid-April, when infection rates in the US
started to fall. These results highlight the potential usefulness and scope of our methodology; we
recover the distribution of investor beliefs in real time using readily available data.
    Next, we examine how the distribution of investor expectations evolves over time. Our estimates
suggest that mean, dispersion, and skewness of the belief distribution evolve in response to past
   2
     For example, the retail market share of leveraged S&P 500 ETFs was roughly the same as tracker (1x leverage) S&P
500 ETFs during the financial crisis (after adjusting for trading volume). We use "leveraged ETFs" to describe both ETFs
with positive leverage (2x, 3x) and inverse ETFs with negative leverage (-1, -2x, -3x).


                                                           3
returns. Following a period of negative stock market performance, investor beliefs become more
pessimistic on average, more dispersed, and more negatively skewed. Though the mean expectation
is extrapolative, we observe an increase in the median belief following negative returns, suggesting
that a large share of investors display contrarian tendencies. This helps explain why disagreement
increases during stock market busts.3 We also verify these patterns using our estimated time-
varying distributions of investor expectations across eight other common asset classes. Further, we
find that expectations are persistent: one month of poor stock market performance impacts investor
expectations up to two years in the future.
       Building on these results, we develop a simple model of belief formation with three investor
types. Random walk investors assume that the stock market follows a random walk (with drift).
Investors with adaptive expectations form persistent beliefs based on past returns and come in two
flavors: extrapolators believe that recent trends will continue, whereas contrarians believe that
the market will reverse course. Both types of investors may respond asymmetrically to positive
and negative past returns. We fit this model to our recovered distribution of beliefs. Our fitted
model suggests that the presence of contrarians and extrapolators are important to explain ETF
purchase behavior. Though extrapolators show the most responsiveness to past returns, we find
that a greater share of investors display contrarian tendencies. Overall, a majority of the value of
leverage choice goes to investors with adaptive expectations; random walk investors find much less
value from leverage variety.
       The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data used in our analysis. Section 3
introduces our model of investor choice and describes how variation in leverage within the choice
set allows us to nonparametrically identify the distribution of beliefs. Section 4 details the param-
eterization of our empirical model, describes the estimation routine, and presents the results along
with a comparison to survey data. We analyze the formation of investor expectations in Section
5. We develop our three-type model of belief formation and fit it to the estimated distribution in
Section 6. Section 7 concludes.


Related Literature:

Our paper builds on the demand estimation literature at the intersection of industrial organization
and finance.4 On a conceptual level, our paper complements the recent work of Koijen and Yogo
(2019a). Koijen and Yogo (2019a) develop an equilibrium asset pricing model where investors
have heterogeneous preferences, and each investor's portfolio is generated from a Berry et al.
(1995) type demand system. This type of demand-side approach to asset pricing uses the revealed
preferences of investors, by focusing on quantities rather than prices or returns. It is conceptually
   3
      Using data from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, Ilut and Schneider (2014) also find that forecast dispersion
is counter-cyclical.
    4
      Demand estimation has recently been used in a number of other financial applications such as demand for bank
deposits (Dick, 2008; Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos, 2017; Egan, Lewellen, and Sunderam, 2017; Wang, Whited, Wu,
and Xiao, 2018), bonds (Egan, 2019), credit default swaps (Du et al., 2019), insurance (Koijen and Yogo, 2016, 2018),
mortgages (Benetton, 2018) and investments more generally (Koijen and Yogo, 2019a,b; Koijen et al., 2019).



                                                            4
similar to the approaches Shumway et al. (2009) and Berk and Van Binsbergen (2016) use to study
mutual fund flows and Heipertz et al. (2019) uses to study French banks.
   Similar to Koijen and Yogo (2019a), we build on the idea of estimating preference hetero-
geneity across investors, but we focus on recovering investor expectations. To this end, our paper
relates closely to Calvet et al. (2019), Ross (2015), and Martin (2017), which focus on recovering
expectations and risk preferences. Using household level data from Sweden, Calvet et al. (2019)
calibrates a life-cycle model to recover the distribution of risk aversion in the population under
the maintained assumption that investors hold common expectations of returns. Ross (2015) uses
state prices computed from options, and backs out a distribution of physical beliefs by imposing a
transition-independent assumption on the stochastic discount factor. Lastly, Martin (2017) derives
a lower bound on the equity premium using data from index option prices. Although we use a very
different approach and data set, our time-varying estimates of the equity premium are similar to
the estimates in Martin (2017).
   Our paper also relates to the growing work on structural behavioral economics (see DellaVigna,
2018, for a discussion of the literature). Our paper relates most closely to Barseghyan et al. (2013).
Barseghyan et al. (2013) develops a demand-side framework that shows how belief distortions can
be separately identified from risk preferences using data on insurance choice. We use a similar
framework and identification strategy to recover the distribution of beliefs, and then use the corre-
sponding estimates of the belief distributions to better understand the evolution of beliefs and the
corresponding behavioral frictions.
   Our demand estimation framework and estimated beliefs complement the findings of Vissing-
Jorgensen (2003), Ben-David et al. (2013), Amromin and Sharpe (2014), Greenwood and Shleifer
(2014), and Nagel and Xu (2019), which use survey evidence to better understand investor ex-
pectations. Using very different data and empirical approach, we find similar patterns of investor
expectations. While we use trading activity data to infer investor beliefs, recent account-level ev-
idence from Giglio et al. (2019) suggests that an investor's beliefs, as measured by surveys, are
reflected in the direction and magnitude of her trading decisions. Given this finding, it is not sur-
prising that our measure of beliefs during the COVID-19 pandemic also match the patterns Giglio
et al. (2020) find in their follow up study on the pandemic. Our finding that beliefs are heteroge-
neous and persistent is consistent with one of the main empirical facts (Fact 3) Giglio et al. (2019)
document using survey data.
   One of our key findings is that investor beliefs appear extrapolative across a number of asset
classes. This finding complements the literature that uses survey evidence to document extrapo-
lation in the stock market (Benartzi, 2001; Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014), the housing market
(Case et al., 2012), risk taking (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011), investment decisions (Gennaioli
et al., 2016), and inflation markets (Malmendier and Nagel, 2015). In our setting we are able
to study extrapolation and beliefs simultaneously across several common asset classes. A novel
finding is that, while beliefs are extrapolative for the average investor, they do not appear extrap-
olative for all investors. For example, following downturns, the average investor becomes more


                                                  5
pessimistic, but a substantial fraction of investors become more optimistic. This empirical finding
of heterogeneous extrapolation is a feature of theoretical asset pricing models with extrapolative
beliefs (Cutler et al., 1990; De Long et al., 1990; Barberis and Shleifer, 2003; Barberis et al., 2015,
2018). Thus, our findings provide additional evidence for understanding the formation of beliefs.
A recent literature documents that such adaptive expectations could have profound impacts on the
macroeconomy (Bordalo et al., 2018; Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018; Bordalo et al., 2018).


2        Data

2.1       Overview of Leveraged ETFs

Leveraged ETFs provide investors a menu of different exposures to an underlying asset. Leveraged
ETFs cover many asset categories, including broad indices (S&P 500) and commodity prices (oil).
They offer discrete leverage categories of 2x or 3x on the long side and -1x, -2x and -3x on the
short side. These products provide active retail investors access to leveraged exposure with limited
liability as an alternative to more complicated derivative contracts, which require margins and
specialty knowledge.5
        Despite easy access to leverage, these products are not considered suitable for buy-and-hold
investors and mostly attract short-term purchases. Leveraged ETFs typically rebalance either daily
or monthly in order to maintain a constant ratio of leverage relative to the linked asset. Though
this rebalancing provides constant leverage in the short run, the return on these ETFs over a longer
period (i.e., more than one year) may diverge from the short-run leverage target. We explore this
additional risk for longer-term investors in Appendix E.2.


2.2       ETF Data Sources

We assemble ETF data from Bloomberg, ETF Global, and CRSP. Bloomberg reports monthly data on
ETF AUM, net asset value, trading volume, and quarterly data on ETF institutional ownership. We
rely on benchmark and fund descriptions in ETF Global accessed via WRDS to identify the choice
sets of S&P 500 ETFs with leverage categories from -3x to 3x. Lastly, CRSP Mutual Fund Database
also accessed through WRDS provides ETF expense ratios. Our panel ranges from 2008 to 2018.
        We aggregate individual ETFs to their leverage categories, so that the primary unit of observa-
tion in our analysis is at the month-by-leverage level. Our main focus is understanding investor
expectations and risk aversion, so we focus on investors' choice of leverage (i.e., 1x vs 2x lever-
age) rather than individual ETFs (i.e., ProShares Ultra 2x S&P 500 ETF vs. Direxion Bull 2x S&P
500 ETF). Implicitly, we assume that investors choose leverage and issuer separately. We consider
this approach reasonable because the risk and return profiles of ETFs are homogeneous within a
    5
    In addition to ETFs, retail investors can also buy leveraged mutual funds and exchange-traded notes (ETNs). We
focus on ETFs primarily because of better data quality and for comparability reasons. The structures of leveraged mutual
funds and ETNs are the same as ETFs, so our model could also be applied to these products.




                                                           6
leverage category, similar to the maintained assumption in Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004). To ag-
gregate our data from ETF to leverage level, we sum the market shares across ETFs and take the
market-share weighted average expense ratio. We detail our construction of ETF-specific market
shares below.


2.3      Constructing Market Shares from Leverage Choice

A key input in our empirical model is the quantity of ETFs purchased by retail investors. We measure
quantities as the dollar amount retail investors purchase over the course of each month. This flow
measure reflects the investor expectations at the time of transaction, as opposed to stock measures
that reflect past purchase decisions. Stock measures such as AUM will place greater weight on
passive investors whose holdings do not reflect contemporaneous information. This distinction is
important in our context, because a large fraction of AUM in trackers (1x) comes from passive
investors, whereas trading in leveraged ETFs is dominated by active investors. In addition, we
remove demand from institutional investors. Institutions are major investors in trackers, but they
rarely buy leveraged ETFs because they have access to more cost-effective leveraged contracts such
as futures and swaps.
      We construct our measure of ETF purchases from data on trading volume and net fund flows
each month, with the ultimate goal of measuring the quantity of ETFs purchased by active retail
investors in a given month. To calculate the quantity purchased, we assume that every month a
fraction of retail investors consider investing a fixed portion of their wealth in ETFs that follow a
particular asset (e.g., the S&P 500). Investors may set aside this wealth in the process of actively
rebalancing their portfolios in that month. If an investor does not choose to invest this wealth in
an ETF, the investment is put into a money market account.
      When investors purchase ETFs, they purchase from a market maker who has previously pur-
chased the ETF from another investor. Thus, measures of trading volume (T rading V olumejt )
count investor purchases and investor sales as separate transactions. When purchases exceed sales,
new shares are issued by the market maker to satisfy excess demand. These new shares are mea-
sured as net flows (N et F lowjt ). When sales exceed purchases, N et F lowjt is negative and repre-
sents redemptions.
      We construct the quantity of ETF j purchased by retail investors at time t as

               Quantityjt = Retailj × [(T rading V olumejt - N et F lowjt )/2 + N et F lowjt ].

To measure purchases only, we first subtract net flows from trading volume, capturing trades of
existing shares that have both a purchase and sale. We divide this measure in half to get a measure
of purchases. We add back in net flows to adjust for shares created or redeemed. To adjust for
retail demand, we scale this measure by the average retail ownership of each ETF in our sample,
Retailj .6
  6
      As a robustness check, we also calculate quantities as Quantityjt = Retailj × T rading V olumejt . This adjustment


                                                            7
    As in most demand estimation exercises, we do not directly observe investors that consider
investing in S&P 500 ETFs but choose a risk-free option instead (0x leverage). To construct shares
for this outside option, we calculate flows into retail money market accounts for retail investors
considering S&P 500 ETFs, as investing in a money market account is a natural risk-free option for
most retail investors. First, we obtain the total amount of assets invested in retail money market
funds from FRED. We scale this total by the fraction of AUM in S&P 500 ETFs out of the AUM in all
retail investment vehicles (including all ETFs and retail mutual funds). This constructs a proxy for
the share of money market AUM relevant for S&P 500 investors. To convert this stock measure into
a flow measure of investor purchases, we scale this proxy by the ratio of quantity (defined above)
to retail AUM. We calculate the ratio as the average across all S&P 500 ETFs within each month
of our sample. As a robustness check, instead of using this measure, we estimate the share in the
outside option as a free parameter; the estimation results are not materially different. We discuss
this and other robustness checks in Section 4.
    Table 1 compares market shares based on our demand measure with shares of raw AUM, which
includes holdings of passive or institutional investors. Because institutional investors hold a dispro-
portionate share of tracker funds, the shares in trackers are on average 88% under AUM but only
57% according to our market share definition.


2.4     Summary Statistics and Trends

The market for S&P 500 linked ETFs and leveraged ETFs grew dramatically over the period 2008-
2018. Figure 1 displays total AUM held in S&P 500 linked ETFs by retail investors and the asso-
ciated trading volumes over the period 2008-2018. As of 2018, retail investors held around $180
billion in S&P 500 linked ETFs.
    The primary unit of observation in our analysis is the market share of each leverage category at
the monthly level. Figure 2a displays the market share of each leverage category over the period
2008-2018. While S&P 500 tracker funds (1x leverage) are the most commonly held product on
average, during the financial crisis leveraged ETFs collectively became more popular than tracker
ETFs.
    Table 1 shows a breakdown of leverage categories, with average AUM as well as expense ratio.
As discussed above, leveraged ETFs are smaller in AUM compared to trackers. Leveraged ETFs
also charge substantially higher fees, and ETFs with more leverage tend to be marginally more
expensive. Figure 2b shows the trends in ETF fees. ETF fees are relatively stable over time, though
the average fee for 1x trackers has been declining since 2013.
has no appreciable differences on our market share measure and consequently our empirical results.




                                                         8
3        Empirical Framework

3.1       Demand for ETFs

We model an investor's investment decision as a discrete-choice problem. Each investor i has a fixed
amount of wealth to allocate to ETFs that are benchmarked to the performance of the S&P 500
Index. Investors choose an ETF leverage category j  {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3} with corresponding
leverage j = j , where j = 0 represents the outside option of placing their money in a retail money
market account.
        Investor i's indirect utility from choosing leverage j is given by

                                                                 2 2
                                           uij = j µi - pj -      j  .                                          (1)
                                                                2
The term µi reflects investor i's expectation of future stock market returns. Investors have hetero-
geneous expectations that are distributed µi  F (·). If an investor chooses j = 2, she will realize
twice the return of the S&P 500 Index. Collectively the term j µi - pj captures the investor's (sub-
jective) expected return as a function of leverage j and net of ETF fee pj . Without any loss in
generality, we normalize preferences with respect to the annualized ETF fee pj to one. Because ETF
fee pj is measured as annualized percentage of AUM, this allows us to interpret µi as the annualized
return in excess of the risk-free rate offered by a money market account.
        Risk aversion is additively separable, following the second-order Taylor expansion used in
Barseghyan et al. (2013). The parameter  is the investor's coefficient of risk aversion, and can
be interpreted to represent either constant absolute risk aversion or constant relative risk aversion.
         2  2 measures the volatility of leverage j , where  2 is the volatility of the S&P 500 Index.
The term j
Thus, the combined term -    2 2
                          2 j  captures the (time-varying) risk penalty for leverage category j .
        In our baseline analysis, we assume that risk aversion is constant across investors. We later ex-
tend the model to allow for heterogeneous risk aversion: i  G(·). Though i is defined as a risk
aversion parameter, it may also capture heterogeneous beliefs over the volatility of the stock market.
                                       2  2
Thus, i may be interpreted as i i
                                2 , where i is investor i's expectation of stock market volatility.

Another feature of our model is that we treat an investor's ETF investment choice independently
from her more general portfolio allocation problem. To address this, we consider an extension of
the model where investors account for how the ETF covaries with their wealth/portfolio, and we
allow ETF choice to potentially hedge against wealth/portfolio risk. For a derivation of this model
and the corresponding estimates, see Appendix B. Neither extension has a first-order effect on our
estimated belief distribution. Moreover, our estimates suggest that hedging demand plays a mini-
mal role in retail investment in ETFs.7 For these reasons, we proceed with the more parsimonious
model to develop our main results.
    7
    The estimated mean expectation of stock returns with hedging demand is highly correlated with the estimated mean
expectation in our main results with a correlation coefficient of 0.98.




                                                         9
       The investor's problem is to choose the leverage category that maximizes her indirect utility

                                                                              2 2
                                               max            j µi - pj -      j                                         (2)
                                       j {-3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3}                  2

An investor chooses leverage j if and only if it maximizes her subjective risk-adjusted return relative
to the other leverage choices k = j . So an investor who chooses j prefers leverage j to leverage
j - 1 such that

                                               2 2                    
                      uij = j µi - pj -         j  > j -1 µi - pj -1 - j -1 2  2 = uij -1
                                              2                       2

This inequality can be re-written to provide a lower bound on investor i's expectation of future
stock market returns:
                                                2   2    2
                                        µi >      - j -1  + pj - pj -1 ,                                                 (3)
                                               2 j
noting that j - j -1 = 1. Intuitively, investor i must believe that the stock market return µi
                                                                                  2 - 2    2
is sufficiently high to offset the incremental change in risk                 2   j   j -1  and fees pj - pj -1
associated with leverage j over leverage j - 1. Similarly, an investor who chooses j prefers leverage
j to leverage j + 1 such that

                                               2 2                    
                      uij = j µi - pj -         j  > j +1 µi - pj +1 - j +1 2  2 = uij +1
                                              2                       2

generating an upper bound on investor i's expectation of future stock market returns:

                                                2       2
                                        µi <          - j  2 + pj +1 - pj .                                              (4)
                                               2 j +1

In words, the above inequality implies that investor i s expectation of future stock market returns is
not sufficiently high to offset the incremental change in risk and fees to justify purchasing leverage
category j + 1 over j.
       Inequalities (3) and (4) imply that an investor's optimal leverage choice is simply a function
of her expectation µi . We assume that every leverage category j is optimal for some investors,
i.e., there exists some µi that satisfies both (3) and (4) for all j .8 Therefore, an investor chooses
leverage category j if and only if

                     2       2                         2
                      j +1 - j  2 + pj +1 - pj > ui >      2
                                                         - j    2
                                                             -1  + pj - pj -1 .
                    2                                 2 j
   8
     In other words, we assume that no leverage is dominated by another leverage. This can be tested empirically for any
                             2       2                2     2
set of parameters. Because j  +1 - j = 2j + 1 and j - j -1 = 2j - 1, this assumption can be written as the condition
   2
 > (pj - pj -1 ) + (pj - pj +1 ) for interior j (j = {-3, 3}). Intuitively, prices for leverage j can not be too high relative
to the nearby leverage categories.




                                                              10
Given the distribution of beliefs F (·), the share of investors purchasing leverage j, sj , is then

                          2       2                            2
             sj = F             - j  2 + pj +1 - pj      -F        2
                                                                 - j    2
                                                                     -1  + pj - pj -1                  (5)
                         2 j +1                               2 j

The above market share equation captures the probability that any given investor would purchase
leverage j . This relationship is at the heart of our estimation strategy described below. Given
market share data sj and product characteristics p and , we can recover the preference parameter
 and the distribution of expectations F (·).


3.2   Identification

We now describe how risk aversion  and the distribution of expectations F (·) are nonparametri-
cally identified using aggregate market share and product characteristic data. We discuss the merits
of the assumptions with respect to our empirical implementation in Section 4. In estimation, we
allow F to vary over time. Here, we provide conditions to identify the distribution that applies in
each relevant period.
   Identification is obtained by using two sources of variation. The first source is variation comes
from the menu of choices facing investors. By revealed preference, an investor that chooses a
leverage category of 2x has a higher expected return than an investor that chooses a 1x ETF, and
a lower expected return than an investor that chooses a 3x return. By observing the market shares
of purchases in each leverage category, we can pin down features of the distribution of expected
returns.
   Formally, the distribution of expectations is semi-parametrically identified by the shares of in-
vestors in each leverage category, similar to identification in an ordered probit or logit model.
For notational convenience, let Sj denote the cumulative share of investors purchasing a leverage
             j
k  j:        k=-3 sk .   We can add up the shares from equation (5) to obtain a system of equations
satisfying
                                            
                                   Sj = F     (2j + 1)  2 + pj +1 - pj ,
                                            2
               2      2
where 2j + 1 = j +1 - j for all j < 3. S3 is always equal to 1 and is not informative. The
right-hand side elements depend on the observed characteristics  , pj +1 , and pj , as well as the
unknown parameter  and the distribution F . Because we observe six unique cutoff points in our
data, {Sj } = {S-3 , S-2, S-1 , S0 , S1 , S2 }, we have a system of six equations in each period. These six
equations allow us to identify, in principle, a period-specific risk aversion parameter , as well as a
period-specific distribution for F . The distribution of F can be estimated as a flexible distribution of
up to five parameters, provided it is sufficiently well-behaved. For example, if F is parameterized as
normal, then F has two degrees of freedom (mean and variance) to attempt to fit the six observed
values of {Sj }.
   Our second source of variation, which allows us to obtain full nonparametric identification,
comes from time series variation in prices and volatility. Intuitively, if we observe how prices shift


                                                    11
leverage choices, we can pin down the scale of risk aversion. We assume that prices pj and the
available leverage choices j are independent of investor expectations F (·). In the data, both prices
and leverage choices are relatively fixed in the short run; this helps alleviate concerns that ETF
issuers are endogenously changing fees and leverage choices, quarter-to-quarter, in response to
changes in investor expectations.
        Formally, suppose that there exists a realization of the data for which              ~k = Sj
                                                                                ~ 2 =  2 and S
                                                                                
for k = j . Then it must be that           2   (2j + 1)  2 + pj +1 - pj =       2 (2k + 1)  + p
                                                                                               2    ~k+1 - p ~k . Therefore,
                2                                                                pk+1 -p
                                                                                (~     ~k )-(pj +1 -pj )
we have        2  (2j     - 2k ) = (~
                                    pk+1 - p
                                           ~k ) - (pj +1 - pj ), or  =                  2 (j -k)
                                                                                                         . The risk aversion
coefficient is identified from the data. Because the coefficient on price is normalized to 1, we have
identified the distribution at the quantile F -1 (Sj ). Furthermore, we only have to identify  once,
                                                                           ~j }.
so this single comparison provides identification at all quantiles {Sj }  {S
        Likewise, exogenous variation in volatility can aid in identification. Intuitively, if we observe the
same realization of market shares from the same belief distribution, but prices have changed, then it
must be the case that changes in volatility have exactly offset the changes in prices for the marginal
investor. Formally, consider two different realizations of the data (, pj , pj +1 ) and (~
                                                                                         , p
                                                                                           ~j , p
                                                                                                ~j +1 )
                ~                            - 1          - 1 ~                     2
for which Sj = Sj . Then, it must be that F (Sj ) = F (Sj ), or 2 (2j + 1)  + pj +1 - pj =
                                                                                              pj +1 -p
                                                                                             (~      ~j )-(pj +1 -pj )
2   (2j + 1) ~2 + p
                  ~j +1 - p
                          ~j . The risk aversion coefficient is then  = 2                        (2j +1)( 2 - ~2)
                                                                                                                       .   More
generally, this exactness can be relaxed by using a local approximation to estimate how leverage
                                                                    Sj                      Sj                Sj
market shares vary with respect to variation in prices,             pj ,   and volatility    2
                                                                                               .   Because    pj    = -f (Sj )
                                                                           Sj
         Sj                                                         -2      2
and       2
              =   2   (2j + 1) f (Sj ), we can recover  as  =      2j +1   Sj   .
                                                                           pj

        Our main empirical results use both sources of variation. We estimate the belief distribution at
the quarterly level, allowing monthly variation in prices and volatility to assist in identification. To
demonstrate the identifying power of the menu of choices only, we provide an alternative set of
estimates in Appendix A. Using this alternative approach, we can allow the belief distribution to
vary at the monthly level. These alternative estimates closely resemble our main results.


3.3        Extension: Heterogeneous Risk Aversion

The main objective of this paper is to estimate a parsimonious model that allows us to recover
the distribution of investor beliefs. However, we also consider the natural extension of the model
where investors have heterogeneous risk aversion i  G(·).

                                                                     i 2 2
                                                uij = j µi - pj -      j  .
                                                                     2

Here, we assume that investors agree over the volatility of the S&P 500 Index but have het-
erogeneous risk aversion. This framework corresponds to the random coefficients and latent
class/mixture ordered choice models,9 and also relates more generally to the random coefficients
models commonly used in the demand estimation literature (Berry et al., 1995). As discussed in
    9
        See Chapter 8 of Greene and Hensher (2010) for a discussion of the literature.


                                                             12
Section 3.1, one could recast the model of heterogeneous risk preferences into an empirically equiv-
alent model where investors have heterogeneous beliefs over the volatility of the stock market.
       With heterogeneity in risk aversion, the share of investors choosing leverage j is

                       i 2                                          i 2
       sj =       F           - j  2 + pj +1 - pj            -F          2
                                                                       - j    2
                                                                           -1  + pj - pj -1   dG(i ).
                       2 j +1                                       2 j

Identification of heterogeneity in risk preferences comes from variation in the substitution patterns
with different levels of volatility similar to identification in Berry et al. (1995).10 In the above sec-
tion, we showed that two realizations from the data are sufficient to pin down a single risk aversion
parameter. If we observe more than two realizations of the data that generate the same quantile,
then we have multiple measures of the risk aversion parameter. These can be used as overidenti-
fying restrictions to reject a model of homogeneous risk aversion, or, intuitively, these additional
realizations can be used to pin down properties of the distribution of risk aversion coefficients.


3.4       Discussion and Alternative Interpretations

Our model makes a few key assumptions that merit discussion. First, we assume that investor
expectations about future stock market performance can be collapsed into a single expected return.
We do not view this assumption as particularly problematic. Investor uncertainty will be absorbed
by the risk aversion parameter in our model. Implicitly, the parameter captures both market-level
uncertainty and investor-specific uncertainty, as described above. Investor-specific uncertainty may
reflect both forecast uncertainty and beliefs about volatility.
       Second, we assume that the investor is making a discrete decision to invest a certain amount of
wealth in these ETFs. The discrete choice assumption rules out behavior where an investor splits
their wealth between two different leverage categories. The way we justify this assumption is the
standard approach in empirical discrete choice models: we allow, in theory, individual investors to
have multiple realizations from the distribution F (·). Thus, µi may represent different perspectives
within a single individual, without any modification to the model.
       Third, we assume investors only focus on financial characteristics of ETFs summarized by ex-
pected return and volatility. Non-financial characteristics such as fund issuer marketing, distribu-
tion channels, and brand recognition are ruled out. Issuers of leveraged ETFs offer almost the entire
menu of leverage choices, and so they are unlikely to steer investors toward a specific leverage. By
omitting ETF-specific demand shocks, we could potentially overstate the expected return needed
for investors to shift from a tracker to a 2x ETF if investors have a brand preference for the three
(more well-known) issuers that only offer trackers.
       Finally, we do not make any assumptions about an investor's investment horizon. As discussed
previously, without any loss in generality, we normalize an investor's disutility from fees p to one,
which allows us to interpret investor expectations over stock market growth µi in term of annual
returns. Note that this does not mean that we assume that the investor intends to hold the ETF for
  10
       See Cunha et al. (2007) for further discussion of ordered choice models.


                                                            13
a year. Rather, it means that the investor expects the S&P 500 to grow at rate of µi , where µi is
measured in annualized returns.11 In the data we do not observe an investor's investment horizon,
nor do we need to make any assumptions about the horizon. However, in practice, investors in
leveraged and inverse-leveraged ETFs tend to have similar holding periods, which are less than one
month on average.


4         Estimation

4.1        Empirical Model

Following our framework in Section 3, we develop and estimate an empirical model of investor
leverage choice. We allow the distribution of investor expectations to vary over time, estimating
Fs for each set of periods s. The subscript s indexes time-varying distributions and also the set
of months Ts for which the distribution applies, i.e., the distribution Fs applies to any period
t  Ts . In our baseline specification, we estimate the model using monthly data and allow the
distribution of expectations to vary at the quarterly level such that |Ts | = 3. We estimate the
expectation distribution via maximum likelihood. The likelihood contribution of an investor who
chooses leverage j is Fs (xjt ) - Fs (x(j -1)t ), where Fs is the distribution of expectations and xjt
is scaled utility corresponding to the expected return that renders an investor indifferent between
choice j and choice j + 1. Let ai denote the leverage choice for investor i and Nt denote the number
of potential investors in period t. Then, the likelihood component for Fs is

                                                                               1[ai =j ]
                                                  Fs (xjt ) - Fs (x(j -1)t )                                       (6)
                                  tTs iNt j J


and the log-likelihood is

                                             1 [ai = j ] ln Fs (xjt ) - Fs (x(j -1)t ) .                           (7)
                              tTs iNt j J


         We observe market share data, rather than individual choices. We sum over the (latent) indi-
viduals in each period and scale by Nt to obtain the following expression for the log-likelihood


                                               sjt ln Fs (xjt ) - Fs (x(j -1)t ) .                                 (8)
                                     tTs j J

The parameter vector, , characterizes the time-varying distribution Fs and risk aversion . Our
estimate ^ is chosen to maximize the log-likelihood. We parameterize Fs as a skewed t distribution
with four parameters. The parameters correspond to location, scale, skewness, and kurtosis; these
are further described in Table 2.12 The four-parameter skewed t distribution is a flexible distribution
    11
     In other words, our methodology allows us to recover an investor's expectations about the growth rate of the S&P
500 rather than the investor's beliefs about what the level of the S&P 500 should be.
  12
     We parameterize the skewed t distribution as F (xjt ) = F~ xjt -a . The corresponding density f
                                                                                                   ~ is given by f
                                                                                                                 ~(x) =
                                                                 b



                                                          14
that nests other common distributions such as the Normal and Cauchy distributions. We estimate
location, scale, and skewness separately for each three-month period, while holding kurtosis fixed
for the entire sample. As discussed in Appendix A, we also re-estimate the model where we allow
the location, scale, and skewness to vary at the monthly rather than quarterly level, and we find
quantitatively similar results.
    xjt is the utility index and is parameterized as

                                                  2       2 2
                                        xjt =           - j t + p(j +1)t - pjt
                                                 2 j +1

where ETF leverage (j ) and fees (pjt ) are directly observed in the data, and we calculate implied
            2 ) based on the VIX. In our baseline specification, we hold  constant over time. This
volatility (t
has the interpretation that  is a deep preference parameter, rather than a proxy for consumption
and other factors.13
    Thus, we estimate three parameters in each quarter, corresponding to the time-varying distri-
bution of expectations, plus the kurtosis parameter and an additional parameter to capture risk
aversion. Since we have 11 years and 44 quarters of data, we estimate 134 parameters in total. In
some alternative specifications, we allow i to be heterogeneous across investors, and we hold the
distribution of i fixed over our sample.


4.2     Baseline Results

Our estimates for investor expectations are plotted in Figure 3. Panel (a) shows the distribution
of time-varying expectations in each quarter. The mean expectation is plotted with red dots and
the median is plotted with a solid red line. Dashed lines show the 25th and 75 percentiles, and
dotted lines show the 10th and 90th percentiles. The estimated time-varying parameters that char-
acterize the distribution are displayed in the other three panels. Panels (b), (c), and (d) plot the
estimates for the location, scale, and skewness parameters, respectively. 95 percent confidence in-
tervals are displayed with dashed lines and are calculated using the maximum likelihood formula
for asymptotic standard errors. Here, we describe and interpret our baseline estimates of investor
expectations. In Section 5 we further study the evolution of and the factors driving investor expec-
tations.
    Our estimates of investor expectations in Figure 3a suggest that investors became substantially
more pessimistic surrounding the 2008 financial crisis and that pessimism persisted for several
years after the crisis. During the crisis, the average investor's expectation of the market risk pre-
  2
      g (cx)                 ~(x) =
               for x < 0 and f          2
                                            g( x )   for x  0, where c is the skewness parameter and g is the density of a t
c+1/c                                 c+1/c    c
distribution with degree of freedom d. In estimation, we use the skewt package in R for calculating F~.
   13
      We think treating  as a deep preference parameter is a reasonable assumption for ETF demand. In the data, leverage
in ETFs increases during the crisis; models with time-varying risk aversion such as Campbell and Cochrane (1999) would
suggest increased risk aversion and reduced leverage during this period. As a robustness check, we estimate an extension
of the model where we allow risk aversion to vary annually, which we present in Appendix C. This extension generates
a similar distribution of investor expectations to our baseline model. In contrast to Campbell and Cochrane (1999), our
estimates suggest that risk aversion is slightly procyclical for ETF demand.


                                                                15
mium fell by over 20% and remained below zero for the following two years. Over our whole
sample the average expected market risk premium of the median investor in our sample is roughly
3%, which is similar to, albeit slightly smaller, than the median realized market risk premium in our
sample (4.65%) and other estimates in the literature (Welch, 2000; Graham and Harvey, 2008).
       We find that there is a large variation in the dispersion of expectations across investors over
time. The changing dispersion in investor expectations is captured by our scale parameter, shown
in panel (c), which is roughly analogous to the standard deviation. Investors have greater dis-
agreement during the crisis, as can be seen in the large differences between the 90th and 10th
percentile of expectations from 2008 to 2011. At the most extreme, our estimated mean expecta-
tion in 2008 Q4 is an annualized return of less than -20 percent. In this quarter, we estimate that
10 percent of investors thought the return on the S&P 500 would be worse than -67 percent. The
results suggest that disagreement tends to rise in times of crisis. As illustrated in Figure 3a, there is
also a substantial increase in disagreement among investors surrounding the 2011-2012 European
Sovereign Debt Crisis and the 2015-2016 Chinese stock market turbulence. From 2016 to 2018,
we estimate that investors had much less disagreement about the future return of the stock market.
The expectation distribution has remained more stable with tighter bands between the 90th and
10th percentiles.
       We estimate that the distribution tends to have a negative skew. In panel (d), this corresponds
to ct < 1. This affects the overall distribution by lowering the mean relative to the median, which
can be seen in panel (a). Skewness has the greatest effect on the mean in 2008 Q4, when the
dispersion in expectations is highest. This suggests that a mass of investors became particularly
pessimistic during the financial crisis.
       We summarize our estimated parameters in Table 3. For our time-varying parameters, we report
the median value and the corresponding standard errors. We report our time-invariant parameter
for kurtosis, which reflects how much of the distribution lies in the tails. Our estimated kurtosis
parameter of 1.26 implies fat tails that are roughly in line with the Cauchy distribution.14 Our
estimated risk aversion parameter of  = 0.98 implies that investors are willing to pay an additional
40 basis points in fees for a one standard deviation reduction in volatility.15 To put these numbers in
perspective, our estimate of  is lower than other risk aversion estimates traditionally found in the
literature. For example, using life cycle models Fagereng et al. (2017) estimate relative risk aversion
of 7.3, Calvet et al. (2019) estimate relative risk aversion of 5.8, and Meeuwis (2019) estimate
relative risk aversion of 5.4. These differences are not necessarily surprising, given our distinct
population and the fact that our parameter may capture additional uncertainty. As described in
Section 3.1,  and i may not be directly interpretable as risk aversion to the extent that investors
have heterogeneity in beliefs about volatility and forecast uncertainty.
  14
     Technically, our estimates imply that moments higher than the mean are not defined. Hence, we talk about a
scale parameter rather than a standard deviation. For convenience, we use the terms skewness and kurtosis, whose
corresponding moments are not defined.
  15
     This is computed as  2
                            sd( )2 , where sd( ) denotes the standard deviation of VIX in our sample.




                                                      16
4.3     Heterogeneous Risk Aversion

In our baseline specification, we hold the risk aversion parameter fixed for all investors. We also
estimate a specification in which investors have heterogeneous preferences for risk. As discussed
above, this assumption is isomorphic to a model in which investors have heterogeneous beliefs
about the volatility of the stock market.
   Formally, we assume that i  G(·), where i is independent from investor expectations µi .
We parameterize G as a uniform distribution. As above, we estimate our model using maximum
likelihood, while integrating out the distribution for i . The estimated parameters are summarized
in Table 3. We report our estimate of G in terms of its midpoint and dispersion, where dispersion
captures the distance from the midpoint to the upper and lower bounds.
   Incorporating heterogeneity in risk aversion makes little difference to our overall estimates. We
estimate a risk aversion distribution of i  U [0.66, 1.00]. Thus, the midpoint of 0.82 is slightly
lower than the constant risk aversion parameter estimate of 0.98. The other parameters are only
slightly affected by the change. Figure 4 provides a comparison of the two specifications. The top
three panels correspond to the specification with fixed risk aversion, and the bottom three panels
correspond to the specification with heterogeneous risk aversion. Panels (a) and (d) show the
distribution of investor expectations, which track each other closely. Panels (c) and (f) show the fit
of log shares, where the x-axis represents the log shares in the data and the y -axis represents the
fitted shares in the model.
   For a more specific comparison, we plot the distribution of investor expectations for a single
period in panels (b) and (e). These panels show the pdf of expectations in September 2009, which
is plotted in yellow. The vertical blue lines correspond to the cutpoints of indifference between
leverage categories, in terms of excess return. The area under the yellow line between two ver-
tical blue lines corresponds to the model-predicted shares for a particular leverage. For example,
investors with expectations between µi = 11 and µi = 16 would choose 2x leverage. Comparing
panel (b) to panel (e), we see that incorporating heterogeneity in risk aversion compresses the
cutpoints toward zero, though this effect is small. For example, the implied expectation to choose
1x leverage over the outside option is µi = 3.3 in our baseline specification and µi = 2.8 with risk
aversion heterogeneity.


4.4     Comparison with Survey Data, Future Returns, and Model Returns

4.4.1    Comparison with Survey Data

We examine how our estimates of investor beliefs compare with survey responses, which have
been previously used to understand the formation of beliefs (Vissing-Jorgensen, 2003; Ben-David
et al., 2013; Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Nagel and Xu, 2019). We examine the following sur-
veys/indices that are commonly used in the literature: the Duke CFO Global Business Outlook, the
Wells Fargo/Gallup Investor and Retirement Optimism Index, the University of Michigan Survey of
Consumers, the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) Sentiment Survey, the Shiller


                                                 17
U.S. Individual One-Year Confidence Index, and the Survey of Professional Forecasters. An advan-
tage of surveys is that they can be constructed to be representative of a desired target population
of individuals; conversely, the advantage of our revealed preference approach is that it is based on
the actual decisions of individuals, albeit from a specific subset of the population.
   Each survey asks potentially different questions to elicit investor beliefs about the stock market.
For example, the Duke CFO Global Business Outlook asks survey respondents to report what they
believe the stock market will return over the course of the next year, while the Shiller U.S. Individual
One-Year Confidence Index measures the percentage of respondents who expect the stock market
to increase over the upcoming year.
   Because we recover the full distribution of expectations, we can use our estimates to calculate
the implied responses to each survey question. For example, our estimated mean corresponds to
a survey that asks for expected return, whereas our estimated fraction of investors taking positive
leverage corresponds to investors who think the stock market will increase. In principle, we can
simulate survey statistics quite flexibly. Overall, the survey responses implied by the estimated
distribution of beliefs from our model are statistically and positively correlated with the survey
data.
   Table 4 evaluates the relationships between the survey data and our estimated distribution
of expectations. All nine of the chosen measures from surveys are positively and significantly
correlated (at the 1 percent level) with the corresponding statistic from our estimated distribution.
The different survey measures correspond to different moments of the underlying distribution of
investor expectations. The results indicate that our estimated distribution of beliefs is correlated
with the distribution of beliefs elicited from survey data on number of different moments beyond
the mean. For additional details of each survey and scatterplots of the relationship, see Section F
in the Appendix.
   Overall, the results displayed in Table 4 help shed light on the external validity of our estimates.
The expectations we recover from demand for S&P 500 linked ETFs are highly and significantly cor-
related with the investor expectations measured in six different surveys. Our estimates of investor
beliefs help complement the survey data. While the survey data are intended to capture the beliefs
of distinct populations, our belief estimates come from the actual investment decisions of investors.


4.4.2   Future Returns and Model Returns

We explore whether investor expectations of returns can forecast future returns. We regress the
future 12-month excess return on the estimated mean expected return from our sample and report
the corresponding results in column (1) of Table 5. Rather than predicting excess returns, the
estimated mean expected returns instead have a weakly negative correlation with future returns.
Our evidence is consistent with the findings in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) and Amromin and
Sharpe (2014) that investor expectations do not forecast future returns.
   In contrast, Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) and a long previous literature show that model-
based measures can forecast future returns. We examine how our estimates of investor expectations


                                                  18
about future returns vary with model expected returns. First, following Greenwood and Shleifer
(2014) we use the dividend price ratio as a proxy for expected returns, second, we use the con-
sumption wealth ratio (cay ) of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) as a proxy for expected returns, and
third, we use the lower bound on the equity premium that Martin (2017) constructs using prices on
S&P 500 index options. Columns (2)-(4) of Table 5 report the regression results corresponding to
the regressions of the dividend-price ratio, cay, and the lower bound on the equity premium on our
estimate of the mean expected return. The results indicate that model expected returns are nega-
tively and significantly correlated with our estimate of the mean expected return. This evidence is
consistent with the findings from Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) and Martin (2017) that investor
expected returns are negatively correlated with model-based measures of expected returns.
   In addition, Martin and Papadimitriou (2019) highlight the distinction between the average
belief and the belief of a representative investor who chooses to hold the market. This insight sug-
gests another connection with Martin (2017). The lower bound on equity premium binds for an
unconstrained rational investor with log utility who is fully invested in the market. In our frame-
work, we also estimate a range of expected returns such that investors with these expectations find
it optimal to hold the market (i.e., choose 1x leverage). Figure A1 panel (b) in the Appendix shows
that our estimated range almost always contains the equity premium in Martin (2017). Although
using different methods based on different products, we generate very similar implications about
the beliefs of a representative investor.


4.5   Robustness Checks

We find that allowing for skewness and kurtosis, as we do in our baseline specification, provides
estimates that best fit the data. However, for robustness, we also estimate the model using a normal
distribution for expectations, where we allow the mean and standard deviation (the location and
scale parameters) to vary over time. Using a normal distribution maintains several of the qualitative
features of our baseline specification, but the model fit is worse. The normal distribution does a
poor job fitting the fat tails of the expectation distribution, and it cannot account for skewness.
   We consider two alternative definitions of the outside option to test the sensitivity of our results
to this measure. In one specification, we scale the outside share by a factor of 5 rather than the
average ratio of purchase volume to AUM, with the idea that outside options may not trade at
the same frequency as the inside goods. We also consider a specification where we estimate the
share choosing the outside option as a free parameter, rather than bringing in the data. Neither
assumption makes a meaningful difference in our estimates. The resulting expectation distributions
and the plots of model fit are displayed in Figure A2 of the Appendix.
   We also present three sets of results discussed earlier as robustness checks. Appendix A provides
results using only within-menu variation in choices, at both quarterly and monthly frequencies. Ap-
pendix B provides a discussion of our more general model where we allow an investor's ETF choice
to incorporate hedging demand as part of the investor's broader portfolio allocation problem. In
this extension, investors account for how the ETF investment covaries with their wealth/portfolio,


                                                  19
and we estimate this covariance term for each investor as a random coefficient. The corresponding
estimated time-varying distribution of investor expectations is similar to the estimated distribution
in our baseline specification.
       In the third set of results, we estimate the model while allowing investors to have time-varying
risk aversion t (Appendix C). On average, we estimate similar but slightly lower risk aversion
compared to the baseline model (0.61 vs 0.98). More importantly, for the purposes of our analysis,
the two models produce qualitatively similar distributions of investor expectations. The correla-
tion of the mean expected return across investors in the time-varying risk aversion model and our
baseline model is 0.96.


4.6       Extending the Methodology to Other Assets

It is straightforward to extend our approach to other asset classes. We extend our analysis to
estimate time-varying investor expectations for gold, oil, European equities, emerging market eq-
uities, US real estate, medium-term (7-10 year) Treasury, and long-term (20+ year) Treasury. In
Appendix D, we describe the ETFs corresponding to each asset class in detail and report corre-
sponding market shares. We follow the same methodology as above, using maximum likelihood to
recover time-varying distribution of expectations separately for each asset class. For oil and US real
estate, we have less empirical variation in choices, so we restrict the skewness parameter to be 1
(no skew) throughout the sample.16
       Figure 5 panels (a)-(g) plot the estimated expected return distribution over time across the
seven different asset classes. We capture time-varying expectations that seem reasonable and are
consistent with intuition. For example, following the 2008 financial crisis, investor expectations
over the real estate sector fall dramatically and then rebound in 2010 and 2011 (5e). Similarly, the
negative effects of the European sovereign debt crisis on investor beliefs are immediately apparent
in Figure 5c, as the average investor expected a decline in equity prices and there was an increase
in disagreement across investors.
       We estimate different risk aversion for each asset class, because the sample of investors trading
each asset class may be different. For example, we estimate that investors in gold are slightly less
risk averse than those in S&P 500 ( = 0.78 vs.  = 0.98). We estimate that investors in oil are
much less risk averse, with a risk aversion parameter of 0.28. One caveat is that the interpretation
of these estimates as risk aversion depends on the strict interpretation of the model. If investors
have heterogeneity in beliefs about volatility, this could be reflected in the estimated parameter.
The differences in estimated risk aversion could also vary because the size of the ETF investment
relative to the investor's portfolio varies across asset classes.
  16
       If we relax this constraint, we do not estimate the skewness parameter to be significantly different from 1.




                                                              20
4.7   Using Higher Frequency Data: Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic

Our methodology for recovering investor beliefs allows us to calculate the distribution of beliefs at
the same frequency as the ETF flow data. In our baseline analysis, we estimate the distribution of
beliefs at monthly and quarterly frequencies. As an extension, we exploit daily ETF flow data to
calculate the distribution of beliefs at a daily level during the COVID-19 pandemic.
    We estimate the distribution of beliefs over the period January 2020 through June 2020 follow-
ing the same procedure described in Section 4.1. We use the high-frequency data to estimate the
time-varying parameters of the distribution--location, scale, and skewness--at a daily frequency.
For this shorter time series, we set the static parameters for risk aversion and kurtosis equal to our
baseline estimates. Figure 6 panel (a) displays our daily estimates of investor beliefs and panel (b)
displays the incidence of COVID-19 and the S&P 500 Index level. Panel (a) shows that there was a
sharp increase in disagreement among investors in mid-February around the time the first COVID-
19 death was reported in the US. The increase in disagreement peaked in late March, but remained
elevated through June. Part of the increase in dispersion was driven by an increase in pessimism,
but it was also driven by an increase in optimism among contrarian investors. The results suggest
that the average investor became optimistic about returns starting in February until states in the US
started imposing lockdowns in mid-to-late March. Following the lockdowns in the US, the average
expected return fell by more than 20% from its peak and did not recover until mid-to-late April
when infection rates in the US started to fall. The patterns we document are consistent with the
survey evidence in Giglio et al. (2020). Using monthly survey data from February through April
2020, Giglio et al. (2020) find that in mid-March the average investor became more pessimistic
and that there was a persistent increase in disagreement. Overall, the results displayed in Figure
6 highlight the potential usefulness and scope of our methodology; we recover the distribution of
investor beliefs at a high frequency in real time using readily available data.


5     Understanding Investor Expectations
In this section, we use our estimates to contribute to the understanding of how investors form
expectations. First, we confirm a previous finding that, on average, investors extrapolate recent
stock market returns when forming expectations. We contribute to the literature by showing how
extrapolation impacts not only the mean expectations but also the variance and skewness. In other
words, we show how historical returns are correlated with investor disagreement and pessimism.
Second, we examine the persistence of beliefs and find that a one-time -10 percent return shock
impacts investors' beliefs for up to two years into the future.


5.1   Determinants of Investor Expectations: Extrapolated Beliefs

There is a long theoretical and empirical literature highlighting the role of extrapolation in the
formation of investor beliefs. We examine the relationship between past stock market returns and


                                                  21
the expectations we recover from our model. An advantage of our model is that we recover the full
distribution of beliefs, rather than just the mean or median, which allows us to examine how other
moments, such as the standard deviation and skewness of beliefs, change in response to historical
stock market returns.
   We examine the relationship between the estimated mean expected excess return versus the
previous year-over­year excess return of the stock market in the following regression


                                  E [R]q =  + AnnualRetq +        q                               (9)

where E [R]q is the mean expected return from our model and AnnualRetq is the past one year
excess return of S&P 500. Observations are at the quarterly level.
   We report the corresponding estimates in column (1) of Table 6. Due to potential autocorre-
lation of the error term, we report t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) with four lags.
The results in column (1) indicate that a one percentage point increase in historical returns is
correlated with a 0.11 percentage point increase in investor beliefs about the stock market return.
The results also indicate that historical returns explain 58% of the variation in the mean expected
return, suggesting that recent returns are first-order in explaining investor expectations.
   Building on these results, we examine how other moments of the expectation distribution co-
vary with recent stock market returns. Column (2) of Table 6 displays the corresponding regression
estimates corresponding to the the dispersion of expected returns across investors versus the previ-
ous year-over­year excess return of the stock market. The two series are negatively and significantly
correlated. The estimates reported in column (2) indicate that a one percentage-point decrease in
the past 12-month excess return of the stock market is correlated with a 2.6 percent increase in
the dispersion parameter (which is analogous to the standard deviation of a normal distribution).
The results suggest that there is a substantial increase in disagreement following negative returns,
while investor beliefs become more homogeneous following positive returns.
   Part of the increase in dispersion appears to be driven by the presence of contrarian investors. In
column (3) of Table 6, we examine the relationship between median beliefs and historical returns.
We estimate a small negative and statistically significant relationship between the median belief
and the previous 12-month excess return of the stock market. The results indicate that a one
percentage point increase in historical returns is correlated with an 0.04 percentage point decrease
in the median belief. These results suggest that while the mean belief is extrapolative, the median
investor is contrarian.
   Understanding changes in the skew of the distribution helps reconcile the differences between
the mean and median belief. Column (4) of Table 6 illustrates how the skewness of the distribution
varies with recent stock market returns. The results indicate that investor expectations become
more positively skewed following positive past returns. Conversely, investor expectations become
more negatively skewed following negative returns. The results indicate that a one percentage-
point increase in recent historical returns is correlated with a 0.27 percent increase in the skewness
parameter. Combined, these findings suggest that there exists a mass of behavioral investors that


                                                 22
become very pessimistic after a market downturn, making the belief distribution more negatively
skewed and decreasing the mean expectation.
    An advantage in our setting is that we recover the distribution of investor beliefs across asset
classes which allows us to construct a panel of the distributions of investor beliefs across eight
different asset classes at a quarterly level. Using this panel data set provides additional statistical
power and insight into the formation of investor beliefs, allowing us to exploit cross-sectional
variation in asset returns. In Appendix D, we exploit the panel structure of our data to show that
the extrapolative behavior we document among S&P 500 investors, in terms of the mean, standard
deviation, and skewness of investor expectations, holds more generally across asset classes.17


5.2    Persistence of Beliefs

Figure 3 panel (a) suggests that the financial crisis had a large and persistent impact on investor
beliefs. After the decline in stock market in the late fall of 2008, the mean and skewness of in-
vestor expectations become more negative, and there is also a large increase in disagreement. As
illustrated in the figure, these effects persist for up to two years.
    We examine how the beliefs distribution evolves by estimating how the parameters of the dis-
tribution, location, scale and skewness, evolve as an AR(1) process.



                         Locationq = a + a M onthlyRetq + a Locationq-1 +                     aq

                              Scaleq = b + b M onthlyRetq + b Scaleq-1 +                 bq                         (10)
                        Skewnessq = c + c M onthlyRetq + c Skewnessq-1 +                       cq


Observations in equation (10) are at the quarterly level over the period 2008-2018. We examine
how each parameter evolves as a function of the parameter value from the previous quarter, and
also M onthlyRetq , the previous monthly excess return of the stock market averaged across the
current quarter. We report the corresponding estimates in Table 7. The results indicate that there is
strong persistence in the belief distribution over time, as the AR(1) component of each parameter
estimate is positive and significant. Consistent with our previous estimates, we also continue to
find evidence that beliefs are extrapolative and impact multiple moments of the distribution.
    Figure 7 displays the impulse response of how the expectation distribution evolves in response
to large swings in the stock market. Panel (a) displays how investor expectations respond follow-
ing a one-time one-month return of negative 10 percent. As illustrated in the figure, the mean
expectation across investors immediately falls, and it remains negative for almost two years. One
interesting feature, which is consistent with our previous results, is that the mean and the me-
dian move in opposite directions. While the mean expectation across investors falls, the median
expectation increases in response to a negative return. This disagreement in measures of central
  17
     When we look across asset classes, we find that the median belief is positively correlated with past returns. This is
consistent with our results in Section 6 that indicate that the fraction of contrarians varies across asset classes.


                                                           23
tendency is possible because a negative stock market return has a large impact on the skewness
and dispersion of the distribution of beliefs. Following the negative return, there is substantial dis-
agreement among investors, and the interquartile range of investor expectations almost doubles.
In response to the negative return shock, the 10th and 25th percentile of investors become dramat-
ically more pessimistic while the median investor becomes more optimistic. The expected return
among investors in the 10th percentile falls by more than 10 percent.
    Panel (b) of Figure 7 shows how the expectation distribution evolves in response to a one-
time one-month return of positive 10 percent. The average investor's expectation of future stock
market returns jumps up and remains elevated for the next 1-2 years. In sharp contrast to the
effect of a negative return, investor expectations become less disperse in response to positive news
about the stock market. Expectations among investors at the 25th and 75th percentiles of the
distribution converge to the median in response to the recent positive stock market return such
that the interquartile range among investor beliefs falls by half.
    Our results suggest that investor beliefs are extrapolative and persistent, such that a change in
recent returns has a profound impact on the mean, variance, and skewness of investor beliefs for
the proceeding two years.


6    Extrapolative and Contrarian Investors
In this section, we develop a parsimonious model of belief formation and fit the model to esti-
mated belief distributions from Section 4. We build upon our results in the previous section, where
our regression analysis showed that investor beliefs are persistent and that investors may respond
asymmetrically to past returns. Our model allows for both random walk investors, who have sta-
tionary beliefs about excess returns, and investors with adaptive expectations, who respond to past
returns and whose beliefs are persistent. Our random walk investors assume that the stock market
follows a random walk (with drift), and we assume that their beliefs follow a normal distribution.
    Our model is intended to demonstrate, in a simple way, the importance of accounting for in-
vestors that respond differentially to past returns. This differential response is a key feature of our
estimated belief distributions. After the financial crisis and also during the COVID-19 pandemic, we
see large increases in both the positive and negative tails of the belief distribution for the S&P 500,
corresponding to investors increasingly buying both -3x and +3x leveraged ETFs. Some investors
have adaptive expectations that are extrapolative, in that they project that recent trends in returns
will continue in the future, whereas others appear to be contrarian, in that they believe that the
market will rebound after a large shock. Our analysis suggests that contrarian investors comprise a
significant portion of investors in ETF markets.




                                                   24
6.1     Model of Belief Formation

In our model, the beliefs about expect returns for a random walk investor i in period t are given
by:
                                       µr
                                        it = it ,   it  N (m,  2 ),                                  (11)

where m represents the expected return on the asset and  captures the standard deviation in beliefs
across investors.
      Investors with adaptive expectations have persistent beliefs that are related to past returns, and
they may respond asymmetrically to positive and negative returns. The beliefs of these investors
evolve according to the following process:


             µb      b            b
              it =  µi(t-1) - m +  Rt ( 1[Rt  0] + 1[Rt < 0]) + it ,           it  N (m,  2 ).       (12)

We allow for two types of investors with adaptive expectations, which are indexed by b  {e, c}.
Extrapolative investors (e) have persistent beliefs that are positively related (e > 0) to the return
in the previous period. Contrarian investors (c) have persistent beliefs that are negatively related
(c < 0) to past returns. The parameter  captures the persistence in beliefs, which decay toward
the mean expectation over time. We model both types of adaptive expectation investors as having
the same persistence parameter,  . We also assume that these investors receive the same distribu-
tion of "news" about future returns as random walk investors, modeled as an additive idiosyncratic
shock it . Investors with adaptive expectations may respond asymmetrically to positive returns
and negative returns. The parameter  captures the asymmetry in the response of beliefs to recent
returns. For negative returns, the response is b times the prior return. For positive returns, the
response is b  times the prior return. The share of each investor type is given by (sr , se , sc ), where
1 = sr + se + sc .
      We calibrate this three-type model to fit our estimated distribution of investor beliefs. We
choose a limited set of parameters (m, , , , se , e , sc , c ) to minimize the difference between the
estimated quarterly belief distribution and the model-predicted belief distribution. Specifically, we
use the z th percentile pz
                         t for each period t, where z  {10, 25, 50, 75, 90}. This provides 44 × 5 = 220
                                                             ^z
empirical targets. We simulate the corresponding percentiles pt using 5,000 simulated investors
in the calibrated model. We construct a distance measure as           t   z   wz (^
                                                                                  pz    z 2
                                                                                   t - pt ) , choosing the
parameter vector to minimize this distance. The weight wz corresponds to the fraction of investors
closest to each percentile, i.e., w = {0.875, 1, 1.25, 1, 0.875}. For our measure of historical return,
we assume that an investor in each month responds to the one-month return in the previous month
as in Section 5.2. To construct Rt at a quarterly level, we take the average value of this one-month
historical return across the three months of the quarter.




                                                    25
6.2      Simulated Results

Figure 8 displays the simulated belief distribution from the calibrated model compared to the belief
distribution we recovered in Section 4. The 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the sim-
ulated distribution are plotted in black, and the estimated distribution is plotted in green. Overall,
the three-type model captures the patterns observed in the data quite well. Random walk investors
have beliefs characterized by m = 2.28 and  = 1.84. The calibrated model has a persistence
parameter of 0.51, indicating that adaptive expectation investors' beliefs persist across quarters.
Extrapolative investors respond strongly to past returns (e = 0.35). Contrarian investors respond
somewhat less strongly (c = -0.14) in the other direction. Investors react much more to negative
returns compared to positive returns ( = 0.02), which is consistent with the findings from Section
5. The presence of contrarian investors is important: the calibrated model finds that roughly 50
percent of investors are contrarian, compared to 25 percent that are extrapolative.
       To highlight the importance of contrarian investors, we calibrate a restricted version of the
model where we do not allow for contrarian investors (sb = 0). The simulated beliefs from the
restricted model are shown in panel (b) of Figure 8. Only the negative tails of the distribution are
matched in the restricted model, and the model does not capture the increase in expected returns
in the upper tail of the distribution. The R2 of the three-type model is 0.84, compared to an R2 of
0.58 in the restricted model. Thus, our model suggests that the presence of both extrapolative and
contrarian investors are important in the S&P 500 ETF market.18
       We fit our three-type model separately to all asset classes examined in Section 4.7. Consistent
with our findings in the S&P 500 market, contrarian investors appear to be important in explaining
the evolution of beliefs across asset classes. Panels (a) and (b) of Table A4 in the Appendix display
the calibrated parameters for the three-type model and the restricted two-type model for each
asset. The last row in each panel provides the R2 as a measure of fit. In most assets, the presence
of contrarian investors results in a much better fit of the observed belief distribution. Contrarians
do not appear to be as important in the markets for gold and Treasuries.


6.3      The Role of Extrapolation and Contrarianism in ETF Markets

The wide dispersion of expectations about future stock market returns suggests that there are large
ex ante welfare gains from product variety in the context of S&P 500 ETFs. Providing investors with
a menu of leverage choices allow them to invest based on their idiosyncratic beliefs. For example,
investors with a negative expected return of the S&P 500 would not choose to invest in an S&P 500
tracker, but they might invest in an inverse ETF. Thus, the availability of inverse ETFs provides a
way for investors to express their views on the market when they have divergent beliefs.19
  18
     Our focus of the simple model is to explain qualitative patterns in the data, rather than estimate fundamental
parameters. For this reason, we do not formally explore statistical inference.
  19
     Inverse ETFs provide investors with a straightforward and simple way to short the market, relative to the other
investment options available. For example, investors are not required to have a margin account to invest in inverse
ETFs. For the purposes of the counterfactual, we assume that the set of investors that have access to more sophisticated
instruments are not investing in S&P 500 ETFs.


                                                          26
   Our simple model of belief formation suggests that disagreement among investors is exacer-
bated by behavioral tendencies such as extrapolation and contrarianism. To quantify the impor-
tance of these features, we use the parameters from the calibrated model to simulate a counter-
factual distribution of beliefs with only random walk investors. We then examine how this coun-
terfactual distribution of random walk investors chooses among leverage, relative to the baseline
distribution with both extrapolative and contrarian investors.
   Table 8 panel (c) shows the share of random walk investors choosing leveraged (-3x, -2x, -
1x, 2x, 3x) products, compared to the simulated share using all three types of investors. The
share of investors choosing leveraged products falls from 0.26 to 0.12 when we "turn off" adaptive
expectations. This conforms to patterns we see in the raw data: if investors believed the market
followed a random walk, the shares of leveraged products would fall during the financial crisis due
to increased volatility; the fact that shares of leveraged products were greatest during this period
suggest that adaptive expectations are important.
   As a second measure, we calculate the ex ante welfare gains from leverage variety for all in-
vestors compared to the gains realized by random walk investors. We measure the value of lever-
aged ETFs by comparing the ex ante utility from the realized choice to the utility in a counterfactual
in which leveraged products are eliminated and investors can only choose tracker ETFs (leverage =
1x) or the outside option. Because our model generates a strict ordering of preference for leverage,
eliminating leveraged ETFs will shift all investors in inverse ETFs to the outside option, and all
investors in positively leveraged ETFs to trackers. Using the recovered distribution of expected re-
turn µi and risk aversion, it is straightforward to compute the difference in utility measured in risk
adjusted return from investors' original choices to either the outside option or trackers. Our utility
specification, shown in equation (1), provides the ex ante utility of a leverage choice conditional
on the expectation of each investor. For details, see Appendix E.
   The utility calculations are reported in panels (d) to (f) of Table 8. We find that variety in
leverage provides investors with large ex ante welfare gains in the S&P 500 market, equivalent to
an additional 1.56 percentage point higher excess return. Intuitively, these gains reflect the ability
of investors to purchase products that align with their heterogeneous beliefs. Our counterfactual
simulation suggests that the vast majority of these gains accrue to investors with adaptive expecta-
tions. When we look only among random walk investor types, the gains from leverage variety fall
to only a 0.19 percentage point higher excess return. Conversely, the variety in leverage provides
extrapolative investors with large welfare gains equivalent to a 5.17 percentage point higher excess
return. In Appendix D, we calibrate our model to additional asset classes. Across all asset classes,
adaptive expectations generate a large portion of the estimated gains. Overall, our simulation
suggests that extrapolation and contrarianism in belief formation are important for understanding
investor behavior in ETF markets.




                                                 27
7    Conclusion
We use a revealed-preference approach to estimate investor expectations of stock market returns.
We apply our methodology to the market for S&P 500 ETFs. ETF investors face a fixed menu of
investment alternatives, each with a different fee structure and risk/return profile. Measuring how
investors trade-off risk/return among a fixed choice set allows us to separately identify investor
expectations of returns and risk aversion.
    Our framework allows us to recover the full distribution of investor beliefs at a quarterly fre-
quency over the period 2008-2018. Our empirical estimates of investor expectations are highly
correlated with the leading survey measures of investor expectations that are commonly used in
the literature (Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014). Because we recover the distribution of investor
expectations, we are able to provide new insights into the drivers of investor beliefs. Consistent
with the literature, we find evidence of extrapolative beliefs: mean expected returns are highly
and positively correlated with recent historical returns. In addition, we find that the distribution of
beliefs becomes more dispersed and more negatively skewed following a period of negative stock
market returns. As a stark illustration of heterogeneity in beliefs, we find that mean and median
expectations move in opposite directions after negative S&P 500 returns.
    We fit a simple model of belief formation to the recovered distribution of beliefs. Our model
suggests that both extrapolative and contrarian responses to past returns are important features of
ETF markets. Without both types of adaptive expectations, it is difficult to rationalize the purchase
shares of leveraged products and the recovered distribution of expectations. We find that the
majority of the gains from leverage choice accrue to investors with adaptive expectations, compared
to investors that believe the market follows a random walk with drift.
    Our framework is straightforward to apply to other asset classes. While we study the market for
ETFs for tractability reasons, this type of demand framework could be used to provide insight into
investor expectations and risk preferences in other settings going forward, and could be particularly
useful when survey or micro data is unavailable.




                                                  28
References
Amromin, G. and S. A. Sharpe (2014). From the horse's mouth: Economic conditions and investor
  expectations of risk and return. Management Science 60(4), 845­866.

Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2015). X-capm: An extrapolative capital asset pricing
  model. Journal of financial economics 115(1), 1­24.

Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2018). Extrapolation and bubbles. Journal of Financial
  Economics 129(2), 203­227.

Barberis, N. and A. Shleifer (2003). Style investing. Journal of Financial Economics 68(2), 161­199.

Barseghyan, L., F. Molinari, T. O'Donoghue, and J. C. Teitelbaum (2013). The nature of risk preferences:
  Evidence from insurance choices. American Economic Review 103(6), 2499­2529.

Ben-David, I., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey (2013). Managerial miscalibration. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 128(4), 1547­1584.

Benartzi, S. (2001). Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401 (k) accounts to company stock. The
  Journal of Finance 56(5), 1747­1764.

Benetton, M. (2018). Leverage regulation and market structure: A structural model of the UK mortgage
  market. Working paper.

Berk, J. B. and J. H. Van Binsbergen (2016). Assessing asset pricing models using revealed preference.
  Journal of Financial Economics 119(1), 1­23.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica,
  841­890.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2018). Over-reaction in macroeconomic expectations.
  Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles. The Journal of
  Finance 73(1), 199­227.

Brunnermeier, M. K., A. Simsek, and W. Xiong (2014). A welfare criterion for models with distorted beliefs.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4), 1753­1797.

Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, F. J. Gomes, and P. Sodini (2019). The cross-section of household preferences.
  Working paper.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
  aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205­251.

Case, K. E., R. J. Shiller, and A. K. Thompson (2012). What have they been thinking? Homebuyer behavior
  in hot and cold markets. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 265.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of finance 66(4), 1047­1108.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2007). The identification and economic content of ordered
  choice models with stochastic thresholds. International Economic Review 48(4), 1273­1309.

Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers (1990). Speculative dynamics and the role of feedback
  traders. American Economic Review 80(2), 63­68.

De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990). Positive feedback investment
  strategies and destabilizing rational speculation. The Journal of Finance 45(2), 379­395.


                                                     29
DellaVigna, S. (2018). Structural behavioral economics. In Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications
  and Foundations 1, Volume 1, pp. 613­723. Elsevier.

Dick, A. A. (2008). Demand estimation and consumer welfare in the banking industry. Journal of Banking &
  Finance 32(8), 1661­1676.

Du, W., S. Gadgil, M. B. Gordy, and C. Vega (2019). Counterparty risk and counterparty choice in the credit
  default swap market. Working paper, SSRN 2845567.

Egan, M. (2019). Brokers vs. retail investors: Conflicting interests and dominated products. The Journal of
  Finance 74(3), 1217­1260.

Egan, M., A. Hortaçsu, and G. Matvos (2017). Deposit competition and financial fragility: Evidence from
  the us banking sector. American Economic Review 107 (1), 169­216.

Egan, M., S. Lewellen, and A. Sunderam (2017). The cross section of bank value. Working paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Egan, M., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2019). The market for financial adviser misconduct. Journal of Political
  Economy 127 (1), 000­000.

Fagereng, A., C. Gottlieb, and L. Guiso (2017). Asset market participation and portfolio choice over the
  life-cycle. The Journal of Finance 72(2), 705­750.

Gennaioli, N., Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2016). Expectations and investment. NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 30(1), 379­431.

Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2018). A crisis of beliefs: Investor psychology and financial fragility. Princeton
  University Press.

Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and S. Utkus (2019). Five facts about beliefs and portfolios. Working
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and S. Utkus (2020). Inside the mind of a stock market crash. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Graham, J. R. and C. R. Harvey (2008). The equity risk premium in 2008: evidence from the global cfo
  outlook survey. Working paper, SSRN 1162809.

Graham, J. R. and C. R. Harvey (2011). The Duke/CFO business outlook survey. Duke CFO Global Business
  Outlook. http: www. cfosurvey. org.

Greene, W. H. and D. A. Hensher (2010). Modeling ordered choices: A primer. Cambridge University Press.

Greenwood, R. and A. Shleifer (2014). Expectations of returns and expected returns. The Review of
  Financial Studies 27 (3), 714­746.

Heipertz, J., A. Ouazad, and R. Rancière (2019). The transmission of shocks in endogenous financial
  networks: A structural approach. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hortaçsu, A. and C. Syverson (2004). Product differentiation, search costs, and competition in the mutual
  fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2),
  403­456.

Ilut, C. L. and M. Schneider (2014). Ambiguous business cycles. American Economic Review 104(8),
   2368­99.

Koijen, R. S., R. J. Richmond, and M. Yogo (2019). Which investors matter for global equity valuations and
  expected returns? Working paper, SSRN 3378340.


                                                       30
Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2016). Shadow insurance. Econometrica 84(3), 1265­1287.

Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2018). The fragility of market risk insurance. Working paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2019a). A demand system approach to asset pricing. Journal of Political
  Economy 127 (4), 1475­1515.

Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2019b). Exchange rates and asset prices in a global demand system. Working
  paper, SSRN 3383677.

Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson (2001). Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock returns. The
  Journal of Finance 56(3), 815­849.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect risk taking?
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373­416.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2015). Learning from inflation experiences. The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 131(1), 53­87.

Martin, I. (2017). What is the expected return on the market? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(1),
 367­433.

Martin, I. and D. Papadimitriou (2019). Sentiment and speculation in a market with heterogeneous beliefs.
 Working paper, SSRN 3428381.

Meeuwis, M. (2019). Wealth fluctuations and risk preferences: Evidence from U.S. investor portfolios.
 Working paper.

Meeuwis, M., J. A. Parker, A. Schoar, and D. I. Simester (2018). Belief disagreement and portfolio choice.
 Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Nagel, S. and Z. Xu (2019). Asset pricing with fading memory. Working paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Newey, W. K. and K. D. West (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
  autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55(3), 703­708.

Ross, S. (2015). The recovery theorem. The Journal of Finance 70(2), 615­648.

Shumway, T., M. Szefler, and K. Yuan (2009). The information content of revealed beliefs in portfolio
  holdings. Working paper, University of Michigan.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2003). Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does "irrationality" disappear with
   wealth? evidence from expectations and actions. NBER macroeconomics annual 18, 139­194.

Wang, Y., T. M. Whited, Y. Wu, and K. Xiao (2018). Bank market power and monetary policy transmission:
 Evidence from a structural estimation. Working paper.

Welch, I. (2000). Views of financial economists on the equity premium and on professional controversies.
 The Journal of Business 73(4), 501­537.




                                                    31
Tables

                       Table 1: Summary Statistics Across S&P 500 Leverage Categories

           Adj. Share (%)      Raw Share (%)   Raw AUM (Billion)   Purchases (Billion)   Retail Fraction   Expense Ratio (bps.)
           Mean St. Dev.       Mean St. Dev.    Mean   St. Dev.     Mean     St. Dev.    Mean St. Dev.      Mean     St. Dev.
   -3x      2.87      0.70      0.33    0.13    0.75     0.26       2.50       1.35      0.91     0.03     93.48       1.26
   -2x     6.59      5.48       1.23    1.08    1.98     0.89       7.76      10.83      0.86     0.05     89.99       1.10
   -1x     1.06      0.48       0.83    0.50    1.66     0.59       1.18      0.80       0.72     0.03     90.74       2.34
    1x     56.98     10.47     88.41    4.37   230.77   139.91     233.13     73.38      0.25     0.05      8.66       0.36
    2x     4.85       2.08      0.99    0.63    1.93     0.62       5.41      4.36       0.79     0.04     91.24       2.09
    3x     3.49       0.62      0.37    0.08    1.04     0.66       3.19      1.30       0.82     0.08     95.27       0.58
  Total    75.26     5.55      92.09    2.76   237.96   140.44     252.67     83.12      0.27     0.04     29.31       9.01


Notes: Table 1 shows summary statistics at month × leverage category level. Adj. Share and Raw Share compare market
shares based on our adjusted purchase volume outlined in Section 2.3 and the raw AUM in the data. Raw AUM and
Purchases display the original AUM and our adjusted purchase volume in billion dollars. Lastly, Retail Fraction shows the
retail ownership and Expense Ratio shows the fee charged by ETFs. The last row corresponds to the means and standard
deviations of monthly total adjusted market share, AUM share, AUM, and purchase volume across all leverage categories,
monthly average retail ownership and monthly average expense ratio weighted by market share.




                             Table 2: Parameters for Time-Varying Belief Distribution Fs

         Parameter     Function        Interpretation
             as        Location        Corresponds to mean and median with no skew (c = 1)
             bs        Scale           Multiplicative; corresponds to standard deviation when (d = , c = 1)
             cs        Skewness        More extreme negative values (c < 1) or positive values (c > 1)
             ds        Kurtosis        Special cases are Cauchy (d = 1, c = 1) and Normal (d = , c = 1)




                                                             32
                                          Table 3: Estimated Parameters


                                                          Constant                  Heterogeneous
                                                        Risk Aversion               Risk Aversion
                                                        Coef       SE               Coef        SE
            Expected Return
            Location (Median)                          2.856         (0.695)         2.484        (0.657)
            Scale (Median)                             1.081         (0.424)         0.992        (0.448)
            Skewness (Median)                          0.766         (0.343)         0.752        (0.259)
            Kurtosis                                   1.262         (0.510)         1.340        (0.465)

            Risk Aversion
            Mean                                       0.982         (0.020)         0.828        (0.069)
            Dispersion                                                               0.172        (0.077)

            Implied Mean Expectation
            10 Pct                                     -2.545                       -1.225
            25 Pct                                     0.106                        0.391
            50 Pct                                     0.768                        0.714
            75 Pct                                     1.140                        1.131
            90 Pct                                     1.402                        1.487

            Model Fit
            R2                                         0.921                        0.923
            Log Likelihood                           -168.593                     -168.468

Notes: Table 3 shows estimation results with constant and heterogeneous risk aversion. The first panel displays param-
eters for the expected return distributions. Location, scale and skewness parameters are allowed to vary over time, and
we estimate one set of coefficients for each quarter. We display the median location, scale, and skewness coefficients, as
well as their corresponding standard errors. The next panel shows mean risk aversion and the dispersion (half length
of the range) when it follows uniform distribution. Standard errors are computed using the inverse of numerical Hes-
sian. Next, we compute the implied mean expected return in each quarter and display the quantiles of the across-time
distribution of mean expectations. The last two rows show R2 and log likelihood of each specification.




                                                           33
                                                                   Table 4: Comparison with Surveys

                   Survey                 Gallup       Mich.         AAII        Shiller                  Duke CFO                             SPF
                   Survey Measure         Index        Index        Index        Index        Mean           SD   Share Neg.            Mean        IQR
                                            (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)      (7)                 (8)        (9)
                   Est. Measure          0.70***      0.77***      0.33***      0.47***      0.29***      0.57***  0.62***             0.82*** 0.72***
                                          (0.11)      (0.093)       (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.15)   (0.12)              (0.14)     (0.19)
                   Observations             40           44           44           44           43           43       43                  44         44

     Notes: Table 4 shows the correlation between the estimated expectations from our model and six additional surveys: (1) the Gallup Investor and Retirement Optimism
     Index, (2) the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, (3) the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) Sentiment Survey, (4) the Shiller U.S. Individual
     One-Year Confidence Index,(5-7) the Duke CFO Global Business Outlook Survey (CFO), and (8-9) the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). The estimated belief
     distribution corresponds to our baseline model estimates reported in column (1) of Table 3. Observations are at the quarterly level over the period 2008-2018. For
     details on these surveys, see Section 4.4.1. Each column displays the correlation between each survey measure and the analogous measure from our model. Surveys
     in columns (1)-(3) are compared to the relative share of investors preferring positive to negative leverage, based on our estimated distribution of expectations. The
     Shiller index in column (4) is compared to the fraction of investors choosing positive leverage (greater than 1x). The CFO mean expected return in column (5) is
     compared to the mean estimated expected return from our model. The standard deviation of expected returns across CFOs in column (6) is compared to the standard
     deviation parameter from our model. The fraction of CFOs who expect returns to be negative next year is compared to the fraction of investors choosing negative
     leverage. The SPF average GDP growth forecast in column (8) is compared to the mean estimated expected return from our model. The interquartile range of GDP
34




     forecasts across professional forecasters in the SPF in column (9) is compared to the interquartile range of estimated expected returns from our model. We winsorize
     the mean and standard deviation of expected returns from our model at the 5% level to account for outliers during the financial crisis. Winsorizing the data does
     not change inference on the relationship between the corresponding series. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.Robust standard errors in parenthesis *** p<0.01, **
     p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                       Table 5: Comparison with Future Returns and Model Returns

                                     Annual Reurns         ln(Div/Price)          cay         Martin (2017)
                                          (1)                    (2)              (3)              (4)
        Mean of Est. Returns             -0.74               -0.047***        -0.0026**        -0.014***
                                        (0.66)                (0.0056)        (0.00100)         (0.0026)
        Observations                      44                     44               39               44
        R-squared                       0.025                   0.749           0.200             0.629

Notes: Table 5 displays the regression of future and model-based return measures on the mean belief from our estimated
distribution of investor beliefs. Observations are at the quarterly level over the period 2008-2018. The dependent
variable in column (1) is the future 12-month excess return of the S&P 500. The dependent variable in column (2) is
the log dividend-pice ratio. The dependent variable in column (3) is cay from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). Lastly, the
dependent variable in column (4) is the lower bound on the equity premium in Martin (2017). The independent variable
Mean of Est. Returns corresponds to our baseline model estimates reported in column (1) of Table 3. We winsorize the
Mean of Est. Returns and the future 12-month excess return of the stock market variables at the 5% level to account for
outliers during the financial crisis. Newey-West based standard errors are in parenthesis with four lags. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                         Table 6: Expected Returns versus Past 12-month Returns

                                            Mean          ln(SD)         Median        ln(Skew)
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                      Annual Return        0.11***      -0.026***       -0.038**      0.0027***
                                           (0.030)       (0.0076)        (0.014)      (0.00092)
                      Observations            44             44             44            44
                      R-squared             0.582          0.310          0.230          0.189

Notes: Table 6 displays the regression of different moments of the estimated expected returns distribution on the past 12-
month excess return of the S&P 500. Observations are at the quarterly level over the period 2008-2018. The dependent
variable in each column corresponds to different moments/parameters of the estimated expected returns distribution
corresponding to our baseline estimates reported in column (1) of Table 3. The dependent variable in column (1) is the
mean and is measured in percentage points, in column (2) is the standard deviation parameter in logs, in column (3)
is the median and is measured in percentage points, and in column (4) is the skew parameter in logs. The independent
variable Annual Return is measured in percentage points. We winsorize all independent and dependent variables at
the 5% level to account for outliers during the financial crisis. Winsorizing the data does not change inference on the
relationship between the corresponding series. Newey-West based standard errors are in parenthesis with four lags. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                           35
   Table 7: Evolution of the Parameters of the Expectation Distribution: Vector Autoregressions

                                                     Location           Scale         Skewness
                              Lag Parameters         0.55***         0.65***           0.44***
                                                      (0.13)          (0.085)           (0.15)
                              Monthly Return         -0.65***        -0.63***          0.0016
                                                      (0.23)           (0.20)         (0.0038)
                              Const                  2.31***         1.33***           0.43***
                                                      (0.69)           (0.41)           (0.12)

                              Observations                 43              43            43
                              R-squared                  0.727           0.792         0.220
Notes: Table 7 displays the regression results to three linear regression models (eq. 10). Observations are at the quarterly
level over the period 2008-2018. The dependent variable in each column corresponds to different moments/parameters
of the estimated expected returns distribution corresponding to our baseline estimates reported in column (1) of Table
3. The dependent variable in column (1) is the mean parameter, in column (2) is the standard deviation parameter, and
in column (3) is the skew parameter. We include the lag dependent variable in each regression as a control variable. The
independent variable Monthly Return is the previous monthly excess return of the S&P 500 averaged across the quarter
and is measured in percentage points. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                        Table 8: Model of Belief Formation

                              Panel (a): Calibrated Parameters of the Belief Formation Model
                                                                 All Three Types                 No Contrarians
             m    Expected Return                                     2.280                            2.848
                  St. Dev. of Expected Return                         1.840                            3.434
                  Persistence                                         0.513                            0.532
                  Asymmetric Reaction                                 0.019                            0.000
             se   Shr of Extrapolators                                0.250                            0.102
             e    Reaction to Return for Extrapolators                0.353                            0.426
             sc   Shr of Contrarians                                  0.479                              -
             c    Reaction to Return for Contrarians                 -0.142                              -

            R2                                                        0.839                            0.583

                                 Panel (b): Simulated Leverage Choice and Ex Ante Value
                                                         All Investors    Random Walk    Extrapolators     Contrarians
       Share of Investors Taking Leverage                   0.256             0.118            0.475           0.219
       Ex Ante Value of All Leverage Options                3.365             1.202            5.874           3.281
       Ex Ante Value of 0x and 1x                           1.803             1.008            0.709           2.824
       Gain from Leverage Variety                           1.562             0.193            5.165           0.457

Notes: Table 8 shows calibration results and ex ante value simulation of the belief formation model S&P 500. Panel (a)
displays calibrated parameters from the belief formation model with all three investor types and without contrarians. R2
of fitting quarterly belief distributions is included in the last row. Panel (b) uses the belief formation model to simulate
leverage choices and ex ante value of the leverage categories. The first row computes the share of investors choosing
leveraged (-3x, -2x, -1x, 2x, 3x) products. The second and third rows compare the ex ante value of being able to choose
from the full leverage menu or a restricted choice set including the outside option and 1x trackers only. The last row
shows the gain from having access to leveraged products. The four columns display results first for all investors and then
for each of the three types separately.




                                                             36
Figures

                                                                                                                  Figure 1: S&P 500 ETFs
                          (a) Assets Under Management (Retail Investors)                                                                                                                                    (b) Trading Volume (Retail Investors)
                                                            200
        Total Retail Assets Invested in S&P 500 ETFs (billions)




                                                                                                                                              Total Retail Trading Volume: S&P 500 ETFs (billions)
                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                                              150




                                                                                                                                                                        150
                       50          100




                                                                                                                                                  100
          0




                                                                  2008    2010          2012           2014         2016          2018                                                               2008         2010           2012           2014              2016      2018
                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                      Year




Notes: Figure 1 shows binned scatters at annual frequency along with the linear fitted lines for total retail AUM in panel
(a) and total retail trading volume in panel (b) of ETFs that track S&P 500. Retail AUM is computed as Retailj × AU Mjt
and trading volume is computed as Retailj × T radingV olumejt according to the market share construction discussed
in Section 2.3.




                                                                                    Figure 2: Data at Leverage Category Level (S&P 500)
                                                                                 (a) Market Share                                                                                                                        (b) Expense Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                          .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Leveraged Expense Ratio (bps.)
                                                                                                                                         Tracker Expense Ratio (bps.)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          95
                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                          .6
      Market Share




                                                                                                                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          90
                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          85
                                                                                                                                                                              9
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                          -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                                                                              7




                                                                  2008   2010       2012             2014        2016      2018                                                                      2008       2010      2012           2014         2016         2018
                                                                         -3x      -2x          -1x          1x      2x      3x                                                                                1x (LHS)     -3x          -2x     -1x          2x      3x




Notes: Figure 2 top panel plots adjusted market share for each leverage category. The bottom panel plots market share
weighted average expense ratio in each leverage category.




                                                                                                                                    37
                                                                                                                                            Figure 3: Time-Varying Investor Expectations
                                                                                                                                                                                      (a) Estimated Distribution


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       Risk Aversion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       = 0.982
                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                          Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                     q q q q q q q                                   q q q q q q q q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q q q                                                                 q q q q
                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                            q q                                           q q
                                                                                                                        q                                             q           q


                                                                                                                                                              q



                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                          -20




                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                          -40




                                                                                                               2008                                                       2010                                                2012                                                    2014                              2016                                                          2018


        (b) Location Parameter (as )                                                                                                                                                      (c) Scale Parameter (bs )                                                                                                         (d) Skewness Parameter (cs )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.0
  40




                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                           25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
  30




                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
  20




                                                                                                                                                                           15




                    q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                             q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                     q                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q               q q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q q q                   q                         q               q       q             q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q           q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                     q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                     q                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                     q           q
                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
  10




                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                            q
                q                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                           5




                                            q
                                                q
        q                                                                                                                                                                                                 q           q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
            q                       q
                                q                   q q                                                                                                                                   q                               q
                                        q                                       q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                           q                q       q q                                                                           q                                               q
                                                                                                                        q q q                                                     q                                                                                               q
                                                                                          q q q                   q q                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                      q       q q               q       q             q
                                                                                                                                                          q                           q                                           q                                                                             q
                                                                                                  q       q                         q                                                                                                             q q q q
                                                                                                                                            q q q q           q                                                                       q                     q q q q q q q q q q       q q q q q         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q q q     q
  0




                                                                                                                                                                           0




       2008                 2010                               2012                          2014                       2016                   2018                             2008                  2010                                2012                 2014               2016             2018                   2008                  2010                          2012                      2014                              2016                    2018



Notes: Figure 3 panel (a) plots the estimated distribution of investor expectations over time. Red dots represent mean
expected return. Solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted
lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles. Panels (b) to (d) show estimated time-varying location, scale, and skewness
parameters for expectation distribution in blue dotted lines, and the 90 percent confidence intervals in blue dashed lines.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   38
                                                 Figure 4: Expectations and Model Fit: Baseline and Heterogenous Risk Aversion (S&P 500)
                                 (a) Expectation Distribution, i =                                                                                                              (b) September 2009, i =                                                       (c) Fit of Log Shares, i = 




                                                                                                                                                                        0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                         q    Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                         q    = 0.982                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                 -3x                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq   q qqqq




                                                                                                                                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                        -2x                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                               -1x                                                                                                        q




                           Expected Return (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Log Share Predicted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0x                                                                            qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1x                                                                    q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq q




                                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                              q q q q                                                                                                                                                                             q q    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                      q         q q q q q q q         q q q q q q q q q q q q q                                                                                                                  q      qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                        q q q q                                                                                                                                                                    q q  qq q  q


                                        0
                                                                                q       q q q                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqqq q
                                                                            q q                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                  q
                                                      q q
                                                                        q           q                                                                                                                                  2x                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q




                                                                                                                                                                    Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3x                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qqq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                  -16%                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q




                                                                                                                                                                  0.04
                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q       -3x
                              -20


                                                                                                                                                                                         -9.6%
                                                                                                                                                                                              -4.2%                                                                                                                     -2x
                                                            q                                                                                                                                             3.3%                                                                                                          -1x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11%




                                                                                                                                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        0x
                                      -40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2x




                                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        3x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -8
                                                 2008               2010                        2012           2014               2016             2018                         -20       -10       0        10                  20                           -8     -6         -4       -2                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                           Expected Return (%)                                                            Log Share Data


                           (d) Expectation Distribution, i  G(·)                                                                                                            (e) September 2009, i  G(·)                                                   (f) Fit of Log Shares, i  G(·)




                                                                                                                                                                        0.10
39




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                     q     Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                           = 0.828 ± 0.172
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                     q                qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q    q
                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                  -3x                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq




                                                                                                                                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                         -2x                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                               -1x                                                                                                q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                           Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Log Share Predicted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0x                                                                            qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                q q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1x                                                                    q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qqq   q
                                                                                        q q q
                                                                                                    q q q
                                                                                                          q q q q q q q q q q q       q q q q q q q q q q q q q                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                        0




                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                    q    q   qq
                                                  q q
                                                      q                     q q                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                        q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2x                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq q
                                                                                                                                                                    Density



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q qq   qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq qq  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3x                                                  qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q   qq
                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                      -14%                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                  0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q       -3x
                              -20




                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                          -8.1%
                                                                                                                                                                                              -3.7%                                                                                                                     -2x
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.8%                                                                                                              -1x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9%
                                                                                                                                                                        0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        0x
                                      -40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2x
                                                                                                                                                                        0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        3x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -8
                                                 2008               2010                        2012           2014               2016             2018                         -20       -10       0        10                  20                           -8     -6         -4       -2                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                           Expected Return (%)                                                            Log Share Data


     Notes: Figure 4 top panels correspond to the baseline specification with constant risk aversion. Bottom panels allow for heterogeneous risk aversion. Left panels plot
     the estimated distribution of investor expectations over time. Red dots represent mean expected return. Solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines indicate
     25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles. Middle panels display the density of expectations for a given month (September 2009)
     and cutoff points corresponding to the expected return where investors are indifferent between two adjacent leverage categories. Right panels plot fit in terms of log
     market shares of each leverage. The x-axis corresponds to log market shares in the data, and y-axis corresponds to predicted log market shares. Color red to blue
     represents each leverage from -3x to 3x. The solid black lines correspond to the 45 degree line.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 5: Expectations: Other Asset Classes
                                                                    (a) Gold                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Oil                                                                                                                                   (c) European Equities                                                                                                                                                             (d) Emerging Markets
                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                      q     Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                q   Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                      q     Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                          q    Risk Aversion




                                                                                                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                      q     = 0.783                                                                                                                                                      q   = 0.278                                                                                                                                                            q     = 0.579                                                                                                                                                                q    = 3.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
       Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                     Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Expected Return (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                          q
                      5




                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q       q                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q                                                                                                   q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q         q         q             q                     q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                     q q                                                               q       q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q        q q                             q q                       q                                         q                                 q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q         q q q         q q                       q       q q q                 q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q q           q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q       q q             q                                                                                               q q         q q q q q q q                       q q q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q           q q q




                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                q
                                                                                                      q                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                        q               q       q                                                                               q
                                                    q                             q                        q
                                                            q                         q q                                                               q
                                            q                       q q                                         q q         q
                                                                                            q q                                 q                           q
                                                                                                                      q q               q                       q                                                         q                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                    q       q                       q q q q q q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q       q
         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q         q                                              q q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q q       q q       q       q                                              q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q           q q q q q q q q                                    q q q        q q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q




                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -10
                  -5




                                                                                                                                                                                               -5


                             2008           2010                          2012                            2014                          2016                         2018                                  2008           2010                   2012                          2014                  2016                            2018                                     2008             2010                 2012                         2014                          2016                           2018                                          2008                        2010                    2012                 2014                 2016                   2018


                                                                                                                                                (e) US Real Estate                                                                                                                               (f) Mid-Term Treasury                                                                                                                                                    (g) Long-Term Treasury
40




                                                                                                       60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                   q      Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                                         q       Risk Aversion
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   = 0.772                                                                                                                                                         q      = 8.94                                                                                                                                                                q       = 1.21
                                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expected Return (%)
                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                                                    q q       q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                        q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q                                                                                                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                            q         q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q                                                                                                      q q                                                  q                                                                                                                                     q                           q   q q       q q q q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q q q q q                                                                                                                                                             q q q
                                                                                        -80 -60 -40 -20 0




                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                q   q q                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q     q                                                                                 q q                           q q             q q           q q         q
                                                                                                                          q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q                                                             q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q q                                                                                      q                                 q
                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                            q                         q q q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q q                   q q                                                                                                                                                              q                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q       q                                                                                                                                                      q         q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                     q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -15
                                                                                                                      2008                      2010                     2012                    2014             2016                      2018                                         2008                2010                          2012                      2014                  2016                  2018                                       2008                        2010                          2012                          2014                        2016                     2018


     Notes: Figure 5 panels (a)-(g) displays the estimated expectation distribution corresponding to gold, oil, European equities, emerging market equities, US real estate,
     medium-term (7-10 year) Treasury, and long-term (20+ year) Treasury. Red dots represent mean expected return, solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines
     indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles.
                                                           Figure 6: Daily Expectations During COVID-19 Pandemic
                                                                                               (a) Estimated Distribution




                                                  60
                                                  40




                                                                                                                 q
               Expected Return (%)
                                                  20




                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                           q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                     q q q                                                         q
                                                                                                 q q     q                                                                        q       q
                                                                                               qq                                                                                q      qq
                                                                                                                                                 q      q q q                          q   q q
                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                 q                               q q            q q             q q q qqq qqqq qq    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                          q    q   q q    q q         q       q
                                                                          q q qq        q qq       q q                                      qq                           q
                                                          qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq q q qqqqqqqqq q                                                 q q        qq   q qqq qq q
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                        q           q
                                                                                                                             q       q q q
                                                                                                               q q

                                                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                                                       q
                                                  -20
                                                  -40




                                                        01/02       01/24          02/14         03/09                       03/30             04/21         05/12         06/03         06/24



                                                                                   (b) COVID-19 Cases and S&P 500 Index




                                                                                                                                                                                                  3400
               7-Day New Cases in US (Thousand)
                                                  200
                                                  150




                                                                                                                                                                                                  3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S&P 500
                                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2600
                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                                             Covid Cases
                                                                                                                                                                             S&P 500
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2200
                                                  0




                                                        01/02       01/24          02/14         03/09                       03/30             04/21         05/12         06/03         06/24



Notes: Figure 6 panel (a) plots the estimated distribution of investor expectations at daily frequency during the first half
of 2020. Panel (b) plots new COVID-19 cases over the past 7 days in the US in dark red with axis on the left hand side,
and S&P 500 index levels in gray with axis at the right hand side. COVID cases are downloaded from the COVID-19 Data
Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University




                                                                                                                                 41
                                                                                  Figure 7: Impulse Response

                           15         (a) Response to -10% one-month return                                                               (b) Response to 10% one-month return




                                                                                                                               15
                           10




                                                                                                                               10
     Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                         Expected Return (%)
                     5




                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                              q          q    q        q          q     q    q          q
                                  q                                                                                                   q
              0




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                    q    q          q
                                                                   q          q
                                                          q
                                                     q
                                          q
      -5




                                                                                                          -5
                           -10




                                                                                                                               -10
                           -15




                                                                                                                               -15
                                  0                  2             4               6                8                                 0                  2             4               6                8
                                                                Quarters                                                                                            Quarters

Notes: Figure 7 displays the impulse responses of a one-month S&P 500 return of -10 percent at t = 1 in the left hand
side panel and a one-month S&P 500 return of 10 percent at t = 1 in the right hand side panel. Time t is measured in
quarter. We predict each parameter separately using their lagged value in the previous quarter and the previous monthly
S&P 500 excess return averaged cross the current quarter as reported in Table 7. The initial values are kept at steady
state mean of each parameter. We assume averaged S&P 500 monthly returns are 0.84% for t = 0 and t > 1. Red dots
correspond to analytical mean. Solid dark red line shows median, and dashed dark red lines show 10, 25, 75, and 90th
percentiles.




                                                                       Figure 8: Model of Belief Formation: Fit
                                 (a) Rational, Extrapolators, and Contrarians                                                                (b) Rational and Extrapolators
                           40




                                                                                                                               40
                           20




                                                                                                                               20
     Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                         Expected Return (%)
                           0




                                                                                                                               0
                           -20




                                                                                                                               -20
                           -40




                                                                                                                               -40
                           -60




                                                                                                                               -60




                                 2008         2010       2012          2014       2016       2018                                    2008         2010       2012          2014       2016       2018

Notes: Figure 8 compares the estimated distribution of investor expectations of S&P 500 (in green) with a simulated
belief distribution from the calibrated model (in black and gray) at a quarterly frequency. Panel (a) includes three types
of investors in the calibration model whereas Panel (b) does not include contrarians. The solid green line corresponds to
the median estimated belief, the dashed lines correspond to 25th and 75th percentiles, and the dotted lines correspond to
10th and 90th percentiles. The black line corresponds to the median from the simulation, the dark gray lines correspond
to 25th and 75th percentiles, and the light gray lines correspond to 10th and 90th percentiles.




                                                                                                        42
                                                 Appendix
                                     For Online Publication


A    Alternative Estimates
In this appendix, we provide an alternative set of estimates for our time-varying belief distribution.
Our baseline estimates, which are presented in the text, make use of two sources of variation for
identification. The first source of variation is in the choice of leverage facing investors. The second
source is empirical variation in prices and volatility. How these sources provide identifying power
are described in more detail in Section 3.
    If we rely only on the first source of variation--the choices facing investors--then we can lever-
age the model to estimate beliefs at a higher frequency, as we would not require within-period vari-
ation in prices and volatility. For our alternative estimates, we follow this approach. Because we
observe six unique points in the distribution in each period, corresponding to {Sj } = {S-3 , S-2, S-1 ,
S0 , S1 , S2 }, we can identify, in principle, up to six period-specific parameters for the distribution F
and risk aversion . Thus, even with this high degree of flexibility in the time series, our model has
sufficient identifying restrictions.
    For our alternative estimates, we use nonlinear least squares to estimate parameters that vary
at the monthly level. As in our main results, we hold the risk aversion parameter () and the
kurtosis parameter fixed over the sample, allowing month-specific values for location, dispersion,
and skewness. On advantage of the approach is computational efficiency. We estimate only a subset
of the parameters with a nonlinear search and the rest are recovered by ordinary least squares.
   Our estimation routine works as follows: in an outer loop, we choose the risk aversion pa-
rameter (^ ) and the kurtosis parameter (d
                                         ^), which we hold fixed across periods. Then, in each
period, we pick a value for the skewness parameter c
                                                   ^t . We use the estimated skewness and kurtosis
parameters to invert the cumulative share equation, obtaining

                                                 ^
                    F -1 (Sjt ; c    ^t ) = 1
                                ^t , d
                                                            2
                                                   (2j + 1) t + p(j +1)t - pjt - a
                                                                                 ^t   + jt ,
                                            ^
                                            bt   2

where a^t and ^
              bt are the period-specific location and scale parameters, and jt is a residual. We then
                                                     ^t ) on ( ^
run a period-specific regression of F -1 (Sjt ; c
                                                ^t , d         2 (2j + 1)  2 + p(j +1)t - pjt ) for all j < 3. As
                                                                           t
the coefficient on the combined term is normalized to 1, the regression coefficient provides us an


                                                        43
estimate of the scale parameter    The constant is equal to - a
                                     1
                                     ^  .                     ^t
                                                              ^  and provides us an estimate of the
                                     bt                       bt
                                                               ^
location parameter. We iterate over the outer-loop parameters  and d ^ until we find the value of all
parameters that minimize          ^2 .
                                 t   j jt
       Our monthly estimates using this procedure are displayed in Figure A3. These estimates track
our main results fairly closely, though the skewness is somewhat less extreme during the crisis. This
may be due to the fact that this alternative approach has residuals that allow the model to fit the
shares exactly. Thus, extreme beliefs that may imply skewness in the distribution can be instead
captured with a residual.
       Figure A4 provides a more detailed comparison of the different estimates. Panels (a) and (e)
report our baseline time series, which is based on maximum likelihood estimation, and the model
fit. The alternative time series is shown in panel (d), and the fit, after removing the residuals, is
shown in panel (h). Recall that the model fits the data perfectly when the residuals are accounted
for.
       To assist in comparison with the alternative estimates, we provide monthly maximum likelihood
estimates in columns (b) and (f), where we allow the parameters of the belief distribution to vary
at the monthly level. These estimates also rely only on variation in the choices and do not make
use of empirical variation in fees and volatility. Likewise, we provide quarterly estimates for the
alternative approach in panels (c) and (g).
       The alternative estimates, which are obtained using different identifying restrictions and using
a different objective function in estimation (least squares instead of maximum likelihood), return
similar qualitative patterns to our baseline results. These alternative estimates show that our gen-
eral approach is not sensitive to any single assumption.


B       Heterogeneous Portfolios and Hedging Demand
In this appendix, we allow for portfolio hedging in our demand estimation. In our baseline specifi-
cation, investor utility is given by

                                                                 2 2
                                            uij = j µi - pj -     j  ,
                                                                2

which specifies that the additional risk of adding an ETF to an investor's portfolio is j 2  2 . This
model does not account for how the ETF investment decisions may covary with the investor's
wealth. If an investor considers the risk of her wealth not invested in ETFs, then she may prefer to
pick ETFs that are negatively correlated with her other wealth to reduce her overall risk.
       Formally, if an investor's wealth i is correlated with the underlying ETF asset, the additional
variance of investing a fraction of her wealth  in ETF j is given by  2 j
                                                                        2  2 + 2   2 , where
                                                                                j i
i is the market beta of the investor's portfolio. The term  2 j
                                                              2  2 reflects the variance of the ETF

investment, and the term 2j i  2 reflects how the ETF investment changes the variance of the
investor's existing portfolio.


                                                       44
     To see this, consider an investor who has wealth W0 exposed to market risk and sets aside W0
in active investment following S&P 500 ETFs. The total value of her wealth and ETF investment is
W = W0 (1 + i R) + W0 (1 + j R), where R denotes S&P 500 returns and we assume there is no
alpha in the wealth return. Taking a second-order Taylor Expansion of expected utility with respect
to deviation from W0 (1 +  ) obtains

                                                                  1                2
     E [u(W )]  u(W0 (1 +  )) + u (W0 (1 +  )W0 E [i R + j R] +     u (W0 (1 +  ))W0 E [(i R + j R)2 ]
                                                                  2
                                                                1                2 2 2
              u(W0 (1 +  )) + u (W0 (1 +  ))W0 (i µ + j µ) +      u (W0 (1 +  ))W0  (  i
                                                                                         +  2 j
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                + 2j i )
                                                                2
              j µ + 1 u (W0 (1 +  ))
                    2 u (W0 (1 +  ))
                                     W0  2 ( 2 j
                                               2
                                                 + 2j  )  i



             = j µ -
                        2 2
                       2
                         ( j + 2j i ) 2     j µ - 2
                                                    2 2
                                                    j  ( +
                                                           2
                                                            j
                                                                    i
                                                                        )


where, in the second line, we plug in the definition of mean and variance of return and assume
that E [i R + j R]2  0. In the third line, we drop terms unrelated to j and divide by u (W0 (1 +
 ))W0 . In the fourth line, we define risk aversion as constant relative risk aversion scaled by the
fraction invested in ETF:  = - u      (W0 (1+ ))W0 (1+ ) 1
                                        u (W0 (1+ ))    1+ .   Also, note that purchasing an ETF will yield
diversification benefits for the investor if and only if sgn(j ) = sgn(i ).
     Thus, the indirect utility of leverage j for an investor whose wealth has market risk i is given
by

                                                      2 2
                                 uij = j µi - pj -     j   - j i  2 .
                                                     2
For an average  , the cumulative probability of purchasing leverage k  j becomes

                                        
                             Sj = F       (2j + 1) 2 +   2 + pj +1 - pj
                                        2
     With this extension, we identify  and  . The coefficient on the first term inside the bracket
captures risk aversion multiplied by the fraction of active ETF investment  . The second term
corresponds to hedging and gives us an estimate for the average wealth market risk multiplied
by risk aversion  . This specification considers the overall risk contribution of an ETF leverage
choice, including its covariance with the investor's wealth in addition to its own variance. If the
investor's wealth is positively correlated with the market ( > 0),  shows that positive leverage
has an additional risk of increasing the investor's overall market exposure while negative leverage
yields an additional hedging return. Though we can no longer directly identify risk aversion , we
can still recover the distribution of investor expectations F .
     We estimate specifications with fixed portfolio risk  and investor-specific portfolio risk i ,
where we allow i to follow a normal distribution. We integrate out these unobserved preferences
as random coefficients. We present our estimates for the model with heterogeneity in risk aversion
and portfolio risk, but the results are similar when we do not allow for heterogeneity.
     Figure A5 displays estimates for investor expectations with hedging, which are close to our


                                                     45
baseline results in Figure 3. The estimated mean expected returns in these two models are highly
correlated with a correlation coefficient of 0.98. Our estimates suggest that portfolio demand is
not meaningful in the context of S&P 500 ETFs. While we only recover  / = -0.813 on average
and cannot separately identify  , it is unlikely that active investment in S&P 500 ETFs makes up
a significant fraction of investors' wealth. To provide an "upper bound" estimate of the effects of
hedging demand, assume that investors place a significant fraction of their wealth--10 percent--
into ETFs. If on average   0.1, then  = -0.0813. This suggests investors behave as if their
wealth is nearly uncorrelated to the market. In other words, this hedging term is close to zero,
suggesting that investors behave as if there is little hedging consideration against market risk.
    In estimation, we might pick up collinearity between (2j + 1) 2 and  2 , so we hesitate to
interpret this result strongly. But this exercise shows that our method is capable to account for
multiple sources of risks in more general settings.


C    Time-Varying Risk Aversion
In this appendix, we estimate an extension of our baseline specification where allow the risk aver-
sion coefficient to vary annually. We rely on the menu of choices and the empirical variation in
fees and volatility within each calendar year to identify the risk aversion of that year. Specifically,
we estimate three parameters corresponding to the location, scale, and skewness of expectation
distribution each quarter, risk aversion parameters each calendar year, and the kurtosis parameter
kept constant over time. With 11 years of data, we estimate 144 parameters.
    Figure A6a displays our estimates for investor expectations with time-varying risk aversion,
which are qualitatively similar to the distribution of expectations in our baseline model. The es-
timated mean expected returns in these two models are highly correlated with a correlation coef-
ficient of 0.96. The average risk aversion is lower but similar to the level in our baseline model
(0.61 vs 0.98). We have also estimated a specification where we allow risk aversion to vary at the
quarterly level, and we found similar time-varying patterns of both risk aversion and expectations.
    The most notable difference from the baseline model is that the dispersion of expectation be-
comes smaller during periods with high volatility, especially in 2008 and 2009. As shown in Figure
A6b, we estimate lower risk aversion during those periods, and hence we need less dispersion in
beliefs to rationalize leverage choices in the data.


D    More Asset Classes
In addition to S&P 500, we also consider other asset classes including gold, oil, European equities,
emerging market equities, US real estate, medium-term Treasury, and long-term Treasury. For each
asset class, we include ETFs tracking the following indices:

    · Gold: Bloomberg Gold Subindex, NYSE Arca Gold Miners Index, MSCI ACWI Select Gold
      Miners Investable Market Index, and the spot price of gold. Our data for gold ETFs starts in

                                                  46
         Q1 2009.

    · Oil: Bloomberg WTI Crude Oil Subindex, WTI Crude Oil and Brent Crude Oil futures. Data
         starts in Q1 2009.

    · European equities: FTSE Developed Europe Index. Data starts in Q3 2009.

    · Emerging market equities: MSCI Emerging Market Index. Data starts in Q1 2008.

    · US real estate: Dow Jones US Real Estate Index and MSCI US REIT Index. Data starts in Q1
         2008.

    · Medium-term Treasury: Barclays US Treasury 7-10 Year Index, ICE US Treasury 7-10 Year
         Bond Index, Merrill Lynch 7-15 Year US Treasury Index, and NYSE 7-10 Year Treasury Bond
         Index. Data starts in Q1 2009.

    · Long-term Treasury: Barclays US Treasury 20+ Year Index, NYSE 20+ Year Treasury Bond
         Index. Data starts in Q1 2009.
Figures 5 and A7 plot estimated expectation distribution and market share for these seven other
asset classes. Europe and US Real Estate show different peaks of dispersion corresponding to the
sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the subprime mortgage crisis in the US. Long-term Treasury
exhibits large dispersion in 2013, possibly due to speculation that Federal Reserve might start to
wind down its quantitative easing program (tapering). Mid-term Treasury has a few discrete spikes
in 2014, most likely corresponding to some idiosyncratic trading of institutions that we are unable
to filter out using average retail ownership across time.20
       We also compare the correlations across these asset classes. Table A1 shows that the mean
expectations we recover generate reasonable correlation patterns across asset classes. US stock
market comoves positively with European and emerging market equities in general, and is also
positively correlated with real estate. US stock is positively correlated with Treasury and negatively
correlated with commodities (gold and oil). On the other hand, emerging market is positively
correlated with commodities and negatively correlated with Treasury.


D.1      Investor Expectations Across Asset Classes

We examine the extrapolative nature of beliefs in our panel setting using the following regression

                                    E [R]iq = AnnualRetiq + µi + µq +             iq .                              (13)

The dependent variable (E [R]iq ) is the average expected return of asset i at time q , and the key
independent variable of interest is the corresponding past one year return (AnnualRetiq ). Obser-
vations are at the quarter by asset class level. The panel setting allows us to control for asset and
time fixed effects.
  20
    Different from other asset classes, leveraged ETFs in treasuries have reasonably low fees, so there is larger institu-
tional demand.


                                                           47
         Table A2 displays the corresponding regression estimates. Consistent with our previous results
for the S&P 500, the results suggest investor beliefs are extrapolative across asset classes. The
results in column (1) indicate that a one percentage point increase in historical returns is correlated
with a 5 basis point increase in the mean expected return. We also find that the dispersion and
skewness of investor beliefs are correlated with past returns across asset classes. Negative returns
are correlated with an increase in investor disagreement; a one percentage point decrease in returns
is correlated with a one percent increase in the dispersion parameter (column 2). We also find
evidence that skewness of beliefs is positively correlated with past returns.
         We also test whether investor expectations predict future returns across asset classes in the
following regression specification


                                    F utureRetiq = E [R]iq + µi + µt +       iq                              (14)

The dependent variable (F utureRetiq ) measures the realized annual return of asset i from time
q to q + 4. The independent variable (E [R]iq ) is the average expected return of asset i at time q .
Observations are at the quarter by asset class level. We report the corresponding estimates in Table
A3. The results in column (1) suggest that expected returns are negatively correlated with future
returns; however, the effect becomes much smaller and statistically insignificant once we control
for asset and time fixed effects. Consistent with our results for the S&P 500, investor beliefs do not
forecast future returns across the eight major asset classes.
         Following the exercise in Section 6, we fit a simple model of belief formation to our recovered
distribution of beliefs for each asset class. We estimate distinct sets of parameters for each asset.21
We allow for three types of investors our baseline model: random walk investors, extrapolators,
and contrarians. We compare the results from this model to to a restricted version that does not
allow for contrarianism. The results are reported in Table A4. Overall, adaptive expectations--in
terms of both extrapolation and contrarianism--are important for explaining investor behavior in
ETF markets.


E         Value of Product Variety in ETF Markets
The wide dispersion of expectations about future stock market returns suggests that there are large
ex ante welfare gains from product variety in the context of S&P 500 ETFs. Providing investors with
a menu of leverage choices allow them to invest based on their idiosyncratic beliefs. For example,
investors with a negative expected return of the S&P 500 would not choose to invest in an S&P 500
tracker, but they might invest in an inverse ETF. These investors comprise, on average, 10.5 percent
of the market in our sample (Table 1). Thus, the availability of inverse ETFs provides a way for
investors to express their view on the market when they have divergent beliefs.22
    21
    We constrain e to [0, 0.5] and c to [-0.5, 0.0].
    22
    Inverse ETFs provide investors with a straightforward and simple way to short the market, relative to the other
investment options available. For example, investors are not required to have a margin account to invest in inverse



                                                        48
    In this section, we quantify the welfare gains of product variety by comparing investor utility
in our data to a counterfactual in which leveraged ETFs are eliminated. In our counterfactual,
investors can only choose tracker ETFs (leverage = 1x) or the outside option. We consider ex ante
expected utility in each scenario, i.e., the utility realized by investors if ex post returns matched
each investor's ex ante expectation.


E.1    Gains from Variety

To measure the gains from the availability of leveraged ETFs, we calculate the welfare gains from
these products relative to trackers and the outside option. Because our model generates a strict
ordering of preference for leverage, eliminating leveraged ETFs will shift all investors in inverse
ETFs to the outside option, and all investors in positively leveraged ETF to trackers. Using the
recovered distribution of expected return µi and risk aversion, it is straightforward to compute the
difference in utility measured in risk adjusted return from investors' original choices to either the
outside option or trackers.
    As before, investor i's indirect (ex ante) utility from choosing leverage j is given by

                                                                       2 2
                                              uij = j µi - pjt -        j                                               (15)
                                                                      2
                                                                                    (1)
                                                                    = maxj uij , j  {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3}.
Denote the realized utility with the menu of choices in the data as ui
                                       (0)
Denote the counterfactual utility as ui = maxj uij , j  {0, 1} with the restricted choice set. We
                                         (1)  (0)
calculate the gains from variety as E [ui - ui ] by assigning all investors that choose j < 0 to
j = 0 and all investors with j > 1 to  = 1 and re-computing their utility.23
    We calculate the gains separately for each period.24 Figure A8 displays the quarterly average
gain. On average, investors realize gains of 3.72 percentage points in ex ante excess return from
the presence of leveraged ETFs. The gains are higher during the crisis period, averaging 7.43
percentage points in excess return from 2008 to 2011. Higher gains are the result of greater
disagreement about the future performance of the stock market, which can be observed in the
higher dispersion of expectations in Figure 3 before 2012. From 2012 on, the dispersion in expected
return is much lower; the average gains from variety from 2012 through 2018 is 1.24 percentage
points, which is lower but still economically meaningful.
    One caveat to this exercise is that we take investor expectations as given when calculating ex
ante utility. If investors make systematic mistakes when forming expectations, then one might
ETFs. For the purposes of the counterfactual, we assume that the set of investors that have access to more sophisticated
instruments are not investing in S&P 500 ETFs.
   23
      We follow the standard for welfare calculations of assigning a utility of zero to the outside option. This assumption
rules out substitution to assets that provide similar exposure to S&P 500 ETFs but that are not in our sample. These
alternative assets are not in our model and are ruled out by construction.
   24
      To calculate gains and losses, we make additional restrictions on the tails of the expected return distribution. Because
we do not identify the tails in estimation, some investors in 3x and -3x leverage have extreme and unrealistic expected
returns. Hence, we censor the distribution of µi at the lowest and highest level we can identify. Specifically, we censor
µi  [µ, µ] , where µ is the maximum µi that chooses the inverse ETF with highest leverage (e.g., -3x) and µ is the
minimum µi that chooses the ETF with highest positive leverage (e.g., 3x).


                                                             49
want to benchmark investors' decisions against those chosen under an alternative distribution of
expectations, such as one based on rational expectations. In the main text, we perform an exercise
to examine the gains accruing to rational investors, which we estimate to be much lower than the
gains from the full distribution of types.
       Our counterfactual is in part motivated by Vanguard's recent ban on leveraged ETFs. In January
2019, Vanguard removed leveraged ETFs from their investment platform, limiting the ability of
investors to pick an investment product matched to their individual expectations. Our estimated
gains from variety correspond to the (ex ante) losses realized by investors on Vanguard's platform.
In the following subsection, we describe Vanguard's stated reason for the ban and explore the
potential costs for investors with a longer holding period than the typical ETF investor.


E.2      Vanguard's Ban on Leveraged ETFs

In January 2019, Vanguard banned leveraged ETFs on their platform,25 eliminating the product
variety we analyze above. Vanguard's stated motive for the ban was investor protection. As we de-
scribe below, investors who hold on to the leveraged ETFs for a sufficiently long period may realize
an ex post leverage that differs from the nominal leverage associated with the ETF. The difference
between ex post and nominal leverages depends on stock market performance and volatility. In
essence, Vanguard's stated motive is to product investors against additional risk.26
       Provided investors hold on to ETFs for a sufficiently short period, our gains from variety calcu-
lated above correspond to the losses for users of Vanguard's platform. Perhaps short-term holding
is a reasonable assumption: ProShares and Direxion, two issuers of leveraged funds, say trading
data show that most investors treat leveraged ETFs as short-term investments. In a letter to the
SEC, Direxion estimated that its shareholders hold triple-leveraged funds for between one and four
days.27 In our data, the average holding period for ETFs is less than one month. Despite this,
quantifying the welfare impacts for longer holds provides a valuable benchmark. To consider the
impact of additional risk from the divergence between the nominal and ex post leverage, we first
calculate the ex post leverage realized for hypothetical investors that hold on to each product for a
period of 12 or 24 months.
       To capture the ex post realization, we estimate ex post leverage by comparing the realized
performance of the leverage category to the performance of S&P 500 for an investor who buys at
month t and holds for 12 or 24 months. We construct a time-varying measure by running an OLS
  25
     "Vanguard to stop accepting purchases in leveraged and inverse investments," Vanguard.com.
https://investornews.vanguard/vanguard-to-stop-accepting-purchases-in-leveraged-and-inverse-investments. Accessed
November 12, 2019.
  26
     As Vanguard describes on their website, "On any given day, if you use a leveraged or inverse product, you can expect
a return similar to the stated objective. However...extended holdings beyond one day or one month, depending on
the investment objective, can lead to results different from a simple doubling, tripling, or inverse of the benchmark's
average return over the same period. This difference in results can be magnified in volatile markets. As a result, these
types of investments aren't generally designed for a buy-and-hold strategy... These funds are riskier than alternatives
that don't use leverage." "Important information about leveraged, inverse, and commodity exchange-traded products,"
Vanguard.com. https://investor.vanguard.com/investing/leveraged-inverse-etf-etn. Accessed November 12, 2019.
  27
     https://www.wsj.com/articles/sec-moves-to-curb-leveraged-etfs-1465205401


                                                          50
regression of the leverage category returns from t to t + 12 or t + 24 on S&P 500 returns over the
same holding period, in a moving window of 7 months centered around t.
       The ex post leverage for a 12-month holding period are displayed in Figure A9. As can be
seen in the figure, the median ex post leverage is fairly close to nominal for a 12-month holding
period across leverage categories. However, there are periods where the ex post leverage departs
meaningfully from the nominal leverage. In July 2008, ETFs with negative nominal leverage--
i.e., a positive return during a downturn--generated a positive leverage for those that bought and
held for a year. In 2011, increased volatility resulted in a negative shift for all ex post leverage.
Around January 2015, the inverse products realized a positive shift, with the 3x leverage realizing
a negative return. Likewise, the ex post leverage for a 24-month holding period can be higher or
lower than the nominal leverage. Though our sample does not show a systematic bias one way or
the other, the realized leverages can deviate by large factors for long holding periods, illustrating
the additional risk of these products for buy-and-hold investors.
       To calculate the investor protection benefit of a ban of these products, we simulate a counter-
factual in which buy-and-hold investors have perfect foresight over the realized ex post leverage.
We denote the counterfactual utility for a buy-and-hold investor as

                                        u
                                        ~ij (h) = ~j (h)µi - pjt -   ~j (h)2  2
                                                                   2

where h is the holding period and ~j (h) is the leverage for category j as a function of the holding
period. First, we hold investors' choices fixed and adjust the utility based the ex post realization
                    (1)
of leverage: u
             ~i            ~ij , j = arg maxj uij . We then allow these investors to re-optimize and choose
                          =u
                                                                                            (2)
their preferred leverage based on the ex post leverage of the product, u
                                                                       ~i                                ~ij , For both
                                                                                                  = maxj u
 (2)          (1)
u
~i     and   ~i ,
             u      we hold fix investors' stock market expectation and allow them to choose from j 
{-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3}.
       Using these calculations, we compute two measures of regret from leverage risk. Our first mea-
sure is the fraction of investors with leverage regret, i.e., those investors that would change their
product choice with foresight of the ex post leverage: Ei [1 {arg maxj uij = arg maxj u
                                                                                      ~ij }]. Our sec-
ond measure is expected loss, which we compute as the average difference between the utility from
                                                                                                         (2)     (1)
                                                                                 ~i - u
re-optimized choices based on ex post leverage and from the original choices: Ei u    ~i                               .28
       Finally, we consider the investor protection gains from a ban on leveraged ETFs for buy-and-
hold investors. We construct a third measure of utility based on ex post leverage when investors
                                                              (0)
can only choose trackers or the outside option, u
                                                ~i , but, as before, they make their choice based
                                                                                      (1)     (0)
on the nominal leverage (j = arg maxj uij , j  {0, 1}). Thus, Ei u
                                                                 ~i - u
                                                                      ~i                            provides us with a
measure of investor gains from product variety, taking into account the ex post leverage regret.
Or, equivalently, the investor loss from the ban. Note that the welfare effects are composed of the
  28
    In addition, when we allow investors to re-optimize after learning the ex post leverage, we restrict them to their
original long or short directions. For example, suppose an investor buys a -2x ETF but learns that the ex post leverage of
a 2x ETF is in fact -1.8x, which happens to be her most ideal leverage. In this case, we do not allow this investor to shift
from -2x to 2x.



                                                            51
gain from variety in product choice and the loss of protection from leverage risk. For the investor
protection to be a net benefit, the losses from leverage risk must outweigh the gains from product
variety.29
       Figure A10 shows the respective welfare calculations for investors with a 12-month holding
period. Panel (a) shows the fraction of investors with leverage regret. The fraction is highest
during the crisis and declines during our sample. Panel (b) shows the expected loss in terms of
excess return. The quarterly average expected loss is on average around 0.8 percentage points
during the crisis and peaks at nearly 3 percentage points in the second half of 2008. Much of this is
driven by the fact that the ex post leverage for inverse ETFs diverged significantly from the nominal
beta (Figure A9) in this period. The expected loss drops to 0.1 percentage points on average after
the crisis. Panel (c) shows the gains from variety, taking into account ex post leverage. Investors
gain from the availability of leveraged ETFs in our sample. Investor gain is highest during the crisis,
when investors have greater dispersion in expectation. This is despite the fact that the fraction with
regret is also highest. Overall, the ability to trade on expected return µi more than offsets the loss
from misunderstanding the product, though not all investors gain. Thus, we calculate that a ban
would result in a net loss to investors.30
       Our welfare results are summarized in Table A5. For comparison, we include gains for 12-
month and 24-month holding periods. For 24-month holding periods, we find similar results for a
12-month holding period. Overall, investors gain from increased product variety. These gains are
the largest during the crisis, despite a larger fraction of investors with leverage regret.
       Our findings suggest that the benefits of protecting some investors do not offset the large losses
from reduced product variety. Therefore, protecting the average investor does not seem to justify
a ban on leveraged ETFs. Even if investors were naively buying and holding these products, the
gains from product variety appear to dominate the leverage risk. Corroborating this finding, there
is almost no record of investor complaints about these products. The Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) requires that all investor complaints are reported through its BrokerCheck web-
site. Using the BrokerCheck data, we parse through the universe of investor complaints reported
on BrokerCheck (300k total complaints), and find fewer than one hundred related to leveraged
ETFs.31 One notable exception is a class-action lawsuit initiated by investors against ProShares and
Direxion in 2009, which claimed that the companies misled investors by not adequately explain
the risks of holding the products over time. A judge dismissed the suit against ProShares in 2012,
  29
     Investors may realize significant ex post losses by making the "wrong" bet on the market. By looking at ex post
leverage only, and not ex post return, we do not protect investors from ex post losses based on realized returns.
  30
     Note that the precise magnitude of the gains or losses from the ban, as well as other counterfactual outcomes, is
sensitive to our assumption that investors in leveraged ETFs do not understand the rebalancing mechanism. If investors
are sophisticated and realize the additional risk from rebalancing yet still choose high (positive or negative) nominal
leverage, they must have more extreme µi than our estimates and would suffer even more from the ban. On the other
hand, these sophisticated investors would not regret their purchase if nominal and ex post leverages are different, so
we over-estimate the regret and expected loss. Therefore, although we are unable to measure what fraction of investors
understand these products in our setting, our simplifying assumption that no investors understand leads to a lower
bound of the overall net loss from the ban.
  31
     See Egan et al. (2019) for further discussion of the data.



                                                         52
while Direxion agreed in 2013 to pay $8 million to settle the lawsuit while denying wrongdoing.32
         In addition to estimating the net loss to investors due to this ban, we also conduct a back-of-
the-envelope calculation of the potential profit impact to Vanguard. Given the vertical demand
structure, all affected investors who would have chosen 2x and 3x ETFs will shift into trackers.
Because we do not have a precise statistics of Vanguard's platform market share, we consider
two different benchmarks for the fraction of affected investors. First, we assume the fraction of
shifted investors that choose Vanguard's tracker is equal to the market share of its tracker (VOO)
in terms of retail AUM at the end of 2018, which is around 24 percent. For our second measure,
we use a rough upper bound estimate of 50 percent. This latter figure is motivated by the fact
that, in addition to offering ETFs, Vanguard also provides brokerage accounts for retail investors.
Compared to its main competitors: Fidelity, Charles Schwab, TD Ameritrade, and T. Rowe Price,
Vanguard is the only platform that provides its own S&P 500 ETF, and it is generally recognized
as a superior platform on which to trade ETFs. Our 50 percent benchmark captures the fact that
investors may disproportionately trade in leveraged ETFs on Vanguard's platform.
         We use the average retail AUM in 2x and 3x leverage categories over our sample as an estimate
for the total amount of assets that would be affected by the ban. Vanguard would attract between
550 and 1,169 million dollars in assets, which would generate 0.16 to 0.35 million dollars of
revenue based on its current expense ratio of 3 basis points. Using the same units as expected loss
for investors, we compute Vanguard's expected gain across investors is 0.06 to 0.12 basis points.
Comparing with the net loss due to the ban on leveraged ETF, the expected gain is an order of
magnitude smaller. Our estimates suggest that Vanguard did not have a substantial profit motive
for the ban.


F         Details on Survey Data
In this section, we provide additional details on the survey data and scatter plots showing the
relationships between the survey measures and our estimated distribution of expectations.


Duke CFO Global Business Outlook: The Duke CFO Global Business Outlook surveys CFOs at
a quarterly frequency about their views on the stock market and macroeconomic outlook. As part
of the survey, CFOs are asked to report their expectations of the market risk premium over the
upcoming year. The organizers of the survey report both the mean and standard deviation of the
expected market risk premium across survey respondents, as well as the fraction with a negative
outlook (Graham and Harvey, 2011). We examine how these moments of the distribution of the
expected market risk premium across CFOs compare with the estimated moments from our model.
This survey provides a nice demonstration of how we can construct statistics that map our model
to survey results.
    32
         https://www.wsj.com/articles/sec-moves-to-curb-leveraged-etfs-1465205401




                                                           53
       Figure A11 panels (a)-(c) display binned scatter plots, comparing the moments from the sur-
vey to our estimated moments. Each panel is constructed using quarterly data over the period
2008-2018 from the CFO survey and our estimates. Figure A11a displays a binned scatter plot of
the estimated mean expected market risk premium across ETF investors versus the mean expected
market risk premium across CFO survey respondents. The two series are positively and signifi-
cantly correlated, exhibiting a correlation of 0.38. Figure A11b compares the standard deviation
of expected returns across the two series. The standard deviation of the expected market risk pre-
mium across ETF investors is significantly and positively correlated (0.41) with the corresponding
standard deviation across CFOs. The Duke CFO survey also reports the fraction of respondents
expecting a negative market return over the course of the next year. We construct an analogous
measure in our ETF data by examining the fraction of investors who prefer negative leveraged
ETFs. Figure A11c displays a binned scatter plot of the share of CFO respondents versus the share
of ETF investors with a negative market outlook. Again the two series are positively and signifi-
cantly correlated with each other (0.65). It is also worth noting that the magnitudes are remarkably
similar.33 Overall, the results suggest that the distribution of investor beliefs about the stock market
recovered from our model is similar to the distribution of investor beliefs reported in the Duke CFO
Global Business Outlook.


Wells Fargo/Gallup Investor and Retirement Optimism Index:                        The Gallup Investor and Retire-
ment Optimism Index is constructed using a nationally representative survey of U.S. investors with
$10,000 or more invested in stocks, bonds, and mutual funds.34 The index is designed to capture a
broad measure of U.S. investors' outlook on their finances and the economy based on their survey
responses and Gallup's proprietary index construction methodology. Given that we are unable to
directly construct an analogous index, we construct a measure of "optimism" using the fraction of
investors choosing positive leverage versus those choosing negative leverage. Specifically, we use
the following measure
                                                           j ={1,2,3} s
                                                                      ^j
                                    M=                                                                             (16)
                                               j ={1,2,3} s
                                                          ^j   +   k={-3,-2,-1} s
                                                                                ^j

      ^j is the predicted share from our model.35 This measure is similar to the percent bullish mi-
where s
nus percent bearish measure used in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) and helps capture information
about the beliefs of the median ETF investor.
       Figure A12 displays the relationships between additional surveys and analogous measures from
our ETF measurements, corresponding to quarterly time series from 2008 to 2018. Panel (a)
presents a binned scatter plot of our measure of optimism compared to the Gallup Investor and
Retirement Optimism Index. The two series are positively and significantly correlated (0.70) in the
  33
     A regression of the share of CFO respondents with a negative market outlook on the share of ETF investors who
purchase negative leveraged ETFs yields a coefficient of 0.80 and is statistically indistinguishable from 1.
  34
     The data is calculated from the figures reported online from https://news.gallup.com/poll/231776/investor-
optimism-stable-strong.aspx. A full description of the index is available online https://www.gallup.com/207062/wells-
fargo-gallup-investor-retirement-optimism-index-work.aspx.
  35
     Note that the predicted shares correspond closely to the shares in the data as we obtain a high degree of model fit.


                                                           54
time series. In other words, there is a positive relationship between investor outlook measured by
Gallup, and the relative share of investors preferring positive leverage to negative leverage based
on their estimated expectations. Though we omit the results for brevity, the Gallup index is also
positively and significantly correlated with our estimates of expected mean returns.


University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers:                  The University of Michigan Surveys of Con-
sumers asks consumers about the probability that the stock market increases. Specifically, the
survey asks a set of nationally representative of US consumers to report the percent chance that
a "one thousand dollar investment in the stock market will increase in value a year ahead." Con-
structing an analogous measure using our model is challenging because the subjective belief about
the probability of a stock market increase depends both on the expected stock market return and
also the beliefs of the distribution of returns. Similar to our analysis with the Gallup index, we com-
pare the University of Michigan index to the relative share positive versus negative from equation
(16).
       Figure A12 panel (b) shows that stock market beliefs from Michigan Surveys and our estimates
are significantly and positively correlated (0.77). This correlation suggests that our ETF data and
model estimates mirror the beliefs of consumers more broadly. The University of Michigan index is
also positively and significantly correlated with our estimates of expected mean returns, though, as
above, we omit the results for brevity.


American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) Sentiment Survey: The American Asso-
ciation of Individual Investors surveys its members each week about their sentiment towards the
stock market over the next 6 months. Specifically, the survey asks respondents whether they be-
lieve the stock market over the next six months will be up (bullish), no change (neutral), or down
(bearish).36 Because the percent bullish and percent bearish are highly correlated in the survey, we
                                     bullish
construct a single measure,     bullish+bearish ,   which corresponds closely to the relative share positive
versus negative from equation (16). Comparing each response separately to analogous measures
from our estimates yields similar results.
       Panel (c) in Figure A12 displays the relationship between the AAII survey and our estimates. The
plot shows the relative share bullish compared to our measure of relative share positive (omitting
neutrals). The correlation between the two measures of sentiment is positive and significant (0.33),
which indicates relatively more investors purchase positive leverage when AAII respondents have a
more positive outlook on the market.


Shiller U.S. Individual One-Year Confidence Index:               The Shiller US Individual One-Year Confi-
dence Index measures the percentage of individual investors who expect the stock market (Dow
  36
    The typical AAII member is a male in his mid-60s with a bachelor's or graduate degree. AAII members tend
to be affluent with a median portfolio in excess of $1 million. The typical member describes himself as having
a moderate level of investment knowledge and engaging primarily in fundamental analysis. For further details see
https://www.aaii.com/journal/article3/is-the-aaii-sentiment-survey-a-contrarian-indicator [accessed 11/17/2019]



                                                         55
Jones Industrial) to increase in the coming year.37 Survey respondents, who are comprised of
wealthy individual investors, are asked to provide their expected increase in the stock index over
the upcoming year, and the confidence index measures the percentage of investors who report a
positive expected increase in the stock market. For this survey, we produce a proxy measure using
the fraction of investors who would choose positively leveraged ETFs, i.e.,                     ^j .
                                                                                       j ={2,3} s      Panel (d) of
Figure A12 displays a binned scatter plot of the share of investors purchasing positively leveraged
ETFs and the One Year Confidence Index. The two series are positively and significantly correlated
(0.47), indicating that the preferences revealed through leveraged ETF purchases line up well with
the analogous Shiller survey measure.


Survey of Professional Forecasts:          The Philadelphia Federal Reserve surveys professional fore-
casters each quarter about their views regarding economic growth as part of the Survey of Pro-
fessional Forecasts (SPF). We focus on the forecast of annual real GDP growth since the SPF does
not include stock market forecasts. Panel (e) in Figure A12 displays the relationship between the
estimated mean expected stock market risk premium across ETF investors versus professional GDP
forecasts. The two series are positively and significantly correlated (0.82). The SPF also reports
the interquartile range of GDP forecasts. Panel (f) displays the interquartile range of GDP forecasts
across investors versus the interquartile range of stock market beliefs across ETF investors. As with
the mean belief/forecast, the two series are positively and significantly correlated (0.86).
       Overall, the results displayed in Figures A11 and A12 help shed light on the external validity
of our estimates. The expectations we recover from demand for S&P 500 linked ETFs are highly
and significantly correlated with the investor expectations measured in six different surveys. Our
estimates of investor beliefs help complement the survey data. While the survey data are intended
to capture the beliefs of distinct populations, our belief estimates come from the actual investment
decisions of investors.
  37
    Data are available online at https://som.yale.edu/faculty-research-centers/centers-initiatives/international-
center-for-finance/data/stock-market-confidence-indices/united-states-stock-market-confidence-indices  [Accessed
10/31/2019]




                                                       56
                        Table A1: Correlation of Mean Expectation Across Asset Classes


                         S&P 500    Europe     Emerging Mkt   Real Estate   Treasury 7-10   Treasury 20+    Gold     Oil
        S&P 500             1


        Europe           0.641         1
                         (0.000)

        Emerging Mkt     0.361      -0.274          1
                         (0.000)    (0.003)

        Real Estate      0.686      -0.00523     -0.0690           1
                         (0.000)     (0.956)     (0.432)

        Treasury 7-10    0.751      0.573        -0.274        0.617             1
                         (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.002)       (0.000)

        Treasury 20+     0.595      0.535        -0.538        0.467          0.521              1
                         (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)

        Gold             -0.471     -0.306       0.701        -0.340          -0.251         -0.679           1
                          (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.006)         (0.000)

        Oil              -0.761      -0.128      0.421        -0.653          -0.517         -0.478        0.573     1
                          (0.000)   (0.173)      (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)
        Observations        132


Notes: Table A1 displays the correlation of mean expectation each quarter across all assest classes. Standard errors are
shown in paranthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                              57
          Table A2: Expected Returns versus Past 12-month Returns Across All Asset Classes

                                                 Mean         ln(SD)       Median        ln(Skew)
                                                  (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
                     Annual Return              0.048**      -0.0095*      0.035*       0.0013**
                                                (0.022)      (0.0054)      (0.019)      (0.00050)

                     Time Fixed Effects            X              X           X              X
                     Asset Fixed Effects           X              X           X              X
                     Observations                 330            330         330            330
                     R-squared                   0.390          0.662       0.265          0.654

Notes: Table A2 displays the regression of different moments of the estimated expected returns distribution on the past
12-month excess return of the corresponding asset class (eq. 13). Observations are at the asset class by quarter level
over the period 2008-2018. See Appendix D for a further description of the data. The dependent variable in each column
corresponds to different moments/parameters of the estimated expected returns distribution. The dependent variable
in column (1) is the mean and is measured in percentage points, in column (2) is the standard deviation parameter in
logs, in column (3) is the median and is measured in percentage points, and in column (4) is the skew parameter in logs.
The idependent variable Annual Return is measured in percentage points. We winsorize all independent and dependent
variables at the 5% level within each asset class to account for outliers during the financial crisis. Winsorizing the data
does not change inference on the relationship between the corresponding series. Driscoll-Kraay based standard errors
are in parenthesis with four lags and are grouped by asset class. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




            Table A3: Future Annual Returns vs. Expected Returns Across All Asset Classes

                                                                 (1)          (2)        (3)
                           AverageExpectedReturn              -0.42***       -0.29      0.10
                                                               (0.14)       (0.24)     (0.22)

                           Asset Fixed Effects                                 X         X
                           Time Fixed Effects                                            X
                           Observations                          330         330        330
                           R-squared                            0.013       0.046      0.404

Notes: Table A3 displays the regression of different moments of the estimated expected returns distribution on the past
12-month excess return of the corresponding asset class (eq. 14). Observations are at the asset class by quarter level
over the period 2008-2018. See Appendix D for a further description of the data. The dependent variable measures
the realized return of the asset over the next twelve months. The independent variable, Average Expected Return,
corresponds to the average expected return from our model. We winsorize all independent and dependent variables
at the 5% level within each asset class to account for outliers during the financial crisis. Winsorizing the data does
not change inference on the relationship between the corresponding series. Driscoll-Kraay based standard errors are in
parenthesis with four lags and are grouped by asset class. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                           58
                               Table A4: Model of Belief Formation: All Asset Classes

                                                                                             Emerging   Treasury    Treasury    Real
                                              S&P 500      Gold         Oil     Europe        Market    7 - 10 Yr    20+ Yr    Estate

                     Panel (a): Calibrated Parameters of Belief Formation Model with All Three Types of Investors
m    Expected Return                            2.280      0.875      1.492      0.501         4.195      0.562     -0.877      2.314
     St. Dev. of Expected Return                1.840      0.621      0.808      1.126         5.296      1.028      1.961      2.792
     Persistence                                0.513      0.409      0.690      0.593         0.209      0.893      0.052      0.973
     Asymmetric Reaction                        0.019      1.634      0.541      0.323         0.235      0.892      2.523      0.687
se   Shr of Extrapolators                       0.250      0.261      0.200      0.148         0.250      0.079      0.452      0.251
e    Reaction to Return for Extrapolators       0.353      0.029      0.029      0.091         0.469      0.500      0.024      0.461
sc   Shr of Contrarians                         0.479      0.379      0.252      0.264         0.261      0.000      0.520      0.250
c    Reaction to Return for Contrarians        -0.142     -0.001     -0.032     -0.074        -0.496     -0.466     -0.022     -0.329
R2                                              0.839      0.340        0.277   0.228         0.634      0.043       0.072     0.543

                           Panel (b): Calibrated Parameters of Belief Formation Model without Contrarians
m    Expected Return                            2.848      0.845        1.799   0.632         6.137      0.561      -0.447     14.465
     St. Dev. of Expected Return                3.434      0.595        1.245   1.372         5.959      1.036       1.913      5.380
     Persistence                                0.532      0.438        0.700   0.585         0.475      0.892       0.638      0.838
     Asymmetric Reaction                        0.000      1.638        0.009   0.043         0.043      0.897       0.000      0.101
se   Shr of Extrapolators                       0.102      0.253        0.101   0.105         0.102      0.079       0.388      0.500
e    Reaction to Return for Extrapolators       0.426      0.030        0.045   0.097         0.500      0.500       0.068      0.444
R2                                              0.583      0.340        0.048   0.034         0.296      0.043       0.014     0.442

                                             Panel (c): Share of Investors Taking Leverage
     All Investors                              0.256      0.054        0.127   0.028         0.342      0.067       0.287     0.563
     Random Walk                                0.118      0.023        0.074   0.010         0.210      0.006       0.253     0.278
     Extrapolators                              0.475      0.132        0.200   0.071         0.524      0.771       0.220     0.899
     Contrarians                                0.219      0.029        0.185   0.042         0.415        -         0.347     0.795

                                     Panel (d): Ex Ante Value Considering All Leverage Options
     All Investors                              3.365      0.292        0.517   0.283          6.593     2.297       0.741     20.545
     Random Walk                                1.202      0.121        0.229   0.151          2.845     0.114       0.542      2.010
     Extrapolators                              5.874      0.748        0.544   0.390          8.232    27.751       0.638     43.591
     Contrarians                                3.281      0.142        1.126   0.514         12.064       -         0.841     34.528

                                        Panel (e): Ex Ante Value Considering Only 0x and 1x
     All Investors                              1.803      0.259        0.409   0.251         3.651      1.031       0.159      5.406
     Random Walk                                1.008      0.110        0.184   0.145         1.879      0.111       0.097      1.136
     Extrapolators                              0.709      0.659        0.363   0.282         2.314     11.760       0.250      2.435
     Contrarians                                2.824      0.125        0.934   0.469         8.268        -         0.084     16.925

                                            Panel (f): Simulated Gain From Leverage Variety
     All Investors                              1.562      0.033        0.109   0.032         2.942      1.266       0.582     15.139
     Random Walk                                0.193      0.011        0.045   0.007         0.967      0.003       0.446      0.874
     Extrapolators                              5.165      0.089        0.180   0.108         5.918     15.992       0.389     41.156
     Contrarians                                0.457      0.016        0.192   0.045         3.796        -         0.757     17.603


Notes: Table A4 shows calibration results and ex ante value simulation of the belief formation model for each asset class.
Panel (a) displays calibrated parameters from the belief formation model including all three investor types, and panel
(b) displays calibrated parameters from the belief formation model without contrarians. R2 of fitting quarterly belief
distributions is included in the last row of each panel. Panel (c) computes the share of investors choosing leveraged
(-3x, -2x, -1x, 2x, 3x) products. The panel shows the average share across quarters for all investors and then for each of
the three types separately. Panels (d) and (e) simulate the ex ante value of being able to choose from the full leverage
menu or a restricted choice set including the outside option and the 1x trackers only. The ex ante value is measured by
expected excess return in percentage point which is averaged across quarters for all investors and each type separately.
Lastly, panel (f) compares the difference in ex ante value between having access to these two different choice sets.


                                                                   59
                                            Table A5: Gain from Variety

                                                                    Crisis        Post-Crisis      Full-Sample
                                                                  2008-2011       2012-2018        2008-2018
      Nominal Leverage
      Gain from Variety (pp.)                                        7.429           1.243             3.717

      Ex Post Leverage: 12-Month Holding Period
      Fraction Regret                                                0.152           0.071             0.103
      Expected Loss (pp.)                                            0.806           0.106             0.386
      Gain from Variety Net of Leverage Risk (pp.)                   7.252           1.139             3.584

      Ex Post Leverage: 24-Month Holding Period
      Fraction Regret                                                0.161           0.094             0.124
      Expected Loss (pp.)                                            1.329           0.181             0.691
      Gain from Variety Net of Leverage Risk (pp.)                   6.532           1.252             3.598

Notes: Table A5 summarizes counterfactual results. We display the average outcomes in the crisis period (2008-2011),
post-crisis (2012-2018) and full sample (2008-2018). The first row corresponds to gains from variety, measured as the
utility difference between the choice sets in the data based on nominal leverage and the restricted choice set of either
outside option or trackers. The next three rows correspond to the welfare effect of leverage risk over time. Fraction regret
measures the fraction of investors who would regret their leverage choices after learning ex post leverages. Expected
loss is the difference between the utility from re-optimized choices based on ex post leverage and the utility from original
choices. Gain from variety net of leverage risk measures the utility difference between the full choice set in the data
and a restricted choice set of only 1x trackers or the outside option. Ex post leverage is computed assuming a 12-month
holding period. The final three rows are the same as above, except that ex post leverage is computed assuming a
24-month holding period instead.




                                                            60
                                                       Figure A1: Comparision with Lower Bound on Equity Premium
                                           (a) Mean Expected Return vs. Lower Bound                                                 (b) Expected Returns of 1x vs. Lower Bound




                                                                                                                        40
                        2
      Mean of Estimated Exp. Returns (%)




                                                                                                                               20
                                  0




                                                                                                              Exp. Returns (%)
                                                                                                                     0
                      -2




                                                     Corr = -0.88***




                                                                                                                        -20
         -4




                                                                                                                        -40
                        -6




                                                                                                                                    2008       2010       2012       2014       2016        2018
                                           0       2               4            6             8     10
                                                  Martin (2017) Lower Bound on Equity Premium (%)                                          Lower Bounds     Mean Exp. Returns      Exp. Return of 1x



Notes: Figure A1 displays the relationship between the estimated expected returns from our model and our replication
of lower bound on equity premium in Martin (2017). The estimated expected returns correspond to our baseline model
estimates reported in column (1) of Table 3. Observations in each panel are at the quarterly level over the period
2008-2018. Panel (a) displays a binned scatter plot of the mean estimated expectation from our model versus the lower
bound on equity premium. We winsorize the mean of expected returns from our model at the 5% level to account for
outliers during the financial crisis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Panel (b) plots the time-series of the lower bound
on equity premium, the estimated mean expected returns, and the estimated range of expected returns consistent with
choosing the 1x leverage.




                                                                                                         61
                                                                                                                                                                           Figure A2: Expectations and Model Fit: Robustness Checks
                                                                  (a) Baseline                                                                                                    (b) Normal Distribution                                                                                                                (c) Scale Outside Share by 5                                                                                               (d) Estimate Relative Inside Share

                                                                                                            q     Risk Aversion                                                                                                                             q   Risk Aversion                                                                                                                q   Risk Aversion                                                                                                                                q     Risk Aversion
                                                                                                            q     = 0.982                                                                                                                                   q   = 1.18                                                                                                                       q   = 0.978                                                                                                                                      q     = 0.987
                   20




                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
       Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                   Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Expected Return (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                 q
                                                                                                                  q                                                               q                                                                             q                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                            q q                     q q       q q q q           q q q q                 q q         q q q q q q       q q   q                                  q                                     q                                 q
                                                                              q q q q
                                                                                                                      q q q q q q q q q q q q q                                               q q                                       q q q q q q q q                                   q                                                      q q q q q q q           q q q q q q q q q       q q       q q q q q q q     q q   q                                    q                       q                   q q q                 q q q q q q q q q q q q     q q q q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                          q q q q
                                                                                                  q q q q q q q                                                                                                                                                                 q q q                                    q q                                                               q q q                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q q             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q q q q q                         q q
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                              q       q q q                                                                                                               q                             q                                                                                                                  q q                                                                           q q     q
                                    q q                   q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                q                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                      q           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q



                                              q
          -20




                                                                                                                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -20
                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                   -40




                                                                                                                                                               -40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -40
                               2008               2010                        2012             2014               2016                2018                                 2008                2010                     2012               2014                 2016               2018                                 2008                2010                 2012                   2014           2016                2018                                2008                  2010                       2012             2014               2016           2018



                                                                  (e) Baseline                                                                                                    (f) Normal Distribution                                                                                                                (g) Scale Outside Share by 5                                                                                               (h) Estimate Relative Inside Share
62



                   0




                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq                                                                                                                            qq qq q
                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                              q   q
                                                                                                                            qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq                                                                                                                             qqq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq                                                                                                                                     qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                            qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q  q                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                       q                             q                                                                                                                                    qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq qq                                                                                                                             qqq   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                               q qqq q
                                                                                                                                  qq                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                               qq    q
                                                                                                                                    q q                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq  q                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q  q
                                                                                                                             qq qqq
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                  q q qq                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq                                                                                                                              q qq qq                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qq q qq q
                                                                                                                             q    q qq q
                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq q                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                              qqq q qqq                                                                                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q   qq
                                                                                                                              qq   q
                                                                                                                                   qq                                                                                                                                     q   q     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq  q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                       qq q q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq  qq q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                               qqqqq                                                                                                                 qqq    q              qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q  q                                                                                              q                                     qq                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q  q qq   q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                 qqqq                                                                                                                q                     q q  q     q                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                           qqq q
                                                                                                                               qqq       q                                                                                                                                  qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq   q q qq
                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             qqq qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                          -2




                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                                           qqqqq
                                                                                                                              q q                                                                                                                 q      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq   q
                                                                                                                             q qq                                                                                                                qqqq qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q               qqqqq qq
                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                  qq q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
        Log Share Predicted




                                                                                                                                                    Log Share Predicted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Log Share Predicted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Log Share Predicted
                                                                                                      q       q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                      qq qqq                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                     qq                      q                                                                                                                q qq   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                       qq q
                                                                                                qq q q   q q                                                                                                                                  q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                    qq    qqq                                                                                                                                 q q   q                                                                                                                      qq                                                                                                                                                                 q            q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                         qqq                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                       q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                   q q         q                                                                                                                                                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq q
                                                                                                q qq q  q
                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q        q qq                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                              qq q   q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq qq   qqqq q                                                                                                                  qq  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                              q q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq qq
                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                q    q q
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                        qq q                                                                                                                                     qqq qq                                                                                                                       qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q     qq                                                                                                                                        qq   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                 qq qqqq
                                                                                                      qqqqq q                                                                                                                              q        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                   qq      qqq                                                                                                                                           qqq q  q q  qq
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q q qq q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                                        q qq q                                                                                                              qq q         qq q                                                                                                                                     qq   qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                               qq    q
                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                        qq                                                                                                                                        qqq                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            qq     q qq qq
                                                                                                         q  q
                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq                                                                                                                  q    qqq q   qq                                                                                                                                            q q q q
                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq qq q qq                                                                                                                 q qq  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                              qqq q   q
                                                                                                      q q  q
                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                    qqqq                                                                                                                      qqq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q    q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                             qq qq qq q
                                                                                                      q qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         qqq                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q qqq                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq q   qqq q                                                                                                                                          qq qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                             qqqqqq qq
                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                           qqq                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q                                                                                                                  q qqqqqqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq qq
                                                                                              qq       q                                                                                                                                          qq  q                                                                                                                  q  q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qq q                                                                                                                                          q q qq qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                -4




                                                                                                                                                            -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -4
                                                                                                     qqq                                                                                                                                           q  q                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q   q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q  q    q                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                      qq                                                                                                                     q qqq   qqq q                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                   qqq q qq qq                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q qq        q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                  q q q q                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q qq q   qq                                                                                                                                                  qq q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q    q
                                                                                                      q  q
                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                            q  q                                                                                                            q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqqqq        q
                                                                                                       qq                                                                                                                                  q q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q  q                                                                                                       q q  qq  qq  q q q                                                                                                                                                q q qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                          qq                                                                                                                                                       q        q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                      qq                                                                                                                                          q q                                                                                                          q q qq   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq      qq q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq qq    q
                                                                                                                                     q       -3x                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q       -3x                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q     -3x                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                       q       -3x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                             -2x                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2x                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2x                                                                                                          qq q                                 -2x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq   qqq                                                                                                                q q   q        q                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                             -1x                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1x                                                                                  q                                        -1x                                                                                                                   q                           -1x
       -6




                                                                                                                                                   -6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                     q        0x                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                           q        0x                                                                                                                     q      0x                                                                                                                                       q        0x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                              1x                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                   1x                                                                                                                            1x                                                                                                                                                1x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                              2x                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                          2x                                                                                                                            2x                                                                                                                                                2x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q    q
                                                                                                                                     q        3x                                                                                                                                  q        3x                                                                                                                     q      3x                                                                                                                                       q        3x
                   -8




                                                                                                                                                               -8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q      q q


                               -8                                 -6            -4       -2                                                   0                            -8                                 -6          -4       -2      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q         qq                                    0                            -8                          -6           -4       -2                                                      0                            -8                                   -6            -4       -2                                              0
                                                                          Log Share Data                                                                                                                            Log Share Data                  q                                                                                                      Log Share Data                                                                                                                                   Log Share Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




     Notes: Figure A2 panel (a) and (e) correspond to the baseline estimates. In (b) and (f), we fit data assuming expectation follows normal distribution. In (c) and (d),
     we scale the outside share of our baseline definition by a factor of 5. In (d) and (h), we fit relative inside share only without using the share of outside option. For the
     top panels, red dots represent mean expected return, solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate
     10th and 90th percentiles. The bottom panels plot fit in terms of log market shares of each leverage category. The x-axis corresponds to log market shares in the data,
     and y-axis corresponds to predicted log market shares. Color red to blue represents each leverage from -3x to 3x. The solid black lines correspond to the 45 degree
     line.
                                 Figure A3: Time-Varying Investor Expectations: Alternative Estimates


                                                                                                                            q    Risk Aversion
                                                                                                                            q    = 0.977
                                20




                                                                           q
                                                                             q                                       q
                                             q                           qqq      q
                                                                              q                                q q q q
          Expected Return (%)




                                                             qq q              qq qq                 q        q                                 q q q
                                                                                                                                                q     q
                                       qq q qqq         qqqqq q qq qqq
                                                                     qqqq       q   qqqq qqq qq qqqqq q
                                                                                                          qqqq  q
                                                                                                                qqq q  qqqqq
                                                                                                                           qqq qqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                     qq      qqqq qqqqq
                                         qq       q qqqq q  q q                         q q q q       qqqqq                   q        qqqqqq
                                0




                                                qq q q
                                                   q
                                                   q

                                                 q
                                -20
                                -40




                                      2008             2010                2012                 2014                2016                2018


Notes: Figure A3 plots the estimated distribution of investor expectations over time in each month, using the alternative
approach described in Appendix A. These estimates use only variation in the choices facing investors to recover the time-
variation distribution of expecations. Red dots represent mean expected return. Solid dark red lines indicate median,
dashed lines indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles.




                                                                                     63
                                                                                                             Figure A4: Expectations and Model Fit: Comparison of Baseline and Alternative Estimates
                                                                  (a) Baseline                                                                                                             (b) Baseline Monthly                                                                                                                                       (c) Alternative                                                                                                    (d) Alternative Monthly

                                                                                                            q     Risk Aversion                                                                                                                    q      Risk Aversion                                                                                                                             q     Risk Aversion                                                                                                                   q      Risk Aversion
                                                                                                            q     = 0.982                                                                                                                          q      = 0.985                                                                                                                                   q     = 0.977                                                                                                                         q      = 0.977
                   20




                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
       Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                   Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Expected Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Expected Return (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                      q                                      q
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                q qq                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                 q                            qqq       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                          q q q                                                                     q                     q                                                   q                                                                                  q q            q                               qq q q q                              q
                                                                              q q q q                                                                                                                               q q qqq q               q    q qqq        qq       qq q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q      qq                                                            q q q q           q q q q                                             q q   q                                                  qq q q   q          qqqqq qq qq           q    q qq  q     qqqq     q              q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                      q           q q q q q q q       q q q q q q q q q q q q q                                                    qqq      qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqq q q     qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqqqqqq    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqq qq  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq q qq qqqq q    qqqq qqqqqq                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q                                 q q q q q q q q q q       q q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q     q                              qqqqqqqq     q qqqqqqq q q  qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq              q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqqqqqqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqqqq    qqqq q   qqqqqq qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqqqqq qqqqq qqqqq
                                                                                          q q q q                                                                                                    qq    q                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq                     q       q qqqq                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                            q
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                      q q q                                                                                                 q qq               q qq       q                                    q
                                    q q                   q q
                                                              q                                                                                                              q  qqqq            q    q  q                                                                                                                           q q                                                                                                                                       qq q q
                                q                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                      q           q                                                                                                                q q q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q


                                              q
          -20




                                                                                                                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -20
                                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                          q
                   -40




                                                                                                                                                               -40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -40
                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                               2008               2010                        2012             2014               2016                2018                                 2008                2010              2012                2014                 2016               2018                                        2008              2010                     2012               2014               2016               2018                                 2008              2010               2012                2014                  2016             2018



                                                                  (e) Baseline                                                                                                             (f) Baseline Monthly                                                                                                                                   (g) Alternative                                                                                                        (h) Alternative Monthly
64



                   0




                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                     qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                       q                          qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                               qq    q
                                                                                                                                    q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q   qq                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                             qq qqq
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                  q q qq
                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q                                                                                                                               q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                             qq   q q
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                      qq                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q qqq  qqq                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                 q q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq   q                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                   qq                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q  q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                              qq q q
                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                     q     q             q   q   q                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                               qqqq                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq                                                                                                                                          qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                 q qq                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                 q                       qq qq                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                            qq qqqq      q                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                               q qq                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                         q qq                      q
                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                              qq
                          -2




                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -2
                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                          q      q
                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                    qq
                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qqq
        Log Share Predicted




                                                                                                                                                    Log Share Predicted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Log Share Predicted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Log Share Predicted
                                                                                                      q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                     qqq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq q
                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                              qqq qq                   q
                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                qq q q
                                                                                                    qq    q q                                                                                                                               q qq                                                                                                                                            q  q
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                  q q                                                                                                                                         qq q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                             q q   q                                                                                                                                      q        q qq
                                                                                                q qq q  q                                                                                                                                   qqq qq                                                                                                                                      q q q qq
                                                                                               q q    qq
                                                                                                       qqq q                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq qq                                                                                                                                              qqqq q
                                                                                              q q q  q
                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                            qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qq                                                                                                                                         q q q                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                q    q q
                                                                                                       qqq q                                                                                                                                 q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q qq                                                                                                                                 q qq  q qq                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                 qq qqqq
                                                                                                      qqqqq q                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq q  qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq  q                                                                                                                                 q qq  q qqqq                                                                                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q q qq q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                               qq    q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     qqqq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq  q                                                                                                                         qq  qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q  q                                                                                                                                 q     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q  q                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            qq   qq
                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   qqqq
                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                          qq q                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq                                                                                                                                 q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                              qqq q  qq
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                          q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q q                                                                                                                                       qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq qq                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqq
                                                                                             qq qq qq q
                                                                                                      q qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                   qq q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqq q                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                              q      q qq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq  qq                                                                                                                          qqqqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq                                                                                                                                            qq                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q   q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                             qqqqqq
                                                                                               q
                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       q q q                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                     q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                -4




                                                                                                                                                            -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -4
                                                                                                     qqq                                                                                                                             qq q qq qq                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                            qq                                                                                                                      qq     qq qq                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq                                                                                                                         qq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   qqq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q q                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                      qq q
                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                 q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q  q                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q       qq                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q q                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                      qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq q  qq qq q
                                                                                                                                     q       -3x                                                                                                                             q       -3x                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq                        q       -3x                                                                                                                            q       -3x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                             -2x                                                                                                                                     -2x                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -2x                                                                                                                                    -2x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                             -1x                                                                                                                                     -1x                                                                                                                                            -1x                                                                                                                                    -1x
       -6




                                                                                                                                                   -6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                     q        0x                                                                                                                             q        0x                                                                                                                                    q        0x                                                                                                                            q        0x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                              1x                                                                                                                                      1x                                                                                                    q                                        1x                                                                                                                                     1x
                                                                                                                                              2x                                                                                                                                      2x                                                                                                                                             2x                                                                                                                                     2x
                                                                                                                                     q        3x                                                                                                                             q        3x                                                                                                                                    q        3x                                                                                                                            q        3x
                   -8




                                                                                                                                                               -8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -8
                               -8                                 -6            -4       -2                                                   0                            -8                          -6              -4       -2                                                         0                             -8                               -6          -4       -2                                                    0                            -8                          -6             -4       -2                                                        0
                                                                          Log Share Data                                                                                                                         Log Share Data                                                                                                                                 Log Share Data                                                                                                                         Log Share Data


     Notes: Figure A4 panel (a) and (e) correspond to the baseline estimates. Panel (b) and (f) are based on the alternative approach described in Appendix A. These
     estimates use only variation in the choices facing investors to recover the time-variation distribution of expecations. Panel (c) and (d) are based on the alternative
     method in Appendix A. Panel (d) and (h) are based on monthly estimates uding the alternative method. For the top panels, red dots represent mean expected return,
     solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles. The bottom panels plot fit in
     terms of log market shares of each leverage category. The x-axis corresponds to log market shares in the data, and y-axis corresponds to predicted log market shares.
     Color red to blue represents each leverage from -3x to 3x. The solid black lines correspond to the 45 degree line.
                                         Figure A5: Time-Varying Investor Expectations: Hedging


                                                                                                                            q    = 0.903 ± 0.261
                                                                                                                                  = -0.813 (3.24)
                                 20
                                                                                                                            q
                                 0



                                                                                                                                                q q q q q q q
                                                                                                      q q q         q q q q q q q q q q q q q q
                                                                                        q q                   q q q                                           q
                                                                        q           q
                                            q                                                     q
                                        q                           q           q             q
                                                q               q           q
           Expected Return (%)




                                                            q
                                 -20




                                                        q
                                 -40




                                                    q
                                 -60




                                       2008                         2010                          2012               2014            2016            2018


Notes: Figure A5 plots the estimated distribution of expectations over time for investors with hedging considerations. We
display the risk aversion coefficient, which follows a uniform distribution, and the market risk beta of investors' wealth,
which follows a normal distribution. These coefficients are scaled by the share of wealth invested in ETFs, which we
cannot separately identify. Red dots represent mean expected return. Solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines
indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles.




                                                                                                       65
                                                   Figure A6: Time-Varying Risk Aversion
                                                                                             (a) Expectations


                                                                                                                           q      Avg Risk Aversion




                                            10
                                                                                                                           q      = 0.611




                                   Expected Return (%)
                                                     5
                                                                                                         q                                           q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                           q q q                         q               q           q
                                                                                                                 q q         q q q q             q       q q         q       q       q       q
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                         q       q q q                   q q         q                         q q               q               q
                                                               q



                                             0
                                                           q q                     q q       q
                                                                               q
                                                                           q
                                      -5                               q




                                                                   q
                               -10          -15




                                                          2008                 2010                      2012                  2014                  2016                        2018


                                                                                             (b) Risk Aversion
                                            2.0     1.5
                                      Risk Aversion




                                                                                                                                                               q q q q
                                           1.0




                                                                                                                                 q q q q
                                                                                                                       q q q q


                                                                                                                                                     q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                             q q q q
                                                                                                                                           q q q q
                                  0.5




                                                                                                 q q q q
                                                                                                             q q q q


                                                                                   q q q q
                                                           q q q q

                                                                       q q q q
                                            0.0




                                                          2008             2010                     2012                   2014               2016                   2018


Notes: Figure A6 panel (a) plots the estimated distribution of expectations over time where we allow risk aversion to
vary at annual level. Red dots represent mean expected return. Solid dark red lines indicate median, dashed lines
indicate 25th and 75th percentiles, and dotted lines indicate 10th and 90th percentiles. Panel (b) plots the estimated
risk aversion which varies at the annual level.




                                                                                                                 66
                              Figure A7: Market Shares: Other Asset Classes
                                 (a) Gold                                                                                                        (b) Oil




               .9




                                                                                                                     .9
               .6




                                                                                                                     .6
Market Share




                                                                                                      Market Share
               .3




                                                                                                                     .3
               0




                                                                                                                     0
               -.3




                                                                                                                     -.3
                 2008    2010     2012               2014                2016      2018                                2008        2010         2012         2014        2016    2018
                        -3x     -2x      -1x                        1x      2x      3x                                            -3x      -2x         -1x          1x      2x    3x




                        (c) European Equities                                                                                    (d) Emerging Market
               .9




                                                                                                                     .9
               .6




                                                                                                                     .6
Market Share




                                                                                                      Market Share
               .3




                                                                                                                     .3
               0




                                                                                                                     0
               -.3




                                                                                                                     -.3



                 2008   2010      2012             2014                  2016      2018                                2008        2010         2012         2014        2016    2018
                        -3x     -2x      -1x                        1x      2x      3x                                            -3x      -2x         -1x          1x      2x    3x




                          (e) US Real Estate                                                                                     (f) Mid-Term Treasury
                                                                                                                     .9
               .9
               .6




                                                                                                                     .6
Market Share




                                                                                                      Market Share
               .3




                                                                                                                     .3
               0




                                                                                                                     0
               -.3




                                                                                                                     -.3




                 2008   2010      2012             2014                  2016      2018                                2008        2010         2012         2014        2016    2018
                        -3x     -2x      -1x                        1x      2x      3x                                            -3x      -2x         -1x          1x      2x    3x




                                                                         (g) Long-Term Treasury
                                                              .9
                                                              .6
                                               Market Share
                                                              .3
                                                              0
                                                              -.3




                                                                2008        2010         2012             2014                  2016      2018
                                                                           -3x      -2x         -1x                        1x      2x      3x




               Notes: Figure A7 shows market share of each leverage for each asset class..




                                                                                            67
                                                                         Figure A8: Gains from Variety




                                                            30
                                                            25
                                                 Expected Return (%)
                                                    10    155
                                                            0    20




                                                                       2008         2010     2012         2014    2016

Notes: Figure A8 displays quarterly average gains from variety, measured as the utility difference (in terms of expected
return) between the full choice set in the data and a restricted choice set of only 1x trackers or the outside option.




                          Figure A9: Ex Post Leverage: 12-Month Holding Period
                                                4
                                                2
                             Ex Post Leverage
                                                0
                                                -2
                                                -4
                                                -6
                                                -8




                                                  2008                        2010           2012          2014        2016
                                                                              -3x      -2x          -1x     1x    2x          3x




Notes: Figure A9 plots ex post leverage for each leverage category over time. Ex post leverage is computed by running
OLS regressions of leverage category returns over 12-month holding periods on S&P 500 returns over the same period,
in a moving window of 7 months.




                                                                                                68
                           Figure A10: Welfare Effects with Leverage Risk: 12-Month Holding Period
                            (a) Share with Regret                                                                                       (b) Expected Loss
         0.30




                                                                                                                     4
         0.25




                                                                                                                     3
0.10 0.15 0.20
  Fraction Regret




                                                                                                              Expected Loss
                                                                                                                    21
         0.05
         0.00




                                                                                                                     0
                    2008   2010   2012     2014                                          2016                                 2008    2010   2012    2014   2016

                                                                                  (c) Gains from Variety, Net of Leverage Risk
                                                                                   30
                                            Gain from Variety Net of Leverage Risk
                                            0      5    10     15     20    25




                                                                                        2008    2010   2012   2014             2016

Notes: Figure A10 shows the welfare effect of leverage risk over time. Panel (a) plots the fraction of investors who would
regret their leverage category choices after learning ex post leverage. Panel (b) plots the expected loss as the difference
between the utility from re-optimized choices based on ex post leverage and the utility from original choices. Panel (c)
shows the gain from variety taking into account the leverage risk, measured as the utility difference between the full
choice set in the data and a restricted choice set of only 1x trackers or the outside option.




                                                                                                        69
                                                         Figure A11: Comparison with Duke CFO Global Business Outlook Survey
                                                           (a) Mean Expected Return                                                                                                                                         (b) Std. Dev. of Expected Return




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                      CFO Survey: Std Dev. of Market Risk Premium (%)
                                              5.5
      CFO Survey: Mean Market Exp. Returns (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Corr = 0.57***
                                     5




                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                           4.5




                                                             Corr = 0.29*
                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
          3.5              3




                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                    -8      -6            -4            -2                                                    0              2                                                          0                  2                        4         6
                                                                 Mean of Estimated Exp. Returns (%)                                                                                                                                  Std Dev. of Estimated Exp. Returns (%)



                                                                                                                                           (c) Share with Negative Outlook
                                                                                     CFO Survey: Share Expecting Negative Returns
                                                                                                                            0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                           Corr = 0.62***
                                                                                  0.05     0.10       0.15       0.20




                                                                                                                                    0.05      0.10           0.15           0.20                                              0.25            0.30
                                                                                                                                                     Share Preferring Negative Leverage




Notes: Figure A11 panels (a)-(c) display binned scatter plots of our estimated beliefs distribution versus results from
the Duke CFO Global Business Outlook Survey. The estimated beliefs distribution corresponds to our baseline model
estimates reported in column (1) of Table 3. Observations in each panel are at the quarterly level over the period 2008-
2018. Panel (a) displays the relationship between the mean estimated expected return from our model versus the mean
expected return from the Duke CFO survey. Panel (b) displays the relationship between the estimated standard deviation
of expected returns across investors from our model versus the standard deviation of expected returns across CFOs as
reported in the Duke CFO survey. Panel (c) displays the relationship between the market share of negative leveraged
ETFs versus the share of CFOs who expect S&P 500 Returns to be negative next year. We winsorize the mean and
standard deviation of expected returns from our model at the 5% level to account for outliers during the financial crisis.
Winsorizing the data does not change inference on the relationship between the corresponding series. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                           Figure A12: Comparison with Surveys
                                                                                             (a) Gallup                                                                                                                 (b) University of Michigan




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.65
                                                       150
          Gallup Investor and Retirement Optimism Index




                                                                                                                                                     Univ. of Michigan: Prob. of a Stock Market Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.60
                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Corr = 0.77***
                                                                                       Corr = 0.70***
                                50




                                                                                                                                                            0.45      0.50
                    0




                                                                                                                                                  0.40
                                     -50




                                                                    0.60             0.70              0.80                0.90       1.00                                                                  0.60              0.70              0.80                0.90         1.00
                                                                                        Relative Share Positive vs. Negative                                                                                                     Relative Share Positive vs. Negative

                                                                                               (c) AAII                                                                                                                             (d) Shiller Index
                                                             0.70




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.80
           American Assoc. of Ind. Investors: Bullish vs. Bearish




                                                                                                                                                     Shiller Survey: Share Expecting Positive Returns
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.75
                                           0.60




                                                                                                                                                                           0.70
                                                                            Corr = 0.33***

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Corr = 0.47***
                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                               0.65
          0.40




                                                                                                                                                  0.60




                                                                    0.60             0.70              0.80                0.90       1.00                                                                  0.00             0.05               0.10             0.15         0.20
                                                                                        Relative Share Positive vs. Negative                                                                                                        Share in Positive Leverage ETFs

                                                                           (e) SPF: Average GDP Forecasts                                                                     (f) SPF: Interquartile Range of GDP Forecasts
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.50
                                     3




                                                                                                                                                     SPF: Interquartile Range of GDP Growth
          SPF: Mean GDP Growth




                                                                                 Corr = 0.82***                                                                                                                    Corr = 0.86***
                           2




                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
                 1                   0




                                                                                                                                                  0.50
                                     -1




                                                                     -8         -6              -4            -2                  0    2                                                                     0                         5                      10                     15
                                                                                       Mean of Estimated Exp. Returns (%)                                                                                                 Interquartile Range of Estimated Exp. Returns (%)

Notes: Figure A12 displays the relationship between the estimated expectations from our model and five additional
surveys: (a) the Gallup Investor and Retirement Optimism Index, (b) the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers,
(c) the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) Sentiment Survey, (d) the Shiller U.S. Individual One-Year
Confidence Index, and (e)-(f) the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). The estimated beliefs distribution corresponds
to our baseline model estimates reported in column (1) of Table 3. Observations in each panel are at the quarterly level
over the period 2008-2018. For details on these surveys, see Section 4.4.1. Panels (a)-(f) display binned scatter plots
comparing each survey to an analogous measure from our model. Surveys in panels (a)-(c) are compared to the relative
share of investors preferring positive to negative leverage, based on our estimated distribution of expectations. The
Shiller index in panel (d) is compared to the fraction of investors choosing positive leverage (greater than 1x). The
SPF average GDP growth forecast in panel (e) is compared to the mean estimated expected return from our model. The
interquartile range of GDP forecasts across professional forecasters in the SPF in panel (f) is compared to the interquartile
range of estimated expected returns from our model. In panels (e) and (f) we winsorize the mean and interquartile range
of expected returns from our model at the 5% level to account for outliers during the financial crisis. Winsorizing the
data does not change inference on the relationship between the corresponding series. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.



                                                                                                                                             71
