                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ALTERNATIVE WORK ARRANGEMENTS

                                        Alexandre Mas
                                        Amanda Pallais

                                      Working Paper 26605
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26605


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We would like to thank Camilla Adams, Jenna Anders, Victoria Angelova, Hailey Brace,
Theodore Caputi, Max Maydanchik, and Amy Tarczynski for outstanding research
assistance. Financial support from NSF CAREER Grant No. 1454476 is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Alternative Work Arrangements
Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 26605
January 2020
JEL No. H0,J0

                                          ABSTRACT

Alternative work arrangements, defined both by working conditions and by workers' relationship
to their employers, are heterogeneous and common in the U.S. This article reviews the literature
on workers' preferences over these arrangements, inputs to firms' decision to offer them, and the
impact of regulation. It also highlights several descriptive facts. Work arrangements have been
relatively stable over the past 20 years, work conditions vary substantially with education, and
jobs with schedule or location flexibility are less family-friendly on average. This last fact helps
explain why women are not more likely to have schedule or location flexibility and seem to
largely reduce hours to get more family-friendly arrangements.


Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Simpson International Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu

Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
apallais@fas.harvard.edu
    In defining jobs, firms make many decisions over how to organize production. They choose, for example,
whether to hire workers directly or outsource hiring, whether to pay workers a salary or per hour, how many
hours per week to require, and how much discretion workers have over when and where they can work.
These decisions depend in part on firm production costs which vary with job tasks. For example, it may be
costlier for firms to allow cashiers to choose their schedules from day-to-day than CEOs but easier to allow
cashiers to work part-time. Additionally, workers have preferences over these arrangements, which may
vary with characteristics like gender and children. Sorting on these dimensions of heterogeneity can lead
workers with different skills and preferences to experience very different production processes. Regulation
may also differentially change the costs of work arrangements and influence their provision. For example,
overtime laws increase the cost of long hours, while mandated benefits may make contracting relatively
cheaper.
    Historically, there have been many changes to work arrangements. During the Industrial Revolution,
production moved from individual craftsman to assembly lines, increasing the return to set schedules and
the cost of working from home. The repeal of blue laws that restricted economic activity on Sundays led to
an increase in weekend work. When married women entered the labor market in large numbers, the demand
for part-time work increased. Arrangements such as work hours and temporary contracts vary substantially
by country.
    Our focus in this review is the prevalence, trend, and determinants of alternative work arrangements in
the U.S. over the last few decades. In this period there have been significant technological and organizational
changes that have potentially influenced the structure of work. The internet and IT advances changed the
costs of offering work arrangements, making it easier for employers to allow workers to work remotely (a la
Oettinger, 2011) and to provide workers with flexible schedules or schedule workers on-demand (Lambert
and Henly, 2012). The advent of online platforms has allowed firms to contract on specific tasks for an
increasing number of activities. Given these fundamental changes over the last several decades, we assess the
extent to which working conditions have changed. A reasonable question to ask is whether the "traditional
job" is a thing of the past.
    A traditional job, as defined by Abraham et al. (2018), pays a wage or a salary, often has an implicit or
explicit contract for a continuing employment relationship, has a predictable work schedule, predictable
earnings, and work supervised by the firm paying the salary. For the purpose of this article, we define alter-
native work arrangements as nontraditional jobs in one or more of these dimensions. An alternative work
arrangement could involve a worker hired by a temporary employment agency, an independent contractor
with multiple clients, an independent contractor with a single client, or a W-2 worker working from home


                                                      1
or with a flexible or irregular schedule. We also consider the part-time/full-time dimension, since this is an
important job characteristic for workers seeking flexibility. Our definition of alternative work arrangements
presents some challenges for a single review, due to its heterogeneous nature. As Goldin (2014) notes,
"workplace flexibility is a complicated, multidimensional concept." However, one of our objectives is to
characterize and analyze the structure of jobs which, for completeness, requires an examination of a diverse
set of practices.
    There are a number of reasons why alternative work arrangements are of interest to economists and
policymakers. Some arrangements, such as flexible scheduling, telework, and part-time schedules, are often
described as ways to improve work-life balance, and perhaps reduce gender disparities in wages and labor
force participation. However, irregular scheduling, whereby workers do not control their schedules, or jobs
with long hours may have the opposite effect in addition to negative health consequences (Lamberg, 2004).
Temporary and gig jobs may be used as stepping-stones to more stable jobs, as means to smooth consump-
tion, or as substitutes for more stable employment.1 The use of independent contractors and outsourcing
allows firms to focus on their core businesses but may also have implications for individuals' wages and
fringe benefits. Sub-contracting can be used to circumvent labor standards. Due to imperfect competition
or other market failures, workers may not be compensated for adverse working conditions absent regulation
or collective bargaining.
    We begin by describing the prevalence of alternative work arrangements. We document that the majority
of today's jobs have some nontraditional feature, and more educated workers are more likely to have flexible
jobs. This gradient appears mostly due to job characteristics rather than worker preferences and is related to,
but not entirely explained by, differences in rates of salaried versus hourly work. While flexibility in work
schedule and location have often been touted as a means of achieving work-life balance, we do not find
evidence that these practices lead to reductions in job stress or family life interruptions. In fact, the opposite
is generally true. Workers who report more flexibility tend to also have worse outcomes in these dimensions,
as well as higher shares of long work days and late night work. Perhaps surprisingly given the emphasis of
the benefits of flexible arrangements on work-life balance, there is no evidence that women are more likely
to be in jobs with more scheduling or work location flexibility. The ability to work part-time appears to be
one of the primary job characteristics that workers, especially women, use to achieve work-life balance.
    We go on to ask whether dramatic shifts in firm organization, technology, and markets have coincided
with changes in the nature of work. We observe from the literature and data that, by and large, the nature
  1 Throughout this article, we use "gig jobs" to refer broadly to independent contractor and freelance work. "Electronically-

mediated gig employment," which refers to work on platforms like Uber or Upwork, is a type of gig employment.




                                                              2
of work has not changed dramatically in the last 20 years. The rates of flexible schedule jobs and telecom-
muting have exhibited only moderate growth. The number of electronically-mediated gig jobs has grown
substantially, but these jobs remain a very small share of overall employment, and independent contracting
and self-employment have grown, at most, modestly. While our broad definition of alternative work ar-
rangements represent a large share of the U.S. labor market, the traditional job is still very much a relevant
feature of the labor market, and there is little evidence that it is on a substantial decline.
    Finally, we discuss alternative work arrangements in terms of how these arrangements are valued by
workers, how they are determined on the firm side, and the role of regulation. We highlight several factors
constraining the growth in gig work, flexible scheduling, and telework. Gig work (including independent
contracting and freelancing) as a primary form of employment is likely held back by widely held prefer-
ences against irregular schedules and uncertain earnings. The primary benefits of electronically-mediated
gig work are its potential to smooth fluctuations in earnings and to enable moonlighting. Regulatory pres-
sure to reclassify independent contractors as regular employees may also limit future growth in these types
of alternative arrangements. Temporary staffing has not grown, possibly because it primarily serves to
smooth employment around temporary vacancies or meet transitory demand shocks, needs that may not
have changed much over time. Flexible work practices may also be constrained by high marginal costs of
implementation for two reasons. First, implementing these practices is infeasible in many jobs. Second,
team production and coordination may require workers to be in proximity to each other. Finally, we note
that the literature suggests that there is potential for work hours to explain gender wage and employment
gaps, and for outsourcing to account for some of the change in the wage structure.



1    Setting the Stage: Prevalence and Trends

In this section, we provide descriptive statistics on the prevalence and trends of alternative work arrange-
ments and discuss working conditions more broadly. We use data from the General Social Survey (GSS),
the Current Population Survey Work Schedules Supplement (CPS WSS), the American Time Use Survey
(ATUS), the American Community Survey (ACS), and the Understanding American Study (UAS), all of
which ask about workplace attributes. Measuring alternative work arrangements presents a number of chal-
lenges. In most surveys, questions on work arrangements are not asked consistently, and the wording of
each question often changes over time. Additionally, it is not always clear how to interpret the responses
to some questions. For example, if someone reports working at home often, do we consider this to be a
measure of work flexibility, or an indicator that they brought home work that they could not complete at


                                                         3
the office? Measuring independent contracting and self-employment presents another set of challenges,
with differences in prevalence depending on whether survey data or tax records are used. These issues are
discussed below.


1.1     Measuring "traditional jobs"

We begin by measuring the prevalence of traditional jobs in the labor market, attempting to reproduce the
Abraham et al. (2018) definition described in the introduction. We use the 2014 GSS Quality of Worklife
Survey (QWS) which asks about contingent work, self-employment, working from home, and scheduling
flexibility.2 We define a traditional job as having a number of characteristics: not self-employed, full-time,
an employment relationship that is regular with the expectation of permanence, where a worker works from
home less than once per week, in which a worker cannot change her schedule often, and the where the
worker does not have irregular shifts or on-call work. By this definition, only 38 percent of 2014 workers
between the ages of 18 and 65 had traditional jobs. Clearly, a traditional job, in the strictest sense, is not the
norm in the U.S. labor market.
      The rate of nontraditional jobs declines somewhat if we loosen the definition of traditional jobs. Keeping
the previous criteria but allowing for part-time employment, 43 percent of jobs are traditional. We might still
be overestimating the rate of nontraditional jobs since respondents who report working from home often may
simply be taking extra work home. In the QWS, 26 percent of respondents report working from home often.
However, only 47 percent of these workers report having a formal work-from-home arrangement; the rest
were taking work home.3 Using a looser description that only counts workers with a formal arrangement
as working from home, the rate of traditional jobs could be as high as 55 percent. Using any of these
definitions, traditional jobs are hardly the norm.
      Job characteristics in nontraditional jobs vary quite a bit. Using the strict definition of traditional jobs
in the QWS (where part-time workers and those working from home without formal arrangements are non-
traditional), 11.3 percent workers are self-employed, 23 percent are part-time, 50 percent can change their
work schedule often, 32 percent work from home often, 3.5 percent are on call, 17 percent have irregular
shifts, and 1.3 percent are temporary workers.
      Working conditions are highly related to whether a job is salaried or paid hourly. Jobs with flexible
schedules or work locations are much more likely to be salaried: 42 percent of flexible-schedule jobs are
salaried relative to 27 percent of non-flexible schedule jobs. Similarly, 56 percent of jobs with at least
   2 Although the CPS Contingent Worker Supplement is commonly utilized, we omit it from this exercise because the survey does

not ask about working from home or schedule flexibility.
   3 The rate of formal work-from-home arrangements comes from the UAS as this distinction is not made in the GSS.,



                                                              4
weekly work from home are salaried relative to 24 percent of other jobs. At the same time, jobs with flexible
arrangements are more likely to be temporary arrangements (working as an independent contractor or temp
worker). Of workers with flexible schedules, only 64 percent are in a regular and permanent employment
relationship relative to 88 percent of other workers, while among those who work from home at least weekly,
only 69 percent are regular employees relative to 85 percent of other workers.4 These statistics suggest
that workers in flexible arrangements are a combination of workers with unstable employment and more
conventional salaried workers who have control over their schedules and location of work.


1.2     The education gradient in alternative work arrangements

We now turn to the relationship of alternative work arrangements with education. We regress different mea-
sures of work arrangements on an indicator for college completion, some college, female, and a quadratic in
age. Tables 1 and 2 report the estimates from this regression for the education and gender dummies. We use
three datasets as outcomes differ across surveys: the GSS for the period 2012-2018, the 2011 ATUS Leave
Module, and questions from a module we developed in the 2016 UAS.
      In Table 1 the general pattern is that more educated workers are substantially more likely to have flexible
arrangements. Workers with a college degree or more have a 13 percentage point higher probability of
having a flexible schedule than do workers with a high school degree or less (column 1). This represents a
40 percent difference from the mean of 32 percent. We also see large differences by education in whether the
worker works from home often. College graduates have a 28 percentage point higher rate of home work than
do workers with at most a high school degree, relative to a mean of 26 percent (column 2).5 A similar pattern
holds for whether the worker has a formal arrangement to work from home (column 3), and a regular and
permanent job (column 4).6 There is no detectable relationship of education with self-employment (Table
1, column 5) or with part-time work (Table 2, column 2). Part of the education difference in flexibility is
explained by differential rates of salaried versus hourly work as the rate of salaried workers is substantially
higher among college graduates. However, the education gradient in flexibility holds after controlling for
pay type. In terms of negative attributes, there is an insignificant educational gradient in whether the worker
has an irregular, on-call or split shift (column 7), but more educated workers are much more likely to know
their schedule at least two weeks in advance (column 8).7
   4 All differences are significant at the 0.001 level.
   5 These  relationships are robust to controlling for marital status and children in the household.
   6 A regular and permanent job is defined as a worker who is not an independent contractor, does not do on-call work, is not paid

by a temporary agency, and does not work for a contractor that provides workers or services.
   7 This estimate may overstate the education gap in workers knowing their schedule two weeks in advance. This question counts

workers with flexible schedules as knowing their schedules even though they might have to adjust their work hours last minute if



                                                                5
    One interpretation of these education differences in flexibility is that scheduling and location flexibility
are non-pecuniary, unmeasured benefits of additional education, something missed by standard estimates of
the returns to education. An alternative interpretation is that these characteristics are a component of jobs
that emphasize worker output rather than worker inputs and that jobs emphasizing worker output may have
other, possibly less-attractive, attributes.8 A number of facts support this second interpretation:
    (1) Salaried jobs require more educational attainment and have more flexibility but also longer hours.9
    (2) Workers with more educational attainment have more days of overtime work (Table 2, column 4) but
have a lower probability of having their employer require overtime work (Table 2, column 5), consistent with
higher-skilled workers having more demanding workplaces that emphasize their output over their inputs.
    (3) Workers with flexible schedules and who work at home more often self-report that they have more
autonomy in how they do their work. Specifically, in the GSS they are significantly more likely to respond
that they have "a lot of freedom to do [their] jobs" and are significantly less likely to work as part of a team
(Table 3, columns 4 and 5).
    (4) Workers in jobs with more schedule and location flexibility do not have better measures of work-
life balance. There is a very strong positive relationship between working from home often and whether
the job is stressful, whether it interferes with family life, the probability of working late hours, and days
of work that have extra hours (Table 3). There is a positive but statistically weak relationship between
flexible schedule arrangements and job stress and job encroachment on family life, and a positive, precisely
estimated relationship between flexible scheduling and working late hours.10
    If workers with more educational attainment have flexibility over the time and location of work, the
converse is that less educated workers tend to have limited control and are subject to employer demands
over their time. They are more likely to be required to work overtime, and they have less advance notice
about their schedules (Table 1, column 8).
additional work comes in.
    8 Tan 2017 develops a model where firms can choose between giving workers freedom to develop their own production methods

and tightly monitoring their actions. Freedom can be efficient because it eliminates the ratchet effect of innovating ­ workers
benefit from their innovations since firms do not raise future performance requirements on the workers. Firms decide whether to
give workers freedom trading-off the productivity gains from innovation in the production process under freedom with efficiency
losses due to asymmetric information with less monitoring.
    9 Salaried workers work approximately 5 more hours per week than hourly workers, after controlling for education, gender

and age in the 2011 CPS, and 4 more hours after controlling for two-digit industry and occupation. Salaried workers have a 15
percentage point higher probability of working more than 45 hours per week (the overall fraction of workers working more than 45
hours is 0.21). In the 2014 GSS, salaried workers have a 9 percentage point higher rate of having a flexible schedule than hourly
workers, controlling for education, age and gender (p-value = 0.004).
   10 Blair-Loy (2009) provides an ethnographic account of how flexibility can interfere with personal time in the case of stock

brokers. The brokers she interviewed who were in firms that granted them more scheduling flexibility relayed that they had more
work-family conflict than brokers with traditional schedules. The latter reported that rigid schedules helped provide a buffer from
clients during the off-work hours.




                                                                6
    The positive education gradient in flexibility and demands of the job may be more intuitive when we
consider workers' occupations. For example, out of the 38 two-digit occupations in the GSS, the category
"chief executives, senior officials, and legislators" is tied for the most stressful occupation and is second in
terms of job interfering with family. On the other hand, it is relatively flexible, with roughly half of workers
saying they work from home more than once per week and almost 40 percent of workers reporting schedule
flexibility. On the other side of the spectrum, the category of "food preparation assistants" is one of the least
likely occupations to interfere with family life but has very low rates of home work and flexible scheduling.
    The relationships discussed suggest that differences in job characteristics can be thought of as compo-
nents of different production processes for higher skill work rather than different fringe benefits. It is not
that higher-educated workers demand more flexibility, but that flexibility is cheaper for employers to provide
in higher-skilled jobs. While we discuss workers' preferences for flexibility more in Section 2.1, the litera-
ture does not find a strong relationship between educational attainment and a desire for flexibility. Mas and
Pallais (2017) find that more- and less-educated workers are willing to give up the same fraction of earnings
for different types of flexibility.
    One proxy for the cost of offering telecommuting is the fraction of work employees claim they could
feasibly do from home (regardless of where they do it). We surveyed respondents in the UAS on this job
characteristic and, consistent with the idea that offering flexibility to more-educated workers is cheaper,
college graduates report that 41 percent of their jobs could be feasibly completed from home, relative to
only 14 percent for workers with a high school degree or less. Controlling flexibly for the fraction of the job
that could be feasibly completed from home decreases the college gradient in working from home by more
than half.
    This interpretation of flexibility may help clarify the consistent finding in the literature on alternative
work arrangements that non-wage job attributes are often not correlated with wages in the predicted direction
from a compensating differentials model. In the cross-section, Mas and Pallais (2017), Maestas et al. (2018),
He et al. (2019) find that jobs with more attractive attributes have higher wages, even when controlling for a
rich set of attributes.11 For example, Mas and Pallais (2017) find no evidence of a wage penalty for working
from home or having a flexible schedule, which suggests that the compensating differential that would be
predicted by this model if these were positive amenities doesn't exist. The lack of a penalty may reflect that
these jobs are, on average, held by higher-skilled workers in observable and unobservable dimensions, or
that employers can offer a more attractive job by combining wage and non-wage amenities, as in Hwang et
al. (1998). It may also reflect the fact that more flexible jobs come with other negative amenities like
  11 This   is a similar issue encountered with many non-experimental studies of compensating differentials (e.g., Brown, 1980).



                                                                  7
stress and interference with family life.


1.3     Trends in alternative work arrangements

We now turn to discussing trends in work arrangements over time, looking at both worker-firm relationships
and flexibility measures. Our reading of the research on the worker-firm relationship is that by and large there
have not been substantial changes in the rate of non-standard work arrangements in terms of independent
contracting, self-employment or electronically-mediated gig work.
      The traditional literature on alternative work arrangements focused largely on contingent work, on-call
workers, contract firm employees, and the self-employed (Polivka, 1996).12 The incidences of these differ-
ent forms of alternative arrangements have been tracked by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Contingent
Workers Supplement (CWS) to the CPS since 1995 and the GSS QWS since 2002. The rates of these alterna-
tive work arrangements have been relatively stable. In the CWS, the rate of independent contractors, on-call
workers, temporary help service workers, and contract firm employees have remained at approximately 7
percent, 1.7 percent, 1 percent, and 0.5 percent respectively (Abraham et al., 2018).
      Measurement has been a focus of this literature. Abraham et al. (2018) note that there is a discrepancy
between the number and growth of workers reporting self-employment in the CPS and workers reporting
self-employment income in tax records. Between 1996 and 2016 self-employment rates were relatively sta-
ble in the CPS, in the 5-8 percent range depending whether self-employment is defined in relation to all jobs,
the longest job last year, or the main job last week. If anything, there is a small downward trend in this rate
over the period. Reports from IRS Schedule SE, Self-Employment Tax combined with Schedule C income,
which is required of tax filers with gross non-farm self-employment income earned as an unincorporated
sole proprietor, can be used to calculate self-employment rates in the administrative data. These rates are
higher in levels and growth, going from 9.5 percent in 1996 to 11.3 percent in 2012. There was a similar
increase in the filing of 1099-MISC forms, which are used to report payments to non-employee individu-
als.13 Jackson et al. (2017) document that the increase in self-employment rates in the administrative data
is driven by an increase in individual contractors (people with little or no business deductions) rather than
small businesses.
      Collins et al. (2019) use tax data to identify online platform workers among workers reporting 1099s.
The share of these workers was virtually zero prior to 2013 and grew to approximately 1 percent of the
   12 The BLS defines contingent workers as "persons who do not expect their jobs to last or who report that their jobs are temporary."

These are often non-employee relationships based on the completion of projects or tasks. Independent contractors fall in this
category.
   13 Abraham et al. [2018] recommend probing more deeply into non-employee activities in household surveys and more linking

of survey and administrative data.


                                                                  8
tax workforce by 2016. Using a sample of 1 million Chase customers from 2016, Farrell and Greig (2016)
estimate that 0.4 percent of employed adults and 0.7 percent on non-employed adults had received some
income from online labor platforms. They also document that growth of participants slowed after 2015,
possibly because the labor market improved and workers had better outside options. Both Collins et al.
(2019) and Farrell and Greig (2016) find that online platform work rarely serves as a sizable source of
income for individuals. However, this sector is changing rapidly. Since it is difficult to get statistics in real
time, even the best statistics are a couple of years old.
    A phenomenon related to contingent work and other nonstandard employment situations is domestic
outsourcing. Weil (2014) has argued that the reliance on outsourcing, contractors, and temporary workers,
particularly for non-core activities, has led to lower pay and worse working conditions. Bernhardt et al.
(2016) note that in some industries, like call centers, outsourced jobs are more likely to be nonstandard,
though an outsourced job can also be traditional. There is limited empirical evidence on domestic outsourc-
ing trends due to data limitations. Measuring the extent of outsourcing is complicated because it requires
measuring business-to-business transactions (Bernhardt et al., 2016).14 The evidence we have from specific
occupations and industries suggests that domestic outsourcing is widespread and has grown (Dey et al.,
2010). Handwerker (2015) uses data from the BLS Occupational Employment Statistics to construct an
economy-wide measure of outsourcing by measuring the occupation employment concentration within em-
ployers. The basic idea is that outsourced jobs are likely to be in firms that offer a single service, such
as cleaning. Handwerker (2015) finds that from 1999 to 2015 there was a moderate increase in occupa-
tional concentration in firms but a large increase in concentration for workers in the lowest-paid quintile of
occupations. Increases in concentration were more pronounced in less unionized states.
    Within traditional employment relationships, the prevalence of working from home, flexible scheduling,
and having an irregular schedule set by an employer have not changed dramatically over the last 15-20
years. Figure 1 shows the fraction of non-self-employed workers who self-report working from home using
different datasets and different work-from-home definitions.15 Despite the difference in levels of home work
under the different definitions, the series show a similar pattern: stability until around 2005 and a slight rise
after that. These datasets all show a small, significant increase in the probability of working from home of
2 to 3 percentage points over the 2005 to 2015 period or 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points per year. Oettinger
(2011) finds that the rate of workers working from home increased substantially in an earlier period (from
   14 This measurement challenge has implications for economic statistics. Siegel and Griliches (1992) note that failure to account

for increased outsourcing can lead to an overstatement of productivity growth.
   15 Consistent with Abraham et al. (2018), the prevalence of workers who report self-employment in these surveys has remained

stable over time.



                                                                9
a very low base), between 1980 to 2000. He finds larger increases in working from home in IT-intensive
occupations. IT advances would have decreased employers' costs of offering home-based work, consistent
with the measured penalty for home-based work decreasing from 30 log points to zero over this period.
      The prevalence of flexible scheduling has also not increased much over the last 20 years (Figure 2).16
In fact, the GSS actually reports a slight decline in the fraction of workers who report being able to make
changes in the times they begin and end work from 28% to 26% over the 2002 to 2014 time period. The CPS
WSS shows little change in flexible scheduling: 30% of workers report being able to change their starting
and quitting times often in both 1997 and 2004, the latest years the series was available.
      Figure 3 shows that the rates of irregular scheduling have also been relatively stable since 2000. This
figure uses a relatively strict definition of an irregular schedule. To be counted as irregular, workers must
directly indicate that their schedule is "irregular," as opposed to a day, evening, or night shift or a rotating or
split shift. Broadening the definition of an irregular schedule to include, for example, workers on a rotating
shift increases the level of irregular scheduling, but the trends remain flat.



2      What Determines Alternative Work Arrangements?

In Section 1 we showed that alternative work arrangements are common but heterogeneous. In this section
we will discuss factors that influence the provision of these arrangements. To begin we review the literature
on how workers value these arrangements, how flexibility enters into the firm's production function, and the
role of regulation.


2.1      Worker determinants: Job Satisfaction, Worker Valuation, and Careers

The first step for understanding the equilibrium determination of alternative work arrangements is worker
preferences. How much do workers value these arrangements? How heterogeneous are preferences? Are
differences in preferences correlated with worker characteristics? What are the economic implications of
holding a nontraditional job? We being by discussing preferences for flexible arrangements. We then move
on to gig work and impacts on careers.


Valuing amenities

The literature tends to find that all else equal, workers like flexibility in where and, to a lesser extent, when
they work. Several observational studies find that people with alternative work arrangements generally have
    16 This   figure eliminates workers who report being self-employed.



                                                                  10
higher job satisfaction (Golden et al., 2013; Bryson and MacKerron, 2016), while Bloom et al. (2015) finds
that being randomly selected to be able to work from home increases job satisfaction.
    One thought experiment is to ask how much a worker is willing to pay, in terms of lower compensation,
for any one attribute. Eriksson and Kristensen (2014), Wiswall and Zafar (2017), and Maestas et al. (2018)
use a stated-preference approach embedded in surveys to elicit this information. Mas and Pallais (2017)
conduct a discrete choice experiment with applicants to call center jobs, and they also give hypothetical
choices to a more representative sample of survey respondents. In their field experiment they offer applicants
positions that randomly vary in the wages and job attributes and use these choices to estimate willingness to
pay. All of these approaches, both the surveys and field experiments, find that workers are generally willing
to pay for non-wage attributes, though the amount varies somewhat across studies.17 Mas and Pallais,
for example, find that the median worker is unwilling to pay anything for flexible schedules relative to a
traditional 9-5pm schedule but are willing to pay approximately 8 percent of wages to have the option to
work from home. He et al. (2019) compare application rates to jobs that randomly vary in flexibility and
salary and find that flexible jobs receive many more applications, an impact similar in magnitude to a large
monthly salary increase. Given that job flexibility is often bundled with other, possibly worse attributes, an
interesting question is how much workers value classes of job attributes. This is useful for understanding
how workers value different job types, such as gig employment, which is discussed in the next subsection.
    Other papers focus on negative amenities. The largest literature on this question is on the willingness
to pay for safer or cleaner work conditions (surveyed in Aldy and Viscusi, 2003), but other amenities have
been examined as well, such as hours variability (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981) and instability of work
schedules (Mas and Pallais, 2017; Schneider and Harknett, 2019). Relative to traditional jobs, Mas and Pal-
lais (2017) find that workers have strong preferences against jobs with irregular schedules, where employers
can schedule workers on short notice. As we saw in Section 1, jobs with employer-determined schedules
are more common for less-skilled workers.
    Kaur et al. (2015) provide a novel explanation for why workers might select into different work arrange-
ments: as a way to solve self-control problems. A worker may find it costly to decide how much to work,
or when to work, if they determine their own schedule. Such a worker may be willing to pay something for
a more rigid schedule in order to commit to working a fixed set of hours. Kaur et al. (2015) find empirical
support for this behavior in an experiment using data entry workers. Workers had a tendency to choose
   17 One of the interesting methodological findings of this set of papers is that willingness to pay estimates for work attributes from

hypothetical questions asked in surveys and decisions made in the field are similar. We conjecture that survey respondents are able
to respond accurately about their preferences for hypotheticals that are "relatable," like questions on work schedules, rather than
abstract questions on fatality risk.



                                                                  11
dominated contracts that nevertheless gave them stronger incentives to increase production. This behavior
may explain why Mas and Pallais (2017) find that workers are willing to pay to avoid having total freedom
on the number of hours worked.


Gig jobs

Gig jobs, which include independent contractor and freelance work, represent an extreme of the alternative
work arrangements space. On one hand, individuals have a lot of discretion over their schedules, while on
the other, they face complete responsibility for completing tasks. Wages are often uncertain, meaning that a
worker needs to have an unpredictable schedule to maintain steady earnings. Gig jobs are sometimes work
from home (e.g., coding) and sometimes not (e.g., a rideshare driver). Given these characteristics, the Mas
and Pallais estimates suggest that gig jobs, particularly those that are not work from home, may not be highly
desirable for the median worker since workers strongly prefer to avoid irregular schedules. However, due to
heterogeneity in preferences, which Mas and Pallais document, these jobs might offer considerable benefits
to workers who have sorted into gig work. For example, Katz and Krueger (2019) find that 84 percent of
independent contractors report preferring to work for themselves which, taken at face value, suggests that
these workers have largely selected into these jobs based on preferences.18
    Though a small share of employment (around 1 percent in 2016), electronically-mediated gig jobs,
which include employment in the online platform economy, have received a lot of attention from the press
and policymakers. As discussed in Section 1, these jobs rarely provide a substantial amount of income.
The main benefit of these jobs appears to be in occasional moonlighting and smoothing income. Income is
often variable even for non-gig jobs. In the population of Chase Bank customers, Farrell and Greig (2016)
estimate that 55 percent experienced a month-to-month swing in income of more than 30 percent. As a
safety net, electronically-mediated gig jobs allow workers to quickly adjust their labor supply in response
to the loss of other income or increased demand for consumption. In traditional jobs, workers may face
frictions achieving their desired labor supply or becoming reemployed quickly. Gig economy platforms
such as Uber and Lyft allow workers to adjust their hours and earn money almost immediately. Indeed,
Farrell and Greig (2016) find a high degree of turnover in participants of online labor platforms, which may
come about due to changes in their outside options. While Mas and Pallais (2017) find that relatively few
workers want to adjust the number of hours they work from week to week, Koustas (2018 and 2019) finds
that the small fraction of the workforce that takes a gig economy job substantially benefits from the safety
  18 In contrast, temporary help workers seems dissatisfied with their situations: 77 percent report that they would prefer a perma-

nent job.



                                                                12
net it provides. Workers who start a gig job have falling income, declining assets, and increasing debt. Gig
earnings offset most of the earnings decrease and substantially decrease the responsiveness of consumption
to workers' earnings in their main job. Using a structural approach, Chen et al. (forthcoming) estimate a
large labor surplus ($150 per week, or 40 percent of wages) from Uber drivers' ability to adjust their work
schedules to their own reservation wage shocks.19 As Hall and Krueger (2017) note, many Uber drivers
have other jobs, potentially contributing to the value of controlling their schedule.
    Gig jobs often do not provide benefits such as health insurance or retirement contributions. This may
contribute to their flexibility, allowing workers to come and go as they please. However, at a given wage, this
makes gig work less appealing than traditional employment, particularly in the United States, where there is
a smaller social safety net. On the other hand, to the extent that the market determines total compensation
and firms decide how to split this between wages and benefits, some workers may prefer higher earnings at
the expense of benefits. An interesting question for future research is how the availability of social insurance
programs affects the supply of workers to gig jobs. For example, do workers prefer gig employment in
countries where more benefits are publicly provided?
    The evidence we have about electronically-mediated employment, primarily from ridesharing, is that
there is a horizontal labor supply curve for these jobs in the long-run, anchored at participants' alternative
wages. For example, Hall and Krueger (2017) find that Uber had a downward trend in fares but constant
hourly earnings, implying that drivers' labor supply adjusted to keep equilibrium wages constant. Hall et al.
(2017) examine driver responses to fare changes. When fares increase, drivers work more hours, but spend
a lower share of driving time with paying customers. If wages are anchored at the outside option, it may
be difficult increase hourly earnings. A reduction in Uber's commission would presumably be offset by an
increase in driver hours, leaving hourly take home pay constant. Hourly wages could rise by restricting the
number of driver hours, just as conventional taxi medallions are rationed. In fact, in New York City taxi
medallions were introduced during the Great Depression precisely because low wages in the unregulated
market led to violent protests (New York City Government, 2019).


Gender differences in alternative work arrangements

Conventional wisdom is that flexibility in hours or over the time and place of work may be particularly
valuable for parents, particularly women with children. Indeed, Mas and Pallais (2017) find that women
have a higher willingness to pay for the option to work from home while Wiswall and Zafar (2017) find that
women value the option of working part-time. It has been argued that one factor in the wage gender gap
  19 Angrist   et al. (2017) note that rideshare drivers benefit from being able to set a work schedule without having to cover a lease.


                                                                   13
could be differential sorting of men and women into more flexible arrangements with a lower wage (Goldin
and Katz, 2011). Whether these work attributes have the potential to affect the gender wage gap depends on
the concept of flexibility used. If jobs with work schedule and location flexibility are not typically associated
with more family-friendly outcomes, then why should there be differential sorting of women into these jobs?
In fact, there is little evidence of this kind of sorting. In Table 1, women are less likely to have a more
flexible schedule, work from home often, or have a non-regular employment relationship. While women
may demand more flexibility, in the market, schedule and location flexibility are often accompanied by some
less desirable attribute like long work hours. These patterns, combined with the wage premium for more
flexible positions, described above, make these types of flexibility unlikely candidates for a compensating
differentials explanation for gender wage gaps.20
    The hours dimension of flexibility is a more promising avenue for explaining male-female gaps. The
literature consistently finds that women take jobs with fewer hours, and lower hour jobs are associated with
better work-life balance in all of the dimensions we considered (Table 3) as well as lower wages (Hirsch,
2005).21 It appears that women are mostly working shorter hours by choice. In the 2016 CPS, 80 percent
of women in part-time employment report working under 35 hours per week voluntarily. Further, in Table
3 we see that there is one measure of job flexibility for which women have a clear advantage: the ability to
work half-time in a job. Though the sample is small for this question, the gender differences are striking:
51 percent of employed females are in a job with this attribute as opposed to only 27 percent for men. This
finding suggests that the availability of part-time jobs, or jobs that give the option of part-time work, may
be an important determinant of whether women enter the labor market. Consistent with this, Blau and Kahn
(2013) show in a sample of OECD countries that national policies that give workers the right to work part-
time are associated with higher female employment rates.22 Blau and Kahn (2017) note that the part-time
wage penalty is likely too small to contribute much to the gender wage gap.
    Goldin (2014) posits that the long hours dimension may explain the majority of the gender wage gap
for highly-educated workers. In many jobs, workers are not perfect substitutes for each other, such that
one worker cannot simply hand off work to another. For this reason, firms may ask workers to work long
hours in return for higher salaries and the possibility of future promotion.23 If the returns to long hours are
   20 This finding is consistent with previous papers that have failed to find evidence of sorting of female workers into more flexible

arrangements (see e.g., Golden, 2001, and McCrate, 2005).
   21 Women are more likely to be in part-time employment and, even conditional on full-time employment, are less likely to work

in long hour jobs.
   22 In a sample of 21 OECD countries, Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017) find that countries with a higher index of work flexibility,

specifically the the opportunity to accumulate days off and to vary the start and end of daily work, have smaller gender gaps in
employment. (This index of work flexibility is insignificantly related to the wage gap.)
   23 Kuhn and Lozano (2008) document that the incidence of long hour work for men has increased since 1980, particularly for




                                                                 14
convex and differ by occupation, women who seek to reduce their hours will sort into occupations with lower
penalties for hours reductions. Wage gaps emerge because women are paying for the amenity of "temporal
flexibility." Empirical support for Goldin's hypothesis includes the observation that the gender wage gap is
larger in occupations with a larger wage return to longer hours.24 Goldin and Katz (2016) show that in the
case of the pharmacy profession, technological change that increased worker substitutability narrowed the
gender wage gap. Cortes and Pan (2017) find evidence that reducing constraints on highly-skilled women
from working long hours via more low-skilled immigration reduces the gender earnings gap. Kleven et al.
(2019) show using Danish data that the earnings penalty following childbirth is partially due to reducing
hours of work, shifting to lower-ranked occupations, and shifting to more family-friendly firms (proxied by
the share of female workers with children).


Careers

Worker preferences for alternative work arrangements may be driven, in part, by how these arrangements
impact workers' careers. Bloom et al. (2015) found that workers randomized to work from home had lower
promotion rates conditional on performance. Teleworking employees may have less understanding of office
dynamics and so be less prepared for promotions. Alternatively, being away from the office may negatively
influence managers' evaluation of worker performance. In experimental work in psychology, Elsbach et al.
(2010) find that "observers interpret passive face time as an indicator of specific traits (e.g., responsibility,
dependability, commitment, and dedication), and that the context of passive face time (i.e., whether it occurs
during vs outside of normal work hours) is critical to the particular traits that judges assigned to those
displaying passive face time." Kossek and Van Dyne (2008) find possible deleterious effects on careers may
be one reason workers do not value flexibility more. On the other hand, these types of flexibility may allow
some workers to enter or remain in the labor market.
    A question of interest to economists and policymakers is whether temporary and gig jobs are a stepping-
stone to traditional or stable employment relationships. These jobs may provide workers with experience,
skills, training, and screening valued by future employers (Autor, 2001; Pallais, 2014). On the other hand,
these jobs may not help workers if the human capital component is limited or they do not offer career
advancement. Temporary or gig jobs could even negatively impact workers' careers if they crowd out more
stable employment. Jackson (2019) uses U.S. tax return data to analyze the impact of the gig economy on
higher-educated and salaried workers. They estimate that the return to long hours for hourly wages is positive, even for salaried
workers where there is not a mechanical link between hours and compensation. After ruling out several other explanations, they
conclude that the pattern of evidence is consistent with an increased dependence of pay on job performance.
   24 One complication with this explanation is that at the occupation level, the relationship between hourly wages and hours tends

to be concave rather than convex for all but a small number of occupations, as seen in Table 2 of Cortes and Pan (2017).


                                                               15
the careers of unemployed workers. Using variation in individuals' propensity for gig work based on pre-
unemployment characteristics and variation across counties in the penetration of gig platforms, she finds
that access to the gig economy does crowd out traditional employment in the long run but increases earnings
in the short run. In the year they lose their jobs, high-propensity gig workers with access to the gig economy
earn $3,000 more. However, this gain disappears the next year. Two to four years later, these workers are
five percentage points less likely to be in traditional wage jobs and earn $2,000 less per year. For workers
who are 55 and over when they lose their jobs, the gig economy prolongs their working life and decreases
their reliance on Social Security Disability Insurance and Social Security retirement benefits, whereas for
prime age workers the gig economy leads to bigger crowdout of traditional employment and future earnings.
    In a Swedish audit study, Adermon and Hensvik (2019) examine whether having a gig job on a resume
increases callback rates for traditional jobs. They find gig jobs help workers with Swedish names but not
Muslim names. Autor and Houseman (2010) consider a welfare-to-work program. They do not find evidence
that placement in a temporary job increases subsequent employment rates, and there is some evidence that
it decreases earnings in the medium-run.
    The literature has also considered the impact of domestic outsourcing on workers.25 There is evidence
that sorting of higher skilled workers into higher wage firms has contributed to rising inequality in the U.S.
(Song et al., 2018) and Germany (Card et al., 2013). Increased outsourcing could explain this trend, as it
led to lower wage workers in high wage firms moving to lower wage firms. A small number of studies have
estimated domestic outsourcing's wage impact. Goldschmidt and Schmieder (2017) identify outsourcing in
Germany when workers in a group of occupations move jointly to another firm. They find that outsourced
workers have lower earnings. Handwerker (2015) finds that workers in firms with more concentrated oc-
cupations are paid less and that approximately half of the increase in inequality from 1999-2015 can be
accounted for by changes in firm occupational concentration. Dube and Kaplan (2010) observe janitors and
security guards and identify outsourced workers as those who work for an employer providing labor services
as an intermediate input to another firm.26 Using cross-sectional regressions and a panel of job switchers,
they find that outsourced jobs have relatively lower wages. They argue that the outsourcing wage discount
represents lower rent sharing since outsourcing is more common in industries with high wage premia. There
are compelling narrative accounts on how workers prefer working directly for a firm as a regular employee
rather than through a third-party. Geundelsberger (2019) describes that in an Amazon fulfillment center
   25 We use the term "domestic outsourcing" to distinguish it from offshoring.Dey et al. (2010) define domestic outsourcing as "as

firms or governmental entities located in the United States contracting with other firms or individuals located in the United States
for the provision of goods and services."
   26 A related paper is Abraham (1988).




                                                                16
third party employees wore a white badge while Amazon employees wore a blue badge. The expressed goal
of many white badge workers was to one day obtain the blue badge. Apart from earnings, there is not much
credible empirical evidence, to our knowledge, on the relationship between outsourcing and work condi-
tions. However, it remains a relevant question. Weil (2014) has noted that companies may sub-contract to
avoid labor standards.


2.2     Firm determinants: productivity, costs, and feasibility

Flexible Scheduling and Telework

In the traditional Rosen (1986) framework, whether a firm adopts flexible scheduling or telework will depend
on whether the benefits in terms of reduced wages outweigh the costs (in terms of potential lost productivity
or implementation costs). In this framework, workers with the highest willingness to pay for flexibility
should sort into jobs with employers who have the lowest cost of offering it. In equilibrium, the marginal
worker's benefit of the amenity will equal the marginal firm's cost.
      Mas and Pallais (2017) estimate the distribution of willingness to pay for certain non-wage amenities.
Even though the median worker in the study may not value a given amenity, like the ability to make their own
schedule, there are workers in the tail of each distribution that are willing to pay substantially. Combining
the valuation results in Mas and Pallais with the fraction of workers in flexible and work-from-home jobs
suggests that the marginal worker would be willing to pay 12 percent of wages for flexible scheduling and
21 percent for the option to work from home. These estimates suggest that the cost of implementing these
arrangements for the marginal firm are relatively high, which might help explain why flexible arrangements
are not more prevalent.
      Perhaps surprisingly, Bloom et al. (2015), the seminal experimental paper on telework and productivity,
finds that working from home increases productivity while decreasing capital costs. They conducted a RCT
among Chinese call center workers that requested and had the capacity to work from home. Those who were
assigned to work at home worked for 9 percent longer (due to taking fewer breaks), made 4 percent more
calls per minute, and had significantly less turnover. Bloom et al. (2015) find substantial cost savings (before
any changes in wages) from teleworking, two thirds of which came from reduced office space. Similarly,
Angelici and Profeta (2019) find that Italian workers randomized into having one day per week where they
telework and choose their schedule are more productive and take fewer leave days. Beckmann (2016) uses a
fixed-effect model to estimate the effects of self-managed work in German firms on productivity measures.
He finds that self-managed work, defined as "extensive control over the duration, position, and distribution



                                                      17
of their working hours," including "discretion over starting and finishing times, breaks, vacation days and
days off," increased productivity by 9 percent but had a negligible effect on profits. Similarly, using a fixed-
effect model, Linos (2019) finds that working from home increases productivity among US Patent Office
employees.
    If the marginal worker values telework or flexible schedules and the evidence suggests that they don't
decrease productivity, why don't more workers have these types of job flexibility? One answer is that the
productivity impacts of flexible work arrangements may vary across firms and job types. Allowing flexibility
may be more costly for firms when teamwork is important or monitoring workers is difficult. Indeed, in Ta-
ble 3 we see that workers with more flexible schedules or who work from home often are less likely to work
as part of a team, highlighting the role of coordination in determining work arrangements. Battiston et al.
(2017) finds that face-to-face communication is more efficient than electronic communication for emergency
room operators. In their setting, call handlers relay information about emergencies to location-specific radio
operators. Call time, the relevant measure of productivity, was shorter when both the call handler and the
radio operator were in the same room. Similarly, Lee et al. (2010) find that papers have more citations
(a measure of quality) when their authors work in the same building. Consistent with this, in a survey of
German managers, Beham et al. (2015) find that managers are less likely to say they would allow a hypo-
thetical worker to work from home when the worker's task involves teamwork. In-person communication
may work through productivity spillovers, such as those found between supermarket cashiers in Mas and
Moretti (2009) and other settings (Herbst and Mas, 2015). Monitoring workers may also be more difficult
when workers work remotely, particularly in jobs where workers have more discretion over tasks. Working
at home or a flexible schedule may allow workers to shirk or get distracted. Consistent with this, Frakes and
Wasserman (2016) find that patent examiners are much more likely to procrastinate reviews when they start
working from home.
    Alternatively, while an employee herself may be happier and more productive while teleworking, work-
ing from home may impose a negative externality on other employees, which may raise firms' wage bill
for other workers. Kossek and Van Dyne (2008) emphasize how one employee's work from home or at a
non-standard time can make group communication, problem-solving, and coordination more difficult for
their coworkers. Park (2017) finds that, by revealed preference, workers were willing to pay 4.5 percent
of their wage to work near a friend. In this study, workers in a Vietnamese seafood processing plant were
paid a piece rate, but they still chose to work near friends despite being less productive when doing so. One
worker working from home can also lead to an unraveling. If one person is out of the office, that can reduce
the benefit of being at work for another worker, who as a result may decide to stay home, and so on. Even


                                                      18
if most workers prefer to be in the office, through this unraveling all workers may end up at home. This
dynamic may be familiar to readers who have experienced academic departments where no one goes to the
office. Consistent with this externality mechanism, Linos (2019) finds that having more peers who can work
from home increases absenteeism and sick leave among co-workers ineligible for teleworking.
    If technological advances have decreased the marginal firm's costs of providing flexibility, we might
expect these amenities to become more common, but they largely have not. It is difficult to know the extent
to which the costs of offering flexibility has changed over the last 15 to 20 years, but several statistics suggest
that the cost has decreased. From 2000 to 2015, the fraction of households with a computer increased
from roughly 50 to 80 percent, while the fraction with internet increased from roughly 40 to 75 percent
(American Community Survey, 2018). In 2000, virtually no households (1 percent) had broadband internet
at home, while today virtually all household internet is high-speed (Pew Research Center, 2019). File-
sharing platforms developed over this period may have also made it easier to collaborate when working at a
non-standard time or place. Dropbox, which has over 125 million U.S. users, launched in 2008 (Dropbox,
2016), while Microsoft OneDrive and Google Drive launched in 2007 and 2012, respectively.
    However, it could be that these advances may have largely affected inframarginal jobs, jobs where tele-
working was already occurring, in which case we would not expect these declines to change the prevalence
of teleworking. The cost of offering flexible work arrangements may still be high for jobs requiring substan-
tial collaboration or interaction with customers or physical infrastructure. Moreover, in many jobs, working
from home is not technologically feasible. In the UAS, the median worker reports that only 6 percent of
their job could feasibly be done from home.27 Among workers who report they can do at least half of their
job from home, 58% do any work from home and 39% work from home at least once a week relatively to
15 percent and 10 percent of other workers, respectively.
    Outside of the simple Rosen framework, firms could choose not to offer flexible work arrangements if
they thought those arrangements would attract less hardworking or motivated workers. Worker motivation
may be hard to discern during the hiring process and some firms may want to portray their jobs as de-
manding to weed out less committed workers. However, Bloom et al. (2015) find that there is little overall
relationship between prior productivity (measured by the prior wages in a setting with high performance
pay) and willingness to work from home. Nevertheless, the workers in this experiment all selected into and
demonstrated their willingness to complete non-teleworking jobs beforehand.
   27 While we did not collect occupation data, we can link our data to occupations collected two years earlier for a subset of workers.

Workers in "computer and mathematical" and "business and financial operations" saying that they can do a majority of their work
from home while workers in "transportation and material moving," "installation, maintenance, and repair," and "food preparation
and serving" report that less than 5 percent of their work can be done from home.



                                                                  19
    The simple Rosen framework is also complicated by the fact that flexibility complements a production
process that relies on monitoring outputs rather than worker inputs, as discussed in Section 1. Amenities are
multi-dimensional and "positive" amenities may often be linked to "negative" amenities. The marginal firm
may be trading off a more productive flexible production process at higher costs for a more rigid process at
a lower cost, while the marginal worker may be contemplating trading off traditional schedules at lower pay
for more malleable and demanding schedules for higher pay. This suggests that the marginal cost of offering
more flexibility as a benefit may be even higher than above since the share of flexible jobs that are not offset
by higher overall workloads may be relatively small.


Flexible Staffing Arrangements and Outsourcing

A core issue in firm organization is the make-or-buy decision. In the labor market, firms can directly hire a
worker to perform a job, contract with another firm, hire independent contractors, or use "flexible staffing"
(temp workers).
    Firms may use flexible staffing to fill temporary positions that arise from short-term employee fluc-
tuations or temporary fluctuations in demand. In a 1996 survey, employers cited adjusting to unexpected
changes in demand or filling temporary vacancies as the most common reason for using flexible staffing
(Houseman, 2001). However, employers may also use flexible staffing to screen workers for regular jobs
(Autor, 2001) or to reduce wage costs by circumventing collective bargaining agreements.28
    Firms may contract work externally (using independent contractors or outsourcing to another firm) for
efficiency reasons. It may be more efficient to specialize in the firm's core activities ("focusing on com-
petencies") rather than hiring and managing workers in support activities. If output is volatile, firms may
not want to incur the costs of hiring and laying off regular workers. If these are the prime motivations for
outsourcing there may be limited negative impacts on wages. Contrary to this explanation, Abraham and
Taylor (1996) find that firms in more cyclical and seasonal industries are less likely to contract out janitorial
and machine maintenance workers. However, Abraham and Taylor (1996) note that firms with more volatile
output may redeploy workers to other activities during low demand periods, as found in Fay and Medoff
(1985). Unfortunately, there is a dearth of firm-level data, particularly recently, that can be used to better
understand how firms make these decisions.
    Firms may also contract out work to save on wages and benefits or reduce costs associated with working
conditions. Workers in support roles in high-wage firms may earn above-market wages either due to rent
  28 As Abraham and Taylor (1996) note, unions can affect the use of contract work in either direction since contract work may

reduce wage costs but could be harder to employ with union work rules that make it more difficult for employers to contract out. In
their paper, they found no systematic relationship between unionization and a firm's decision to contract out.


                                                               20
sharing or a desire for equity, while contract firms would not pay these workers such high wages. Contracting
out workers can allow firms to avoid paying fringe benefits or have these workers in the same benefits
pool. A monopsony explanation is that a firm can increase employment by hiring contract workers at their
marginal cost without raising wages on the regular workforce. By using contract workers, the firm equates
the marginal cost of a hire with the wage and hires the efficient number of workers. This can lead to a
situation where contract workers are paid more than regular workers, as is the case in the nursing industry
(Seo and Spetz, 2013). In this case, wages are higher not as compensation for a lack of benefits, but because
firms are moving up their labor supply curves.


2.3   Regulations and institutions

A strand of the alternative work arrangements literature has considered the distributional and welfare effects
of regulations prohibiting or compensating workers for bad working conditions. To the extent that frictions
or imperfect competition prevent non-wage amenities from being priced into wages (e.g., Hwang et al.,
1998; Lang and Majumdar, 2004; Sorkin, 2018), there may be a welfare-enhancing role for regulation to
compensate workers for negative amenities. Alternatively, regulation simply serve to protect workers and
promote worker wellbeing similar to minimum wage laws or safety regulations. We review a few of these
regulations below through a full accounting of work arrangement regulations is beyond the scope of this
review.


Overtime

Overtime regulation, requiring employers to pay some workers 1.5 times wages for weekly hours over 40, is
one of the most important labor market regulations in the United States. Theoretically, overtime regulations
could impact work hours, wages, and employment. In a conventional model of hours determination em-
ployers do not care about the hours of any particular worker, only total labor hours (Lewis, 1957, Pencavel,
2016). Given an offered wage, workers choose their preferred work hours. Overtime regulation should
discourage employers from allowing workers to work more than 40 hours per week, leading to a spike in
the hours distribution at 40 hours, which is observed in the data (Ehrenberg, 1971). Inconsistent with this
model, however, we observe overtime work, which may arise due to firm preferences over individual hours
worked (if firms don't view workers as perfect substitutes) or temporary increases in demand. Extensions of
the simple labor supply model allow firms to have preferences on individual hours worked, while firms and
workers negotiate on wage-hour bundles (Brechling, 1965; Lewis, 1969). Since workers will require higher
compensation to work more hours (e.g., Mas and Pallais, 2019), employers will pay higher wages for more

                                                     21
hours. This is consistent with collective bargaining agreements often including wage premia for overtime
work. However, in this class of models, overtime regulations may have limited effectiveness since employ-
ers can respond by reducing the base wage. Consistent with this, in a cross-sectional regression Trejo (1991)
finds that among Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)-eligible workers, overtime work is associated with lower
base pay, though not enough to fully offset the overtime premium.
     The key overtime policy question currently concerns which workers are exempt from overtime compen-
sation. The FLSA permits firms to exempt primarily white collar workers provided that their salary and
total annual compensation is above a certain threshold. Exempt workers are usually salaried employees,
who tend to work more hours than hourly workers, and have more flexibility in their jobs (see Section 1).
In 2016 the Obama administration promulgated a rule that would have substantially increased the exemp-
tion income threshold from $23,660, the level since 2004, to $47,476 per year. The Department of Labor
estimated that this change would affect 4.1 million workers in the year it was to be enacted and result in
a $1.3 billion transfer from employers to workers (U.S. Government, 2016). The rule did not ultimately
go into effect after being contested in the courts, but the Trump administration has proposed a new rule
that would set the threshold at $35,308 (U.S. Government, 2019). In a frictionless model, being subject
to overtime regulation would not affect workers' hours or total compensation. Employers would simply
reclassify salaried employees working over 40 hours per week as hourly workers and set wages such that
their overall income is unchanged. However, this may be infeasible if hours are hard to track, or if there are
other costs to reclassification.29 In that case employers can respond by either raising salaries or laying off
workers. The economics of the question are then similar to that of raising the minimum wage but at a higher
part of the income distribution. The cost-benefit analyses used by the Department of Labor to analyze these
regulations were based on numerous assumptions on these questions for which rigorous economic research
could provide better evidence. Answers to these questions would help analysts understand the welfare and
distributional effects of these policies.


Time and Day of Work

At the federal level in the U.S., there aren't regulations on time and days of work. However, in many
European countries, work is restricted on Sundays, evenings, and during summer months. Hamermesh
and Stancanelli (2015) estimate the incidence of night and weekend work in the U.S. would decline by 10
percent under European standards. An interesting question is why European countries regulate work days
and hours. These regulations may be done to align work hours to worker preferences in a situation where
  29 It   also begs the question why a firm cares to exempt workers if this classification is neutral on any outcome.


                                                                   22
there are market failures or to increase worker surplus. Mas and Pallais (2017) find that workers have a
strong preference for traditional work hours; in their sample of primarily female job applicants, workers are
willing to pay 14 percent of wages to avoid evening work and 19 percent of wages to avoid weekend work.
There may also be a coordination motive to time or day of work regulation if leisure of friends and family
are complements, as is likely the case (Alesina et al., 2006). This coordination may help explain why there
are more vacation days taken in Europe.30


Advance Scheduling

At the state and local level, a number of new laws, starting with San Francisco's Retail Employee's Bill of
Rights in 2015, provide workers more advanced schedule notice. The rule requires large retailers to post
workers' schedules two weeks in advance and pay additional wages if schedules are changed. Since then,
Oregon, New York City, Washington D.C., Chicago, Philadelphia, and Seattle among others have passed
similar ordinances which mainly affect large employers in retail, hospitality, and food service.31 These
ordinances may also require employers to give workers a certain number of hours between shifts and require
(as San Francisco's does) additional hours to be offered to part-time workers before hiring new workers or
engaging contractors or a staffing agency.
    The idea behind these laws is that learning schedules or having them changed on late notice may be
costly for workers juggling many obligations and lead to work-family conflict (as found by Henly and Lam-
bert, 2014).32 We are not aware of research on the impact of these laws on scheduling, worker wellbeing,
employment or wages. One open question is how much late-notice scheduling can smooth employers' de-
mand or labor supply shocks. If last-minute scheduling brings employers limited benefits but is costly for
workers, another open question is what frictions may lead firms to engage in last-minute scheduling instead
of lowering wages.33
  30 Despite  the lack of regulation in the U.S., market forces have changed the work hour distribution. The rate of night work for
men (defined as being at work at 3 am), has declined from 8 percent in 1973 (Hamermesh, 1999) to 4 percent in 2018 (authors'
calculation from 2018 ATUS). Hamermesh (1999) shows that, at least until 1991, this decline could not be explained by industrial or
demographic shifts and was largest for top quartile wage earners workers. He argues that the changes are consistent with nightwork
as a disamenity (which Mas and Pallais, 2017, confirm and quantify) and workers shifting out of nightwork with rising real wages.
   31 At the same time, at least seven states including Georgia, Michigan, and Ohio passed laws prohibiting municipalities from

enacting these ordinances.
   32 Mas and Pallais (2017) find that workers have similar valuations for non-standard schedules that are consistent from week-to-

week and non-standard schedules that are only revealed a week in advance. However, workers may find learning their schedules on
shorter notice more difficult.
   33 Of course, firms paying minimum wage can't lower wages. Moreover, minimum wage laws could lead to reduced amenities

such as advanced scheduling if it leads firms to provide a higher fraction of compensation through wages.




                                                               23
Independent contractor classification

There is an active debate about which workers can legally be classified as independent contractors as op-
posed to regular employees. Companies may have an incentive to classify workers as independent contrac-
tors to circumvent workplace regulations or avoid paying minimum wage rates, paying unemployment and
workers' compensation taxes, providing fringe benefits, or withholding income.
    Federally, Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and Department of Labor tests for whether a worker can be
classified as an independent contractor involve permanence and the amount of control a company has over a
worker. The more control a company has over how, when, and where a worker's job is performed, the more
likely she is to be classified as a regular worker. However, there is evidence that there is widespread mis-
classification of regular workers as independent contractors (Leberstein, 2012). Several states have adopted
or proposed adopting more stringent rules for independent contractor classification. For example, a recent
law in California, California AB 5, establishes what's known as an "ABC" test for classification. A worker
can only be classified as an independent contractor if she is free from the company's control, doing work
that is not central to the company's business, and has an independent business in that industry. This test is
far more stringent than the IRS rules, and analysts expect it will require classifying gig economy workers to
regular employment status unless companies receive exemptions (Wiley and Bollag, 2019).
    An interesting question is how such reclassification from independent contractor to regular employee
affects wages, access to benefits, labor supply and job satisfaction. A regular employee will have access
to more benefits than an independent contractor, but the resulting increased value of employment may be
offset by lower wages, as in the Summers (1989) model of mandated benefits. In the Summers model, wages
decline by the degree to which workers value the benefits. However, if workers value benefits less than the
cost of provision or if downward wage rigidity prevents wages from adjusting downward, reclassification
results in lower employment and welfare loss. We are unaware of causal evidence on these issues. In the
2015 RAND-Princeton Contingent Worker Survey, Katz and Krueger (2019) document that independent
contractors earn higher wages than traditional employees controlling for occupation. However, independent
contractors work fewer hours and have lower weekly earnings. As they suggest, this wage premium might
be a compensating differential for lower benefits and the need to pay self-employment taxes, but it may also
reflect unobserved characteristics.
    Enforcing a minimum wage for reclassified workers presents some challenges. Freelancers are often
hired in this category because it is easier to monitor their output than time inputs. One possibility is to hire
reclassified workers as salaried workers, who are exempt from the minimum wage. However, this requires



                                                      24
compensation to exceed the federally mandated salary threshold, effectively requiring a worker to work
exclusively for one company. An alternative would be to define a work schedule over which hourly wages
can be computed, though whether this is feasible depends on the nature of the work.
      To appreciate the difficulties that arise when regulating a minimum wage in the gig economy consider
the ridesharing industry, where drivers are only paid while they have a passenger, not when they waiting
for a fare. Ignoring gas and car expenses, the hourly wage of a driver is the hourly customer cost*driver's
share*utilization, where utilization is the fraction of an hour the driver has a passenger. The highly elastic
labor supply for ride-share drivers suggests that, at least in the long run, the wage is anchored at workers'
outside option in equilibrium.34 A minimum wage therefore cannot be regulated through the fare or driver's
share since utilization is endogenous and the number of drivers can adjust to the bring the wage back to the
outside option. Maintaining a minimum wage in markets where the alternative wage is below the minimum
would require restricting driver entry.35 One option would be to require companies to specify shifts over
which drivers would be guaranteed a minimum income. This would require companies to forecast demand
over time and space and change their business model to require drivers to pick up passengers. An alternative
approach would be to directly regulate utilization. For example, rideshare companies could be required to
have their cars occupied at least 70 percent of the time that their apps are turned on. This requirement,
combined with appropriately set fares and drivers' shares would guarantee workers a minimum wage. In
either case, the likely result of these policies would be a shift towards more full-time drivers on predeter-
mined schedules and away from drivers working occasional hours. The policy would benefit drivers already
working full-time, but driver surplus of the kind documented in Chen et al. (forthcoming) would be lost
from eliminating the flexible nature of the work.



3      Conclusion

This article starts by laying out a few facts about alternative work arrangements. Alternative work arrange-
ments are heterogeneous and widespread, such that most jobs have some nontraditional feature. Neverthe-
less, work arrangements have been relatively stable over the past 20 years while new, electronically-mediated
gig jobs remain quite limited. In other words, the traditional job is certainly not dead. Work conditions vary
substantially by education, with college-educated workers much more likely to have schedule or location
flexibility but also more likely to work long hours. While these types of flexibility are often considered
family-friendly, in practice, flexible jobs come with both more freedom and more responsibility. Workers
    34 Rideshare  drivers' outside option may be home production or leisure, whose value may be below the minimum wage.
    35 For   example, in New York City, Uber and Lyft halted hiring new drivers after the city imposed a minimum wage [Keck, 2019].


                                                                  25
find these jobs more stressful and less-family friendly. This may explain why women are not more likely to
have schedule or location flexibility but are more likely to work shorter hours or part-time.
   The alternative work arrangements literature has tackled a number of questions. On the worker side, pa-
pers have estimated workers' valuations of different conditions and the impact of arrangements on workers'
careers. On the firm side, the literature has evaluated the productivity impacts of alternative arrangements
and why firms might use outsourcing or flexible staffing. However, it is still an open question how worker
preferences and firm production functions combine with market frictions to determine equilibrium work
arrangements. The Rosen (1986) model remains seminal, but empirical work has had difficulty identifying
the compensating wage differentials it implies. Several papers (e.g., Hwang et al., 1998; Lang and Majum-
dar, 2004; Bonhomme and Jolivet, 2009) have proposed alternatives, showing how frictions can explain the
lack of compensating differentials. Understanding how work conditions are determined is crucial to answer-
ing the key public policy questions over these arrangements. It could inform what the relevant alternatives
are for workers and firms, whether workers are compensated for negative amenities, and if they aren't,
why not. This would shed light on whether regulations forcing firms to restrict or compensate workers
for arrangements (such as long hours, weekend work, or independent contracting) and initiatives promot-
ing positive arrangements (such as telecommuting or flexible scheduling) would be welfare-enhancing or
market-distorting.




References
John M. Abowd and Orley C. Ashenfelter. Anticipated unemployment, temporary layoffs, and compensating
  wage differentials. In Studies in Labor Markets. University of Chicago Press, 1981.

Katharine G Abraham. Flexible staffing arrangements and employers' short-term adjustment strategies,
  1988.

Katharine G Abraham and Susan K Taylor. Firms' use of outside contractors: Theory and evidence. Journal
  of Labor Economics, 14(3):394­424, 1996.

Katharine G. Abraham, John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James R. Spletzer. Measuring the gig
  economy: Current knowledge and open issues. Technical Report Working Paper 24950, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, 2018.

Adrian Adermon and Lena Hensvik. Gig-jobs: Stepping stones or dead ends? IFAU working paper, 2019.

Joseph E. Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi. The value of a statistical life: A critical review of market estimates
  throughout the world. The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1):5­76, 2003.

Alberto F. Alesina, Edward L. Glaseser, and Bruce Sacerdote. Work and leisure in the u.s. and europe. In
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.

                                                     26
Reports American Community Survey.        Computer and internet use in the united
  states:   2016.       Technical Report 39,   U.S. Census Bureau,     August 2018.
  https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2018/acs/ACS-39.pdf.
Marta Angelici and Paola Profeta. Smart-working: Does job flexibility work? Technical report, Bocconi
 University, 2019.

Joshua D Angrist, Sydnee Caldwell, and Jonathan V Hall. Uber vs. taxi: A driver's eye view. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

David H Autor. Why do temporary help firms provide free general skills training? The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 116(4):1409­1448, 2001.

David H. Autor and Susan N. Houseman. Do temporary-help jobs improve labor market outcomes for low-
  skilled workers? evidence from "work first". American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3):
  96­128, 2010.

Diego Battiston, Jordi Blanes i Vidal, and Tom Kirchmaier. Is distance dead? face-to-face communication
  and productivity in teams. 2017.

Michael Beckmann. Working time autonomy as management practice. IZA World of Labor, (230):1­10,
 2016.

Barbara Beham, Andreas Baierl, and Steven Poelmans. Managerial telework allowance decisions - a vignette
  study among german managers. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 26(11):1385­
  1406, 2015.

Annette Bernhardt, Rosemary Batt, Susan N Houseman, and Eileen Appelbaum. Domestic outsourcing in
  the united states: a research agenda to assess trends and effects on job quality. 2016.

Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn. Female labor supply: Why is the us falling behind? American
  Economic Review, 103(3):251­56, 2013.

Francine D Blau and Lawrence M Kahn. The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations. Journal
  of Economic Literature, 55(3):789­865, 2017.

Nicholas Bloom, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying. Does working from home work?
  evidence from a chinese experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015.

Stephane Bonhomme and Gregory Jolivet. The pervasive absence of compensating differentials. Journal of
  Applied Econometrics, 24(5):763­795, 2009.

F. P. R. Brechling. The relationship between output and employment in british manufacturing industries.
   Review of Economic Studies, 32(3):187­216, 1965.

Charles Brown. Equalizing differences in the labor market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94(1):
  113­134, 1980.

Alex Bryson and George MacKerron. Are you happy while you work?           Economic Journal, 127(599):
  106­25, 2016.

David Card, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west german wage
  inequality. The Quarterly journal of economics, 128(3):967­1015, 2013.


                                                  27
Keith M. Chen, Judith A. Chevalier, Peter E. Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen. The value of flexible work: Evi-
  dence from uber drivers. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

New York City Government.             Regulation and prosperity:          1935 - 1960.
  http://www.nyc.gov/html/media/totweb/taxioftomorrowh istoryr egulationand prosperity.html , 2019.
Brett Collins, Andrew Garin, Emilie Jackson, Dmitri Koustas, and Mark Payne. Is gig work replacing
  traditional employment? evidence from two decades of tax returns. Technical report, SOI Working Paper,
  2019.

Patricia Cortes and Jessica Pan. Cross-country evidence on the relationship between overwork and skilled
  women's job choices. American Economic Review, 107(5):105­09, 2017.

Matthew Dey, Susan Houseman, and Anne Polivka. What do we know about contracting out in the united
 states? evidence from household and establishment surveys. In Labor in the new economy, pages 267­
 304. University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Dropbox.         Celebrating half   a   billion users.                       Blog,      March     2016.
  https://blog.dropbox.com/topics/company/500-million.
Arindrajit Dube and Ethan Kaplan. Does outsourcing reduce wages in the low-wage service occupations?
  evidence from janitors and guards. ILR Review, 63(2):287­306, 2010.

Ronald G. Ehrenberg. The impact of the overtime premium on employment and hours in u.s. industry.
  Economic Inquiry, 9(2):199­207, 1971.

Kimberly D. Elsbach, Dan M. Cable, and Jeffrey W. Sherman. How passive 'face time' afffects perceptions
  of employees: Evidence of spontaneous trait inference. Human Relations, 63(6):735­60, 2010.

Tor Eriksson and Nicolai Kristensen. Wages or fringes? some evidence on trade-offs and sorting. Journal
  of Labor Economics, 32(4):899­928, 2014.

Diana Farrell and Fiona Greig. The online platform economy: What is the growth trajectory?
  https://www.jpmorganchase.com/corporate/institute/institute-insights.htm, March 2016.

Jon A Fay and James L Medoff. Labor and output over the business cycle: Some direct evidence. American
  Economic Review, 75(4):638­655, 1985.

Michael D Frakes and Melissa F Wasserman. Procrastination in the workplace: Evidence from the us patent
 office. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2016.

Emily Geundelsberger. On the Clock: What Low-Wage Work Did to Me and How It Drives America Insane.
 Little, Brown and Company, 2019.

Lonnie Golden. Flexible work schedules: Which workers get them? American Behavioral Scientist, 44(7):
  1157­1178, 2001.

Lonnie Golden, Julia R. Henly, and Susan Lambert. Work schedule flexibility: A contributor to happiness?
  Journal of Social Research and Policy, 4(2):107­34, 2013.

Claudia Goldin. A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic Review, 104(4):1091­
  1119, 2014.



                                                  28
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F Katz. The cost of workplace flexibility for high-powered professionals. The
  Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 638(1):45­67, 2011.

Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F Katz. A most egalitarian profession: pharmacy and the evolution of a
  family-friendly occupation. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(3):705­746, 2016.

Deborah Goldschmidt and Johannes F. Schmieder. The rise of domestic outsourcing and the evolution of
  the german wage structure. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1165­1217, 2017.

Jonathan V. Hall and Alan B. Krueger. An analysis of the labor market for uber's driver-partners in the
  united states. ILR Review, 71(3):705­32, 2017.

Jonathan V Hall, John J Horton, and Daniel T Knoepfle. Labor market equilibration: Evidence from uber.
  URL http://john-joseph-horton. com/papers/uber_price. pdf, working paper, 2017.

Daniel S Hamermesh. The timing of work over time. The Economic Journal, 109(452):37­66, 1999.

Daniel S Hamermesh and Elena Stancanelli. Long workweeks and strange hours. ILR Review, 68(5):1007­
  1018, 2015.

Elizabeth Weber Handwerker. Increased concentration of occupations, outsourcing, and growing wage
  inequality in the united states. Technical report, BLS Working Paper. Washington, DC: Bureau of Labor
  Statistics, 2015.

Haoran He, David Neumark, and Qian Weng. Do workers value flexible jobs? a field experiment on
  compensating differentials. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Julia R Henly and Susan J Lambert. Unpredictable work timing in retail jobs: Implications for employee
  work­life conflict. ILR Review, 67(3):986­1016, 2014.

Daniel J. Herbst and Alexandre Mas. Peer effects on worker output in the laboratory generalize to the field.
  Science, 350(6260):545­9, 2015.

Barry T Hirsch. Why do part-time workers earn less? the role of worker and job skills. ILR Review, 58(4):
  525­551, 2005.

Susan N Houseman. Why employers use flexible staffing arrangements: Evidence from an establishment
  survey. ILR Review, 55(1):149­170, 2001.

Hae-shin Hwang, Dale T Mortensen, and W Robert Reed. Hedonic wages and labor market search. Journal
  of Labor Economics, 16(4):815­847, 1998.

Emilie Jackson.Availability of the gig economy and long run labor supply effects for the unemployed.
 Technical report, Stanford University, 2019.

Emilie Jackson, Adam Looney, and Shanthi Ramnath. The rise of alternative work arrangements: Evidence
 and implications for tax filing and benefit coverage. Office of Tax Analysis Working Paper, 114, 2017.

Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger. Understanding trends in alternative work arrangements in the united
  states. Technical Report Working Paper 25425, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Supreet Kaur, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. Self-control at work. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 123(6):1227­1277, 2015.


                                                    29
Catie Keck. Uber and lyft cut off hiring of new drivers in nyc as new regulations appear to work.
  https://gizmodo.com/uber-and-lyft-cut-off-hiring-of-new-drivers-in-nyc-as-n-1834417266, April 2019.

Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard. Children and gender inequality: Evidence from
  denmark. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(4):181­209, 2019.

Ellen Ernst Kossek and Linn Van Dyne. Face-time matters: A cross-level model of how work-life flexibility
  influences work performance of individuals and groups. In Handbook of work-family integration, pages
  305­330. Elsevier, 2008.

Dmitri Koustas. Consumption insurance and multiple jobs: Evidence from rideshare drivers. Technical
 report, 2018.

Dmitri Koustas. What do big data tell us about why people take gig economy jobs? AEA Papers and
 Proceedings, 109:367­371, 2019.

Peter Kuhn and Fernando Lozano. The expanding workweek? understanding trends in long work hours
  among us men, 1979­2006. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(2):311­343, 2008.

Lynne Lamberg. Impact of long working hours explored. JAMA, 292(1):25­26, 2004.

Susan J Lambert and Julia R Henly. Frontline managers matter: Labour flexibility practices and sustained
  employment in us retail jobs. Are bad jobs inevitable, pages 143­159, 2012.

Kevin Lang and Sumon Majumdar. The pricing of job characteristics when markets do not clear: Theory
  and policy implications. International Economic Review, 45(4):1111­28, 2004.

Sarah Leberstein. Independent contractor misclassification imposes huge costs on workers and federal and
  state treasuries. Technical report, NELP, 2012.

Kyungjoon Lee, John S Brownstein, Richard G Mills, and Isaac S Kohane. Does collocation inform the
  impact of collaboration? PloS one, 5(12):e14279, 2010.

H Gregg Lewis. Hours of work and hours of leisure. In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Meeting, pages
  196­206. Industrial Relations Research Association, 1957.

H Gregg Lewis. Interes del empleador en las horas de trabajo del empleado. Cuadernos de Economia, 6
  (18):38­54, 1969.

Elizabeth Linos. When working from home changes work at the office: Measuring the impact of teleworking
  on organizations, 2019. Working Paper.

Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J Mullen, David Powell, Till Von Wachter, and Jeffrey B Wenger. The value of
  working conditions in the united states and implications for the structure of wages. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Alexandre Mas and Enrico Moretti. Peers at work. American Economic Review, 99(1):112­45, 2009.

Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais. Valuing alternative work arrangements. American Economic Review,
  107(12):3722­59, 2017.

Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais. Labor supply and the value of non-work time: Experimental estimates
  from the field. American Economic Review: Insights, 2019.


                                                   30
Elaine McCrate. Flexible hours, workplace authority, and compensating wage differentials in the us. Femi-
  nist Economics, 11(1):11­39, 2005.

Gerald S Oettinger. The incidence and wage consequences of home-based work in the united states, 1980­
  2000. Journal of Human Resources, 46(2):237­260, 2011.

Claudia Olivetti and Barbara Petrongolo. The economic consequences of family policies: Lessons from a
  century of legislation in high-income countries. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(1):205­30, 2017.

Amanda Pallais. Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets. American Economic Review, 104(11):3565­
 99, 2014.

Sangyoon Park. When peers count : Evidence from randomized peer assignments in the workplace. 2017.

John Pencavel. Whose preferences are revealed in hours of work? Economic Inquiry, 54(1):9­24, 2016.

Technology Pew Research Center. Internet/broadband fact sheet. Technical report, Pew Research Center,
  June 2019. https://pewresearch-org-preprod.go-vip.co/pewinternet/fact-sheet/internet-broadband/.

Anne E. Polivka. Contingent and alternative work arrangements, defined. Monthly Labor Review, 119(10):
  3­9, 1996.

Sherwin Rosen. The theory of equalizing differences. In O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, editors, Handbook
  of Labor Economics, volume 1, chapter 12, pages 641­692. Elsevier, 1 edition, 1986.

Daniel Schneider and Kristen Harknett. Consequences of routine work-schedule instability for worker health
  and well-being. American Sociological Review, 84(1):82­114, 2019.

Sukyong Seo and Joanne Spetz. Demand for temporary agency nurses and nursing shortages. INQUIRY:
  The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 50(3):216­228, 2013.

Donald Siegel and Zvi Griliches. Purchased services, outsourcing, computers, and productivity in manu-
  facturing. In Output measurement in the service sectors, pages 429­460. University of Chicago Press,
  1992.

Jae Song, David J Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till Von Wachter. Firming up inequality. The
  Quarterly journal of economics, 134(1):1­50, 2018.

Isaac Sorkin. Ranking firms using revealed preference. The quarterly journal of economics, 133(3):1331­
   1393, 2018.

Lawrence H Summers. Some simple economics of mandated benefits. The American Economic Review, 79
  (2):177­183, 1989.

Teck Yong Tan. The extrinsic motivation of freedom at work. Job Market Paper, 2017.

Stephen J. Trejo. The effects of overtime pay regulation on worker compensation. American Economic
  Review, 81(4):719­740, 1991.

Federal Government U.S. Rules and regulations. Technical Report 99, 2016.

Federal Government U.S. Proposed rules. Technical Report 56, 2019.

David Weil. The Fissured Workplace: Why Work Became So Bad for So Many and What Can Be Done to
  Improve It. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2014.

                                                   31
Hannah Wiley and Sophia Bollag. Late lobbying is fast and furious as california lawmakers decide who's
  an employee. 2019.

Matthew Wiswall and Basit Zafar. Preference for the workplace, investment in human capital, and gender.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1):457­507, 2017.




                                                  32
                                                        Table 1: Relationship between Alternative Work Arrangements and Education and Gender

                                              (1)          (2)             (3)                 (4)                 (5)              (6)           (7)            (8)
                                           Flexible       WFH                                                                                                  Sched
                                          Schedule        Often      Formal WFH         Regular Perm        Self-Employed        Salaried     Irregular     TwoWeeks
                                            (GSS)        (GSS)          (UAS)              (GSS)                 (GSS)           (ATUS)         (GSS)         (UAS)
       College or More (Yes = 1)          0.135         0.284          0.131              0.083                   0.005          0.420           0.010       -0.203
                                           (0.032)       (0.020)        (0.020)            (0.019)              (0.008)           (0.013)      (0.017)        (0.025)
       Some College (Yes = 1)                0.041      0.089            0.030             0.059                  0.002          0.085           0.011         -0.037
                                           (0.033)       (0.021)        (0.021)            (0.020)              (0.009)           (0.014)      (0.018)        (0.027)
       Female (Yes = 1)                   -0.091        -0.048           0.011             0.048               -0.043           -0.058          -0.017         -0.026
                                           (0.027)       (0.017)        (0.017)            (0.016)              (0.007)           (0.011)      (0.014)        (0.022)
       Weighted Mean                         0.324        0.263          0.139              0.804                 0.105            0.420         0.143         0.279
       Observations                          1180         2502           1663               2493                  7471             6348          2502           1663
       Standard errors in parentheses
         p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

    Table 1: This table reports OLS coe cients and standard errors on the eect of college competition, some college completion, and being female on certain alternative
    work arrangements. The dependent variable in Column (1) is the probability of having a flexible schedule. The dependent variable in Column (2) is the probability
    of working from home often. The dependent variable in Column (3) is the probability of having a formal work from home arrangement. The dependent variable in
    Column (4) is the probability of being a regular/permanent employee. The dependent variable in Column (5) is the probability of being self-employed. The dependent
    variable in Column (6) is the probability of being salaried. The dependent variable in Column (7) is the probability of having an irregular shift. The dependent variable
    in Column (8) is the probability of knowing one's schedule two weeks or less ahead of time. The table reports weighted means and number of observations. All models
    include age, the quadratic of age, and population weights. The sample is restricted to the employed between the ages of 18-65. These estimates use the 2011 Leave
    Module of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), the 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018 waves of the General Social Survey (GSS), and the Understanding America Survey
    (UAS).
1




                                                                                                     33
                                                            Table 2: Relationship between Hours/Work Intensity and Education and Gender

                                              (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)                   (9)
                                         Usual Work                         Long          Late      Days Extra       Mandatory                    Work Interferes         Able to
                                             Hours        Part-Time         hours         Work          Hours        Extra Days      Stressful     with Family         Work Part-Time
                                           (ATUS)          (ATUS)         (ATUS)        (ATUS)         (GSS)            (GSS)         (GSS)           (GSS)                (UAS)
        College or More (Yes = 1)          2.789          -0.075          0.114         0.149         2.016            -0.044        0.082           0.115                   0.001
                                            (0.342)         (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.013)      (0.360)          (0.021)        (0.017)         (0.020)              (0.070)
        Some College (Yes = 1)            1.206             -0.025        0.047         0.068           -0.320          -0.001         0.013         0.056                  -0.086
                                            (0.363)         (0.011)        (0.012)       (0.014)       (0.378)         (0.023)        (0.018)         (0.021)              (0.073)
        Female (Yes = 1)                  -5.948           0.154         -0.166        -0.069        -1.807           -0.089          0.028         -0.060                0.287
                                            (0.289)         (0.009)        (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.301)         (0.018)        (0.014)         (0.016)              (0.059)
        Weighted Mean                       40.449           0.200          0.223         0.346         5.727            0.278         0.329           0.455                0.360
        Observations                         6645            7032           7032          7032           2472            2486          4454            3592                   246
        Standard errors in parentheses
         p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

     Table 2: This table reports OLS coe cients and standard errors on the eect of college competition, some college completion, and being female on certain alternative work arrangements.
     The dependent variable in Column (1) is the number of hours an individual reports usually working. The dependent variable in Column (2) is the probability of being a part-time employee.
     The dependent variable in Column (3) is the probability that an individual works long hours, defined by working more than 45 hours a week. The dependent variable in Column (4) is the
     probability of reporting working late. The dependent variable in Column (5) is the number of days where extra hours are required. The dependent variable in Column (6) is the probability
     of working a job where extra hours are required. The dependent variable in Column (7) is the probability of reporting working a stressful job. The dependent variable in Column (8) is
     the probability of reporting that work interferes with family. The dependent variable in Column (9) is the probability being able to work part-time. The table reports weighted means and
     number of observations. All models include age, the quadratic of age, and population weights. The sample is restricted to the employed between the ages of 18-65. These estimates use the
     2011 Leave Module of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), the 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018 waves of the General Social Survey (GSS), and the Understanding America Survey (UAS).




34
                                             Table 3: Flexible Work Arrangements and Work Intensity Outcomes



                                             (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)           (5)              (6)              (7)
                                           Job is       Job Interferes       Days with       Freedom       Team Work        Long Hours       Late Work
                                          Stressful      with Family        Extra Hours
                                           (GSS)            (GSS)             (GSS)            (GSS)          (GSS)           (ATUS)           (ATUS)


     Panel A: Work From Home Often


         Work From Home Often              0.054           0.203              2.622           0.166           0.088           0.121            0.336
                                           (0.022)          (0.023)            (0.358)         (0.024)        (0.024)          (0.019)          (0.022)
              Weighted Mean                 0.329            0.455              5.727           0.546          0.554            0.223            0.346
               Observations                 4456             3593               2473            2498           2492             7032             7032


     Panel B: Flexible Schedule


             Flexible Schedule              0.042            0.040              0.723         0.351           0.132             0.007          0.074
                                           (0.029)          (0.032)            (0.485)        (0.030)         (0.032)          (0.010)          (0.012)
              Weighted Mean                 0.329            0.455              5.727          0.546           0.554            0.223            0.346
3




               Observations                 4456             3593               2473            2498           2492             7032             7032


     Panel C: Part-Time


                 Part-Time                 0.126            0.107              3.150           0.036          0.114            0.229           0.091
                                           (0.019)          (0.023)            (0.417)        (0.028)         (0.028)          (0.012)         (0.015)
              Weighted Mean                 0.329            0.455              5.727          0.546           0.554            0.223           0.346
               Observations                 4456             3593               2473           2498            2492             7032            7032



      Standard errors in parentheses
       (p < 0.05),  (p < 0.01),    (p < 0.001)
    Table 3: Panel A reports OLS coe cients and standard errors on the eect of working from home often on certain job characteristics. Panel B reports
    OLS coe cients and standard errors on the eect of having a flexible schedule on certain job characteristics. Panel C reports OLS coe cients and
    standard errors on the eect of working part-time on certain job characteristics. The dependent variable in Column (1) is the probability of reporting
    one's job as stressful. The dependent variable in Column (2) is the probability of reporting that work interferes with family. The dependent variable in
    Column (3) is the number of days that require extra hours. The dependent variable in Column (4) is the probability of reporting having the freedom
    to decide how to do one's job. The dependent variable in Column (5) is the probability than an individual reports working on a team. The dependent
    variable in Column (6) is the probability that an individual works long hours, defined as working more than 45 hours a week. The dependent variable in
    Column (7) is the probability of reporting working late. The table reports weighted means and number of observations. All models include an indicator
    for college completion, an indicator for some college completion, an indicator for being female, age, the quadratic of age, and population weights. The
    sample is restricted to the employed between the ages of 18-65. These estimates use the 2011 Leave Module of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS)
    and the 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018 waves of the General Social Survey (GSS).

                                                                              35
