                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WHO BEARS THE WELFARE COSTS OF MONOPOLY? THE CASE OF THE CREDIT
                           CARD INDUSTRY

                                       Kyle F. Herkenhoff
                                   Gajendran Raveendranathan

                                       Working Paper 26604
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26604


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank Matteo Benetton, Satyajit Chatterjee, Dean Corbae, Kyle Dempsey, Pablo D'Erasmo,
Bob Hunt, Igor Livshits, Daniel Grodzicki, Aubhik Khan, Jaromir Nosal, Ned Prescott, Larry
Santucci, Jim Schmitz, Julia Thomas, and Toni Whited for helpful comments. We thank seminar
participants at the Cleveland Fed, Philadelphia Fed, NBER-Household Finance, Minneapolis Fed,
McMaster University, MIT Sloan, Notre Dame, Ohio State University, Queen's University,
Stanford-SITE, University of Toronto, and the University of Saskatchewan. We thank Jacob
Adenbaum for excellent research assistance. The authors thank the National Science Foundation
(Award No. 1824422) and Washington Center for Equitable Growth for funding. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.¸¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kyle F. Herkenhoff and Gajendran Raveendranathan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Bears the Welfare Costs of Monopoly? The Case of the Credit Card Industry
Kyle F. Herkenhoff and Gajendran Raveendranathan
NBER Working Paper No. 26604
January 2020
JEL No. D14,D43,D60,E21,E44,G21

                                           ABSTRACT

How are the welfare costs from monopoly distributed across U.S. households? We answer this
question for the U.S. credit card industry, which is highly concentrated, charges interest rates that
are 3.4 to 8.8 percentage points above perfectly competitive pricing, and has repeatedly lost
antitrust lawsuits. We depart from existing competitive models by integrating oligopolistic
lenders into a heterogeneous agent, defaultable debt framework. Our model accounts for 20 to 50
percent of the spreads observed in the data. Welfare gains from competitive reforms in the 1970s
are equivalent to a one-time transfer worth between 0.24 and 1.66 percent of GDP. Along the
transition path, 93 percent of individuals are better off. Poor households benefit from increased
consumption smoothing, while rich households benefit from higher general equilibrium interest
rates on savings. Transitioning from 1970 to 2016 levels of competition yields welfare gains
equivalent to a one-time transfer worth between 1.87 and 3.20 percent of GDP. Lastly,
homogeneous interest rate caps in 2016 deliver limited welfare gains.


Kyle F. Herkenhoff
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and IZA
kyle.herkenhoff@gmail.com

Gajendran Raveendranathan
Department of Economics
MacMaster University
1280 Main Street West
Hamilton Ontario L8S 4M4
Canada
raveeg1@mcmaster.ca
1    Introduction
The long standing view that the dead weight losses from monopoly are small, e.g., Harberger (1954)'s
study of American manufacturing in the 1920s, has been refuted repeatedly (see a summary of arguments
by Schmitz (2012)). Recent work by Schmitz (2016) argues that across a number of industries, the costs
of monopoly are large and disproportionately borne by low-income households. We contribute to this
literature by integrating oligopolistic lenders into a Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari framework with default
and quantifying the distribution of welfare losses resulting from non-competitive behavior in the credit
card industry. We find that both low-income households and high-income households suffer significant
welfare losses from monopolistic credit card pricing. We study policies that have recently been discussed
in the context of mitigating credit market power, and find that a homogeneous cap on lender spreads
delivers a small fraction of the gains from competitive pricing.
    The U.S. credit card industry is highly concentrated, generates excess profits, and charges interest
rates that are 3.4 to 8.8 percentage points above competitive pricing. The Justice Department, Federal
Trade Commission, and private parties have repeatedly won antitrust lawsuits against the U.S. credit
card industry. To measure the welfare consequences of competitive reforms in the credit card indus-
try, we depart from existing consumer credit models, which typically assume competitive, zero-profit
lenders (e.g., Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt (2007, 2010) and Chatterjee, Corbae, Nakajima, and Ríos-Rull
(2007)), and develop a model with a finite number of credit card banks that imperfectly compete to issue
non-exclusive credit lines.
    We use our framework to measure the distributional consequences of changes in credit market power
between 1970 and 2016. During this time period, several landmark competitive reforms, including the
abolition of exclusivity rules and the 1978 Marquette decision, generated higher inter-regional compe-
tition among lenders. We model these reforms in two ways: increased lender entry and competitive
pricing. These two exercises provide benchmark estimates and upper bounds, respectively, on the wel-
fare gains that arise from eliminating credit market power. In the 1970s we do not allow lenders to
price discriminate, which is consistent with existing empirical evidence. The welfare gains from adding
another lender in the 1970s are equivalent to a one-time transfer worth 0.24 to 0.38 percent of GDP, de-
pending on the way the lenders compete. Gains from perfectly competitive credit card pricing in the
1970s are equivalent to a one-time transfer worth 1.66 percent of GDP to U.S. consumers. During the
transition from a monopoly to a duopoly, 93 to 96 percent of individuals alive at the time of the transi-
tion are better off. We find that the poorest U.S. households gain from better consumption smoothing,
whereas the richest households gain from greater interest rates on savings due to general equilibrium
effects.
    To capture credit scoring and other technological innovations in the 1980s and 1990s, we allow
lenders to price discriminate by earnings when we consider the transition path from 1970 to 2016 levels
of competition. We find that transitioning from 1970 to 2016 levels of competition yields welfare gains
equivalent to a one-time transfer worth 1.87 percent of GDP, whereas transitioning to competitive pric-
ing yields a welfare gain worth 3.20 percent of GDP. Despite significant gains from perfectly competitive


                                                    1
pricing by lenders, household earnings heterogeneity limits the ability of interest rate caps to deliver
those gains. Our estimated model implies that no homogeneous cap on lender spreads can simultane-
ously make high- and low-income individuals better off in 2016. In particular, caps on lender spreads
that are too tight hurt low-income households the most because lenders tighten credit limits.
   We begin by documenting several features of the U.S. credit card industry. First, the credit card
market has been concentrated from its inception to the present. During the 1960s and 1970s, the founding
banks of Visa, Mastercard, and American Express enjoyed limited regional competition, colluded on
prices (Knittel and Stango (2003)), and did not pass through declining costs of funds to individuals
(Ausubel (1991) and Grodzicki (2019)). By 2016, nine credit card issuers, such as Citigroup, JP Morgan,
Capital One, and Bank of America, accounted for 86 percent of outstanding revolving credit. Second,
even after adjusting for rewards programs and other credit card fees, credit card issuers charge interest
rates that are, on average, 3.4 to 8.8 percentage points above an interest rate that would yield zero profits.
We refer to these large spreads as excess spreads. A consequence of these excess spreads is abnormal
profits. Following Ausubel (1991) and Grodzicki (2019), we show that the average rate of return on assets
for the largest 25 credit card banks is 6.2 percentage points higher than that of the banking industry as a
whole between 1990 and 2018.1 Third, the credit card industry has been the subject of numerous antitrust
lawsuits throughout its existence.
   To measure the welfare gains and losses associated with a non-competitive credit card industry, we
build on a small but innovative class of models that explicitly model credit card lenders' market power
in small open economies (e.g., Wasmer and Weil (2004), Drozd and Nosal (2008), Petrosky-Nadeau and
Wasmer (2013), Galenianos and Nosal (2016), Herkenhoff (2017), and Raveendranathan (2019)). These
environments maintain the assumptions of atomistic lenders, free-entry, and zero ex-ante profits. We
depart from these frameworks by developing a general equilibrium production economy in which a
finite number of non-atomistic credit card firms strategically compete for customers. After estimating
our model to match key credit card market moments, we show that the benchmark non-competitive
model accounts for 20 to 50 percent of the observed excess spreads in the credit card industry between
1970 and 2016.
   We first measure the welfare gains of replacing the regional monopolies that prevailed in the late
1960s and early 1970s with duopolies. This experiment is designed to capture increasing ­ yet still limited
­ competition among credit card issuers following the Marquette decision and the abolition of exclusivity
rules. This time period predates the widespread adoption of credit scoring, and so we assume lenders
cannot price discriminate (e.g., Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt (2016)), an assumption we relax in later time
periods. Moving from monopoly to duopoly lowers excess spreads by nearly 40 percent. We find that
transitioning from a credit card monopoly to a duopoly generates aggregate gains to those living at the
time of the transition that are equivalent to a one-time transfer worth between 0.24 and 0.38 percent of
GDP. The range of gains depends on how the duopolists compete. During the transition from monopoly
to duopoly, 93 to 96 percent of consumers are weakly better off. The lending sector remains profitable

   1 The average rate of return on assets refers to interest and non-interest income net of charge-offs normalized by total assets.



                                                                2
throughout the transition and the default rate rises as borrowing increases. Measuring the distributional
consequences of greater lender entry in the 1970s, we find that duopoly generates welfare gains among
consumers in the lowest earnings decile equivalent to a one time transfer worth 4 to 6 percent of their
annual earnings. Poor individuals benefit from the ability to borrow more at a cheaper rate. High earners
also benefit from higher interest rates on savings in general equilibrium.
   Our second exercise is to measure the welfare gains from perfectly competitive pricing in the 1970s.
We define perfectly competitive pricing as the credit card spread and credit card limit that maximize
newborn consumer welfare subject to weakly positive profits. Because monopolists restrict quantity and
raise prices, spreads fall and credit limits expand in the competitive economy. Relative to the gains
from additional lender entry, we find that perfectly competitive pricing in the 1970s generates gains that
are roughly 4-7 times larger. The aggregate gains to contemporary cohorts from competitive pricing
are equivalent to a one-time transfer worth 1.66 percent of GDP. Half of the gains come from lower
spreads, the other half from greater credit limits. These gains primarily accrue to low- and high-earning
households. Those in the lowest decile of the earnings distribution require a one-time transfer worth 25
percent of their annual earnings to be indifferent between monopolistic and competitive pricing.
   Our third exercise is to measure welfare gains generated as the economy moves from duopoly in the
1970s to a nine lender oligopoly in 2016. Unlike in our earlier experiments, we allow lenders to explicitly
price discriminate by permanent earnings levels. We find individuals with high permanent earnings gain
the most from lender entry, whereas gains among individuals with low permanent earnings are largely
unresponsive. Since low-earning individuals default at a higher rate, lenders offer very restrictive credit
limits independent of competition. In terms of welfare, high-earning individuals require a transfer worth
4.9 percent of GDP per capita to be as well-off in an economy with a duopoly instead of a nine lender
oligopoly whereas low-earning individuals only require a transfer worth 0.3 percent of GDP per capita.
While the majority of welfare gains come from increased limits, two forces affect the way oligopolists
change their spreads in response to entry: (1) increased competition tends to lower spreads, and (2)
debt dilution tends to raise spreads. Initially the competition effect wins, generating lower spreads and
higher limits. However, we find that the additional gains of adding more than nine lenders are positive
but quickly diminishing. The reason for this is that the second effect of debt dilution eventually puts
upward pressure on spreads. Lenders understand that the consumer can borrow more from another
lender ex-post, and so the lenders increase their interest rates ex-ante to reflect this threat of debt dilution.
   Our fourth exercise is to measure welfare gains from perfectly competitive pricing in 2016. Unlike in
our 1970s exercises, we allow for price discrimination by permanent earnings when computing perfectly
competitive prices. Aggregating across individuals, the welfare gains of moving from duopoly in 1970
to perfectly competitive pricing in 2016 are equivalent to a one-time transfer worth 3.20 percent of GDP.
Similar to the 1970s, we find significant gains from competitive pricing in 2016.
   Consequently, we consider a policy that has been discussed recently in the context of credit market
power: homogeneous caps on lender spreads. We find that a cap on spreads could, at most, yield one-
third of the welfare gains from competitive pricing. Moreover, the cap that generates the largest welfare
gain would leave low-earning households worse off. Caps that are too tight can generate welfare losses

                                                       3
among low-earning households since they will face tighter credit limits. More generally, any one-size-
fits-all cap on lender spreads generates welfare losses among either high- or low-earning individuals.

Literature. Our paper is related to competitive consumer credit models (Livshits et al. (2007, 2010) and
Chatterjee et al. (2007)) as well as recent models that generate lender market power via search and bar-
gaining (e.g., Wasmer and Weil (2004), Drozd and Nosal (2008), Petrosky-Nadeau and Wasmer (2013),
Galenianos and Nosal (2016), Herkenhoff (2017), and Raveendranathan (2019)). What makes the search
models of the credit market tractable are the assumptions of atomistic lenders, free entry, and a small
open economy. There is also a relatively new and innovative literature in Industrial Organization that
generates monopoly power among credit card lenders using discrete choice frameworks (Grodzicki
(2015), Nelson (2018), and Galenianos and Gavazza (2019)). What makes Grodzicki (2015) and Nel-
son (2018) tractable is the partial equilibrium nature of the models and exogenous default. Our paper
is closest to Galenianos and Gavazza (2019), who develop and estimate a static search model of lending
that they use to study welfare implications of interest rate caps. We contribute to both of these literatures
by developing a general equilibrium model of credit market oligopoly.
   Another class of models relates improvements in screening technology to greater credit limits and
greater competition in the credit market (e.g., Livshits et al. (2016), Grodzicki (2019), and Sánchez (2018)).
While early contributions such as Ausubel (1991) document a lack of competition in the credit market
throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Grodzicki (2019) makes a strong empirical argument that there has
been an increase in competition in the credit market recently. Drozd and Nosal (2008) and Galenianos
and Nosal (2016) also argue that reductions in entry costs ­ and thus increased competition ­ are quan-
titatively consistent with the rise in debt and defaults from the 1980s to the 1990s. In our framework, as
additional oligopolists enter the credit market (i.e., as the market moves from monopoly and duopoly
in the 1970s to oligopoly in the 2000s), our competitive structure generates increases in credit access and
defaults that likely complement screening technology improvements. We contribute to this literature by
developing a quantitative model of credit market oligopoly and showing that the welfare gains from
competitive reforms in the 2000s are significant despite greater competition.
   Our paper relates to theoretic and quantitative models of credit lines (Drozd and Nosal (2008),
Mateos-Planas and Seccia (2006), Mateos-Planas and Seccia (2013), Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2013),
Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017), Raveendranathan (2019), and Braxton, Herkenhoff, and Phillips (2018)).
Drozd and Nosal (2008), Raveendranathan (2019), and Braxton et al. (2018) have incorporated long-term
credit lines into models with imperfect competition (via search and bargaining) in the credit market.
Others, including Bizer and DeMarzo (1992), Hatchondo and Martinez (2018), and Kovrijnykh, Livshits,
and Zetlin-Jones (2019), consider borrowing without commitment. Closest to us is Hatchondo and Mar-
tinez (2018), who consider one-period loans without commitment. In these environments, the borrowing
contracts resemble credit lines because the amount borrowed ­ capped by a limit ­ does not affect a con-
sumer's interest rate. Our contribution to this literature is to incorporate non-exclusive credit lines into
a Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari economy with default.
   Our model is also related to the quantitative banking literature (e.g., Corbae, D'erasmo, et al. (2011)


                                                      4
and Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019)) and the partial equilibrium industrial organization banking literature
(e.g., Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos (2017), Wang, Whited, Wu, and Xiao (2018), and Benetton (2018)).
Of particular note, Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019) consider a Stackelberg Cournot bank that faces a com-
petitive fringe, building on the earlier work of Allen and Gale (2004) and Boyd and De Nicolo (2005),
who consider Cournot competition. We contribute to this literature by modeling defaultable debt on the
household side and considering N-bank oligopolistic competition for credit lines.
      Lastly, our model contributes to a recently growing macroeconomic literature that attempts to quan-
tify the welfare consequences of market power and strategic interactions (e.g., Mongey (2017), Edmond,
Midrigan, and Xu (2018), Baqaee and Farhi (2017), and Berger, Herkenhoff, and Mongey (2019)).


2     Competition in the U.S. Credit Card Industry
We briefly discuss a narrative history of competition in the early credit card industry largely based on
Evans and Schmalensee (2005) and Wildfang and Marth (2005), and then we turn to contemporary indi-
cators of competition in the credit card industry.


2.1     Historical Background

During its beginning in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the credit card industry was characterized by
regional monopolies. While systematic evidence on interest rate dispersion and pricing is not available,
scholars who have studied the beginning of the credit card industry describe a highly non-competitive
(and very "cooperative") environment. In particular, Evans and Schmalensee (2005) document that the
early years of the credit card industry were characterized by limited competition. Visa's predecessor,
National BankAmericard Inc., was founded in California in 1958 and only began franchising the pro-
gram to other banks in 1966. Part of the franchise agreement was the restriction that banks could only
issue Visa cards (often called exclusivity), which severely limited competition and prompted several an-
titrust suits in the early 1970s (see below). American Express, which to that point was only a travel and
entertainment card, began its own credit card program via franchising. The predecessor to Mastercard
was a "cooperative" of banks which began expanding around the same time period. Nonetheless, the
programs were quite regionally concentrated: American Express was concentrated in New York, New
England, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania (Evans and Schmalensee (2005), p. 62), whereas BankAmericard
was concentrated in the West. The Interbank Card Association, which is the predecessor to Mastercard,
included banks primarily in the Midwest (Evans and Schmalensee (2005), p. 63). The lack of competition
among these groups of banks, and the lack of distinction between payment networks and banks, resulted
in several high profile antitrust lawsuits that we discuss below.


2.1.1    Monopoly and Collusion in the 1970s and 1980s

Several important court cases and academic studies have argued that the credit card market was non-
competitive throughout the 1970s and 1980s. We discuss evidence regarding (i) the lack of competition of

                                                     5
networks across regions and the inability of banks to issue competing network cards, (ii) network rules
preventing competitive new-entrant credit cards from being issued, and (iii) evidence of interest rate
collusion among issuing banks. In the early 1970s and 1980s, issuing banks wholly owned the networks,
and the network rules, which were determined "on-the-fly" by the banks that owned the networks,
severely impeded competition among banks.
   We first discuss the Worthen and MountainWest cases based on analysis by Wildfang and Marth (2005).
The Worthen case establishes that credit card networks effectively blocked entry and banned issuance of
competing cards. In 1970, Worthen Bank was a member of Visa (previously the National BankAmericard
network). Worthen wanted to issue Mastercard (previously the Interbank Card Association network)
credit cards. Visa rules prohibited Worthen from doing so. Worthen sued over this exclusivity rule (the
prohibition of issuing both networks cards), arguing that banning the bank from issuing other credit
cards was the strongest form of anti-competitive behavior described in the Sherman Act (per se illegality).
The federal district court agreed with Worthen. After an appeal and review by the Department of Justice,
Visa abandoned exclusivity rules and there were no barriers to banks dually issuing Visa and Mastercard
credit cards by 1976.
   The second important case is the MountainWest case. In the 1980s, Sears attempted to enter the credit
card market. The company wanted to issue an aggressive Prime Option card on the Visa network that
would have no annual fee (thus a lower implicit interest rate) and would have offered other attractive
features. Although Sears owned MountainWest Financial, a Visa member bank, Visa prohibited Sears
from issuing the card. Visa adopted a new rule banning Visa membership to any institution that was
"deemed competitive." As Wildfang and Marth (2005) summarize, "Sears claimed the rule was de-
signed to, and did, exclude an aggressive price-discounting new entrant, which would have benefited
consumers" (p. 682). Sears was initially affirmed in court, but then reversed on appeal by the Tenth Cir-
cuit. According to Wildfang and Marth (2005), legal scholars believe the reversal was largely based on a
misunderstanding of the facts by the jury. At the time of the trial several news outlets interviewed Visa
spokespeople, who acknowledged that allowing Sears to offer lower-fee cards would benefit consumers.
New York Times News Service (1991) report, "David Brancoli, a spokesman for Visa, based in San Mateo,
Calif., said the bank association opposed the new Sears card. He said that though competition among
Visa issuers would benefit consumers, consumers would benefit even more from competition among
different brands of cards..." New York Times News Service (1991) further quoted industry analyst Allen
R. DeCottiis as saying, "Visa banks are extremely concerned. They paid to build the Visa infrastructure,
and now others are allowed access."
   In the late 1980s, accusations of interest rate collusion among issuing banks were widespread. Wells
Fargo and First Interstate Bank of California were sued by the California Attorney General for interest
rate fixing on millions of credit cards (White (1992)). The two banks ultimately settled the case for $55
million, fearing potentially large losses in court. While the case did not go to court, academic research
by Knittel and Stango (2003) provides strong evidence for interest rate collusion in the early 1980s. Knit-
tel and Stango (2003) show that the average spread between credit card interest rates and the cost of
funds was higher in states where firms faced relatively tight interest ceilings and lower in states with no

                                                    6
ceilings. They argue that firms colluded at non-binding interest rate ceilings up until the late 1980s.
      While little publicly available data exists on interest rates in the 1970s and 1980s, Knittel and Stango
(2003) obtained disaggregated interest rate data from historical editions of the Quarterly Report of Rates
of Selected Direct Consumer Installment Loans, which is collected by the Federal Reserve Board. Over
and above their tests for collusion, Knittel and Stango (2003) observe extreme price stickiness in an
environment with large fluctuations in the risk-free rate: "The most striking aspect of credit card pricing
during the 1980's is the extent of clustering at certain interest rates... A corollary of this clustering is rate
stickiness. For example, in our sample the average spell during which a given issuer's credit card rate
remains unchanged is more than five years. These two factors... seem to defy conventional notions of
pricing in competitive markets" (p. 1708).
      The combination of (i) no inter-regional competition, (ii) lawsuits establishing non-competitive be-
havior, including the blocking of competitive new entrant credit cards, and (iii) academic and legal cases
arguing that there was widespread price collusion, motivate our modeling assumption of the early 1970s
as a monopoly.
      The main exercise in this paper is to measure the welfare gains from competitive reforms. In addition
to the Worthen and MountainWest cases, which led to greater competition, one particularly prominent
competitive reform occurred in 1978 when the Supreme Court unanimously determined that state-level
usury laws (interest rate caps) were not legally binding for nationally chartered banks (e.g., Evans and
Schmalensee (2005)). This decision was the result of Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha
Service Corp. (1978). Prior to the Marquette decision, states with relatively tight usury laws faced limited
competition. After the Marquette decision, these credit card markets became nationally contested. The
Marquette decision facilitated the opening of inter-regional competition among lenders. We model the
Marquette decision, as well as reforms spurred by the Worthen and MountainWest cases, as increasing
competition in the credit card market.


2.2     Indicators of Competitiveness in the 2000s

We document the following features of the credit card industry in the 2000s: (i) it is highly concentrated;
(ii) even after adjusting for default risk, operational cost, rewards programs, and other credit card fees,
credit card issuers charge interest rates that exceed zero-profit interest rates; (iii) credit card issuing banks
have excess returns; and (iv) the credit card industry is still sued repeatedly for antitrust violations.
      The first defining feature of the credit card industry is the large degree of market concentration. We
measure market concentration of both credit card issuers (e.g., banks such as Citigroup, JP Morgan, Cap-
ital One, and Bank of America) and credit card payment networks (e.g., Visa, Mastercard, and American
Express). Table 1 shows that three credit card issuers accounted for roughly half of outstanding revolv-
ing credit in 2016, and nine credit card issuers accounted for 86 percent of outstanding revolving credit
in 2016. Table 2 shows that in 2016, three payment networks (Visa, American Express, Master Card) ac-
counted for 96 percent of credit card purchase volume. The issuing banks founded and still jointly own
(to varying degrees) the main payment networks, Visa and Mastercard, whereas American Express is a


                                                       7
            Table 1: Revolving credit share by issuer, 2016 (source: SEC filings and ValuePenguin)

                                   Company                                   Cumulative share

                                   1. Citigroup                                        18
                                   2. JP Morgan                                        34
                                   3. Capital One                                      46
                                   4. Bank of America                                  58
                                   5. Discover                                         66
                                   6. Synchrony                                        73
                                   7. American Express                                 78
                                   8. Wells Fargo                                      83
                                   9. Barclays                                         86
                                   10. Other                                          100


vertically integrated issuer and payment network. Since issuers own significant portions of the payment
networks, and as we discuss in Appendix C.3, the payment networks and issuers have been repeat-
edly sued for colluding, it is difficult to treat the price setting decisions of these institutions separately.
Whether the effective number of competitors in the credit card market is nine issuing banks or three
collusive issuer-payment networks is not clear. We will consider a range of cases in our quantitative
analysis.

Table 2: Credit card purchase volume by payment network, 2016 (source: SEC filings and ValuePenguin)

                        Company                                                         Cumulative share

                        1.   Visa                                                                 51
                        2.   American Express                                                     74
                        3.   Master Card                                                          96
                        4.   Discover                                                            100


    The second defining feature of the credit card industry is high interest rate spreads. To measure how
far the credit card industry is from competitive pricing, we will focus on what we call excess spreads.
We compute excess spreads as the difference between the actual spread and the zero-profit spread. The
actual spread (actual ) is the difference between the (cross-sectional) average credit card interest rate and
the Moody's Aaa rate. The zero-profit spread is defined as the spread that credit card firms should charge
on interest income to break-even. Let zero denote the zero-profit spread, let D denote the charge-off
rate, let B denote outstanding revolving credit, let r denote the Moody's Aaa rate, and let o denote the
transaction cost net of non-interest income. o is computed as follows: (operational cost + rewards and
fraud - fees income - interchange income)/(outstanding revolving credit). Note that interchange income
accrues to the issuing bank (e.g., Bank of America), not to the network (e.g., Visa).2 Given D, B, r, and
    2 Visa and Mastercard earn profits from network fees (also called credit association fees) that are typically 0.5 percent of trans-

action volume. Visa and Mastercard also set a separate fee called an interchange fee. Interchange fees are directly paid to the
issuer banks and are typically equal to 1.5 to 3.0 percent of the transaction price. A common misconception is that these fees
go to Visa and Mastercard because Visa and Mastercard set these fees. These interchange fees are tied to the generosity of the


                                                                  8
o , the zero-profit spread is estimated from the following break-even equation:

                                       (1 - D ) B(1 + r + zero ) = B(1 + r + o )                                           (1)

The left hand side of (1) is total interest income net of charge-offs and the right hand side is total cost
net of non-interest income. Table 3 presents the average excess spreads (1974-2016) for the case without
transaction costs net of non-interest income (o = 0) and for the case with transactions costs net of non-
interest income. For the latter, we use o = -0.052, which is an estimate from Agarwal, Chomsisengphet,
Mahoney, and Stroebel (2015). The negative o implies that the credit card industry makes profits even if
we ignore interest income.
    Figure 1 plots the credit card industry's interest rate minus the break-even spread. This measure
of excess spread is positive every year from 1974 to 2016 if non-interest income is accounted for. Even
ignoring non-interest income yields significant spreads that have only marginally declined since the
1970s. Table 3 shows that the average spread on credit cards is 3.42 percentage points above break-even
if we ignore transaction costs net of non-interest income and 8.84 percentage points above break-even if
we include transaction costs net of non-interest income. This implies a markup of 44-115 percent on the
Moody's Aaa rate.

            Table 3: Credit card industry excess spreads (source: authors' calculations, see text )

          Excess spread                                                Average, 1974-2016 (percentage points)

          Excluding other transactions                                                    3.42
          Including other transactions                                                    8.84

                                                                               ex where  ex is defined by
Notes. Excess spread `Excluding other transactions ' is defined to be actual - zero         zero
                      ex
(1 - D ) B(1 + r + zero ) = B(1 + r ). Excess spread `Including other transactions' is defined to be actual - zero where
zero is calculated from equation 1. See text for details.


    The large spreads imply excess profits, which is the third defining feature of the credit card industry.
To measure profits, we use a common measure from the literature: average rate of return on assets
(ROA). Following Grodzicki (2019), the average rate of return for a bank is computed as interest and
non-interest income net of charge-offs normalized by assets (see Appendix C for details). Excess profits
are computed as the difference between the average (asset-weighted) return on assets for the 25 largest
credit card banks and the average (asset-weighted) return on assets for all banks. In Table 4, we report
estimates from the literature. Existing estimates imply that the average rate of return on assets for the
largest 25 credit card banks is 5.0 to 7.3 percentage points higher than that of the banking industry. Figure

rewards program that the issuing banks choose. Cards that provide greater rewards can charge higher interchange fees. The
fact that these fees, set by networks, scale with rewards suggests a lack of separation between networks and issuing banks.
Since banks that choose to offer rewards can charge more interchange fees (which are borne by merchants who sell goods and
accept credit card payments), reward cards do not yield lower profits to issuer banks (merchants are typically not allowed to
price discriminate by card, although recent legal changes have relaxed these rules). Hence, by construction of the interchange
fees, rewards do not lower the excess profits and excess spreads of issuers. See Hunt (2003) for more discussion.


                                                              9
          Figure 1: Credit card industry excess spreads (source: authors' calculations, see text )
                                            14

                                            12                       with other transactions
                                                                     (average = 8.8)
                                            10

                        percentage points   8

                                            6

                                            4

                                            2                    without other transactions
                                                                 (average = 3.4)
                                            0

                                            -2

                                            -4
                                              1970        1980           1990           2000   2010   2020

Notes. Excess spread defined to be actual - zero . Break-even spread zero calculated from equation 1. Actual
spread is difference between Flow of Funds (FoF) credit card interest rate and Moody's Aaa rate. See text for
details.


2 plots an updated time series of return on assets for the 25 largest credit card banks. Panel (A) plots the
average return on assets of the 25 largest credit card issuing banks as well as the banking sector on
average. Panel (A) illustrates that the return on assets is positive in every year from 1990 through 2018
and higher among credit card issuing banks. Panel (B) plots the difference in return on assets between
credit card banks and the banking sector average. The average return on assets of credit card banks is
6.2 percentage points higher than that of the banking sector over this time period.

                                                     Table 4: Credit card industry excess profits

              Year      Source                               Avg. ROA (asset weighted): 25 large CC banks - all banks

              1984-88   Ausubel (1991)                                                                            5.7
              1990      Grodzicki (2019)                                                                          7.3
              2008      Grodzicki (2019)                                                                          5.0


   The fourth defining feature of the U.S. credit card industry is antitrust violations. The banks and
payment networks have been sued repeatedly for non-competitive practices. Table 15 in Appendix C.3
describes a small sample of U.S. cases that have recently been brought against the credit card payment
networks and issuer banks for collusion on prices (interchange fees) and collusion to block entry of new
technologies and new competitors.
   Here we highlight three important cases. The first case is about limiting competition among incum-
bents. In 2004, the major payment networks were sued for blocking member banks from issuing cards


                                                                                10
           Figure 2: Return on assets (ROA), 25 largest credit card banks vs. banking average

                            (A)                                                 (B)




Notes. See appendix C for details.


that operated on competing payment networks. The major networks lost three key cases and were or-
dered to pay billions in penalties in each instance. The second case is about entry barriers. In 2017, a
new credit card issuer entrant, Black Card LLC, filed a lawsuit against the major issuers and payment
networks for colluding to block entry of their credit card product. The case is currently in progress.
The third case is about collusion. In 2005, several issuing banks and the major payment networks were
sued for colluding over interchange fees. They lost the case in 2018 and were ordered to pay billions in
penalties. While damages have been determined, the second part of this legal proceeding will involve
prescribing changes to the way the industry operates, in order to avoid further collusion.
    In summary, the U.S. credit card industry is characterized by a large degree of market concentration,
excess spreads, excess profits, and lawsuits for antitrust violations and non-competitive behavior. In
what follows, we depart from standard competitive models of the consumer credit market and, instead,
model a finite number of non-atomistic credit card firms that issue non-exclusive credit lines. We use
the model to quantify the welfare gains and losses from competitive reforms in the credit card industry
(since the 1970s and in the future).


3   Model
Our model economy shares many elements with existing general equilibrium, competitive models of
consumer credit, in particular Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt (2007) and Chatterjee, Corbae, Nakajima,
and Ríos-Rull (2007). We build on Livshits et al. (2007) and Chatterjee et al. (2007) by integrating a lender
oligopoly into a production economy with heterogeneous consumers. We also depart from the existing
literature by allowing lenders to issue non-exclusive long-term credit lines.



                                                     11
3.1     1970 Environment

Time is discrete and runs forever (t = 0, 1, . . .). For ease of exposition, we focus on a recursive exposition
of the steady state, omitting the time subscript. However, when we compute transition paths in later sec-
tions of this paper, the value functions, policy functions, and prices are time dependent. The economy
is populated by a unit measure of infinitely-lived heterogeneous consumers, N credit card firms (which
we will also refer to as lenders), and a final good firm. Consumers differ ex-ante with respect to their
permanent earnings ability. They face idiosyncratic earnings shocks as well as taste shocks over their de-
cision to default/repay. They make savings/borrowing and default/repayment decisions to maximize
utility. The final good firm is perfectly competitive and produces the consumption good using labor and
capital as inputs in a Cobb-Douglas production function. Lastly, lenders imperfectly compete to issue
non-exclusive credit lines. In the 1970 environment, we assume that lenders cannot price discriminate.
We view the 1970s as a period when credit lines were homogeneous due to technology constraints and
the limited development of credit scoring, as documented by Livshits et al. (2016) and Grodzicki (2019)
among others. We relax this assumption when we consider later time periods in Section 3.2.


3.1.1    1970 Consumers

Consumers have discount factor   (0, 1). They make savings/borrowing and default/repayment de-
cisions to maximize the present value of their flow utility over consumption, u(c), as well as any utility
gain or loss associated with default. There are three preference parameters associated with default. Con-
sumers have independent and identically distributed Gumbel taste shocks over default and repayment
                       - R                              - D
 R iid F ( R ) = e-e         and  D iid F ( D ) = e-e         , respectively (e.g., Auclert and Mitman (2018)
and Chatterjee, Corbae, Dempsey, and Rios-Rull (2019)). The Gumbel scaling parameter  is common
for both shocks. We view these taste shocks as unmodeled sources of default such as divorce, health,
and other lawsuits (Chakravarty and Rhee (1999)). If the consumer chooses to default, they incur an
additional one-time utility penalty of  (stigma).
      The consumer's idiosyncratic state is given by their credit standing i  { g, b}, permanent earnings
ability   { L ,  H }    R+ , a persistent earnings shock   R+ , an iid earnings shock            R+ , and
net assets a  R. If the consumer is in good credit standing, then i = g, and the consumer may borrow.
Otherwise, the consumer is in bad credit standing (i = b) and cannot borrow. Permanent earnings
ability  is fixed, and thus we refer to type- consumers when referencing permanent earnings ability. The
earnings shock  is persistent and follows a Markov chain, whereas is perfectly transitory. Positive
values of a indicate saving, whereas negative values of a indicate borrowing. The state of a consumer
is therefore given by the tuple, (i,  ,  , , a). We define the distribution of consumers across states as
(i,  ,  , , a) where  : { g, b} ×  × R+ × R+ × R  [0, 1].
    In order to exposit the consumer's problem, we must briefly discuss the credit card market (more
details about the formation of the credit lines appear in Section 3.1.2). If a consumer chooses to borrow,
they borrow from a set of credit lines S  (R+ , R+ ) N . A credit line is a long-term defaultable debt con-
tract that specifies a spread   R+ over the general equilibrium risk-free rate r  R+ and a borrowing

                                                      12
      ¯  R+ . S is the collection of credit line spreads and borrowing limits offered by the N lenders.
limit l
    In the 1970s, as discussed above, there is no price discrimination and hence all consumers in good
credit standing have access to the same set of credit lines S. Furthermore, credit lines are non-exclusive. If
there are N credit lines available in equilibrium, the consumer will first borrow from the cheapest credit
line independent of the lender that issues the credit line.3 Let j denote the credit card interest rate ranking
of a credit line, where j = 1 is the lowest credit card interest rate and j = N is the highest credit card
interest rate. Therefore, the credit lines can be sorted in ascending order with respect to the spreads (1 
2  . . . j  . . .  N ) and the corresponding borrowing limits (l     ¯1 , l
                                                                          ¯2 , . . . , l
                                                                                       ¯N ), ignoring the issuing credit
                                                                                         ¯1 ), . . . , (N , l
card firm's identity. With this notation, the set of credit lines available is S = {(1 , l                  ¯N )} 
(R+ , R+ ) N . For any net asset level a (recall a < 0 implies debt), let a j ( a)  0 denote the balance on the
credit line with credit card interest rate ranking j  {1, ..., N }:
                                            
                                             ¯j                                         j ¯k
                                            -l                            if   a  -  k =1 l
                               a j ( a) =
                                            min{ a +  j        ¯ -l
                                                                  ¯j , 0}                   j   ¯k
                                                                                    a > -  k =1 l
                                                          k =1 l k             if

If net assets are less than or equal to the sum of the borrowing limits on credit lines {1, ..., j}, then the
consumer has reached the limit on credit line j. Otherwise, if net assets are greater than the sum of the
borrowing limits on credit lines {1, ..., j - 1} and net assets are negative, then the balance on credit line j
        j  ¯k - l
                ¯j . Lastly, if net assets are positive, then the balance on credit line j (and all other credit
is a +     lk =1
lines) is zero. Figure 3 provides an example of the spreads and limits consumers face with three lenders,
N = 3. They borrow from the lowest spread first, 1 , then the next lowest, 2 , and lastly, 3 . The total
principal and interest expense incurred on the lowest spread credit card is (1 + r + 1 ) a1 ( a), the next
lowest spread (1 + r + 2 ) a2 ( a), and lastly, (1 + r + 3 ) a3 ( a). More generally, since  N
                                                                                             j=1 a j ( a ) = a, the
                                                                               N
principal and interest expense of a household can be written (1 + r ) a +  j=1 j a j ( a).
    Using this notation for credit lines, we now describe the consumer's value functions. Let V (i,  ,  , , a)
denote the consumer's continuation value at the start of the period. Let V D ( ,  , ) be the value of default
and V R (i,  ,  , , a) be the value of repayment. The first choice the consumer makes is between default
and repayment:

                         V (i,  ,  , , a) = E D , R max{V D ( ,  , ) +  D , V R (i,  ,  , , a) +  R }                      (2)

    Since  D and  R were assumed to be Gumbel with a common inverse scaling parameter  , we can
express the default probability as follows:

                                                                 exp( V D ( ,  , ))
                              p (i,  ,  , , a ) =                                                                          (3)
                                                    exp( V D ( ,  , )) + exp( V R (i,  ,  , , a))

Given our assumptions about default penalties, default is universal. That is, the consumer repays credit
card debt on all credit lines or defaults on all credit lines. The policy functions for repayment/default,

   3 This   is an equilibrium outcome in our model because there are no switching costs. This keeps the model tractable.


                                                                     13
        Figure 3: Example of credit lines available to consumer with three lenders, N = 3, in 1970s.




Notes: Non-calibrated example with three lenders and three credit lines. More negative net asset positions imply greater debt.
The function a j ( a) allocates net assets a most efficiently across the credit lines ordered by spreads j . Consumers first max-out
credit card 1 with the lowest spread 1 . If they borrow more than l     ¯1 , they then begin borrowing from the credit card with the
second lowest spread, 2 etc.



consumption, and savings/borrowing -- p(·), c(·), a (·) -- are functions of (i,  ,  , , a). However, we
omit this state dependence of policy functions for ease of exposition.
    A consumer who defaults consumes labor earnings and profits, w + , where w refers to the wage
rate and  refers to the profits uniformly transferred to consumers from credit card firms (in Section
7 we consider alternate distributions of profits). Furthermore, the consumer cannot save or borrow
(a = 0) and incurs a one-time disutility cost (stigma ) only during the default period. In the next
period, the consumer may regain good credit standing with probability  or stay in bad credit standing
with probability 1 - . The continuation value of defaulting is given by:

           V D ( ,  , ) = U w +  -  +  E                            , |     V ( g,  ,  , , 0) + (1 -  )V ( b,  ,  , , 0)

    A consumer who chooses to repay and is in good credit standing (i = g), may borrow from the set
                                  ¯j ). Furthermore, this consumer retains good credit standing for the
of credit lines or save ( a  -  N l      j =1
next period. The value of repayment when i = g is given by:

                               V R ( g,  ,  , , a) = max U (c) +  E                , |  V ( g ,  ,    , ,a )
                                                         c, a

                                                  s.t.
                                                                                     N
                                            c + a =w + (1 + r ) a +  j a j ( a) +                                               (4)
                                                                                    j =1
                                                                N
                                                a -l
                                                   ¯j
                                                            j =1


Because of the taste shock for default, consumers in bad standing (i = b) may redefault, a common
occurrence in the data (Athreya, Mustre-del Río, and Sánchez (2019)). Because of the taste shocks, de-


                                                                      14
faults may occur with a balance of zero net assets or greater. We interpret the data analogue of these
defaults to be shocks which are not modeled explicitly in our framework, such as divorce, health shocks,
or lawsuits. A consumer who chooses to repay and is in bad credit standing can only save ( a  0).
Furthermore, the consumer regains good credit standing in the next period with probability  and stays
in bad credit standing with probability 1 - . The value of repayment when i = b is given by:

           V R (b,  ,  , , a) = max U (c) +  E     , |     V ( g,  ,  , , a ) + (1 -  )V ( b,  ,  , , a )
                                  c, a

                           s.t.
                      c + a =w + (1 + r ) a +                                                                   (5)
                          a 0

   Compared to the consumer problem with good standing (4), the budget constraint for those in bad
standing drops the term  N j=1 j a j ( a ) because the consumer in bad credit standing cannot hold debt in
equilibrium regardless of the repayment choice.


3.1.2   1970 Lenders

There are N lenders in the economy. We assume that in the 1970 environment lenders cannot price
discriminate, nor do we allow them to learn (e.g., there are no credit scoring institutions). Lenders only
observe the default status of individuals, i  { g, b}, and they only issue credit lines to those in good
standing. When we consider later time periods in Section 3.2, we allow for price discrimination with
respect to permanent earnings,  .
   Each lender may issue one credit line. Since we restrict our analysis to the case where each credit
card firm issues one credit line, there are N credit lines. We assume lenders commit to the terms of their
lines of credit. Consider lender k  {1, . . . , N }. We will use the convention that superscripted k refers to
a lender's identity and does not reflect any ranking of lenders, and subscripted j refers to the credit card
                                                                                                           ¯k ), to
interest rate ranking of a lender. Lender k's objective is to choose the terms of their credit line, ( k , l
                                             k , discounted at rate r :
maximize their net present value of profits, t                       t

                                                                 t
                                                          1
                                                        1 + rt
                                                                     k
                                                                     t                                          (6)
                                                 t =0

When we consider transition dynamics, the time path of rt will matter for lender pricing decisions. For
the rest of this section, we will omit time subscripts from the lender's problem and focus on steady
states of the model economy. Since lenders commit to credit lines, the lender's steady state objective is
equivalent to maximizing per-period profits  k .
   The credit card interest rate ranking of a lender is denoted by j and is such that j = 1 is the lowest
credit card interest rate and j = N is the highest credit card interest rate. Let j and l   ¯j denote the
spread and borrowing limit of the lender offering the jth highest credit card interest rate. The flow



                                                          15
profits resulting from offering the jth highest credit card interest rate are given by  j :
                                       ^
                                 j =        - (1 - p( g,  ,  , , a))j a j ( a)

                                       + p( g,  ,  , , a)(1 + r ) a j ( a) d( g,  ,  , , a)                             (7)


Lenders borrow from households and since households can costlessly access capital markets, the lenders
must offer a riskless savings rate r. The resulting profits are comprised of two components: The first
term, -j a j ( a), captures the gains from repayment; The second term, (1 + r ) a j ( a), captures the losses
from default (lenders must repay their depositors). Total profits are computed as  =  N     j=1  j , which as
mentioned above, are uniformly transferred to consumers.
   Suppose lender k  {1, 2, ..., N } chooses spread  k and borrowing limit l ¯k . Let j( k ,  -k ) be a func-
tion that maps  k and  -k = ( 1 , ...,  k-1 ,  k+1 , ...,  N ) to the rank of  k when the spreads are sorted
                                            N -1
in ascending order, j : R+ × R+                    {1, . . . , N }. Then the set of credit lines can be written S =
                ¯               N
{(j( k , -k ) , l j( k , -k ) )}k=1 and the profits to credit card firm k are given by:

                                                      k =  j (  k , - k )                                               (8)

    To understand the notation, consider two steady state examples. First, if there is one firm (monop-
olist), then the monopolist chooses the spread  1 and the borrowing limit l ¯1 to maximize total profits,
         ¯1 ) = 1 (1 , l
 1 ( 1 , l             ¯1 ) = , where the first expression refers to profits by the lender's identity, the
middle expression refers to profits using the (degenerate) credit card interest rate ranking, and the last
expression refers to total profits.
    Second, if there are two credit card firms and they move sequentially (Stackelberg competition), then
                                                        ¯1 ) and borrowing limit l
firm 2 (the second mover) will pick its spread  2 ( 1 , l                        ¯2 ( 1 , l
                                                                                          ¯1 ) to maximize its
                 ¯1 ,  2 , l
profits  2 ( 1 , l         ¯2 ) for any given combination of firm 1's spread  1 and borrowing limit l            ¯1 . Firm 1
will pick its spread and borrowing limit to maximize its profits  1 ( 1 , l  ¯1 ,  2 ( 1 , l
                                                                                           ¯1 ), l
                                                                                                 ¯2 ( 1 , l
                                                                                                          ¯1 )), given firm
                                     ¯1 ) and l
2's best response functions  2 ( 1 , l        ¯2 ( 1 , l
                                                       ¯1 ). If, for example, firm 1 sets the lowest credit card
interest rate  1 <  2 , then j( 1 ,  2 ) = 1. Firm 1's credit line offers the lowest credit card interest rate
in the economy and therefore it is ranked first in terms of credit card interest rates. When consumers
borrow, they will borrow on firm 1's credit line before borrowing on any other credit line.
    Forms of lender competition. When we analyze competitive reforms, we consider four forms of
competition: (i) Monopoly ( N = 1), (ii) Stackelberg competition, (iii) Collusive-Cournot competition, which
is a two-stage game where lenders collude on spreads in the first stage and then Cournot compete on
limits in the second stage, and (iv) Perfect Competition. We numerically characterize lender behavior for
each of these forms of competition in Section 5.
    Lender entry costs. When we consider the transition path, we must make assumptions regarding
lender entry costs. Our benchmark model assumes zero lender entry costs. However, in Section 7, we
impose up-front lender entry costs equal to the net present value of profits. Since there was profitable


                                                             16
lender entry between 1970 and 2016, we view this robustness exercise as providing an upper bound on
lender entry costs. We show that these costs have second-order effects on welfare compared to the gains
from increased competition.


3.1.3   1970 Final Good Producer

There is a representative, perfectly competitive firm that produces the final good by hiring labor, L, and
renting capital, K, in order to maximize profits:

                                                  max K  L1- - wL - rK
                                                     K, L


Factor prices are given by r = (K / L)-1 and w = (1 - )(K / L) . The firm earns zero profits.


3.1.4   1970 Equilibrium

A stationary recursive competitive equilibrium is given by a set of credit lines S, a stationary dis-
tribution over idiosyncratic states  (i,  ,  , , a), a wage rate w, a risk-free interest rate r, total prof-
its , a repayment/default policy function p(i,  ,  , , a), a consumption policy function c(i,  ,  , , a),
a savings/borrowing policy function a (i,  ,  , , a), a set of credit card firms' best response functions
            ¯k (·)} N , and the final good firm's choices for aggregate capital K and aggregate labor L such
{  k ( · ), l  k =1
that:
    (i) given S, w, r, and , the allocations p(i,  ,  , , a), c(i,  ,  , , a), and a (i,  ,  , , a) solve the con-
sumer's problem in (2), (4), and (5).
                                         ¯k (·)} N
   (ii) for k  {1, 2, ..., N }, { k (·), l             maximizes each credit card firm's profits in (8).
                                                k =1
    (iii) final good firm's choices give factor prices r = (K / L)-1 and w = (1 - )(K / L) .
    (iv) the distribution of consumers (i,  ,  , , a) is consistent with the policy functions p(i,  ,  , , a)
and a (i,  ,  , , a), and the exogenous process for earnings.
    (v) labor market clears:
                                                        ^
                                                L=               d (i,  ,  , , a)

    (vi) capital market clears:
                                                            ^
                                                 K=              a d  (i,  ,  , , a )

    (vii) final good market clears:
                                   ^
                                       c ( i ,  ,  , , a ) d  ( i ,  ,  , , a ) +  K = K  L 1- 




                                                                     17
3.2     2016 Environment

To capture technological innovations in credit scoring and increases in lender competition that occurred
from the 1970s to 2016, we modify the environment to allow for price discrimination and many more
lenders. In particular, we assume that lenders discriminate with respect to permanent earnings ability
 . To rule out complicated portfolio problems that would render the environment intractable, we as-
sume that lenders only lend to one type- consumer. Therefore, we assume that there are N lenders
who compete for type- consumers. The total number of lenders in the economy is now   N . The
environment remains very similar to the 1970 environment, except now all spreads, limits, and lender
profit functions are indexed by  . The final goods firm problem remains the same, and the equilibrium
concept is identical to that of the 1970s environment. For the sake of brevity, we only exposit portions of
the model that change.


3.2.1    2016 Consumers

Consumers borrow from a set of credit lines that now depends on their permanent earnings, S =
         ¯1 ( )), . . . , (N ( ), l
{(1 ( ), l                        ¯N ( ))}  (R+ , R+ ) N . For each type- consumer, the credit lines can be
sorted in ascending order with respect to the spreads (1 ( )  2 ( )  . . . j ( )  . . .  N ( )) and
                                    ¯1 ( ), l
the corresponding borrowing limits (l       ¯2 ( ), . . . , l
                                                            ¯N ( )). Within each set of type- consumers, let j
denote the credit card interest rate ranking of a credit line.
      For any net asset level a (recall a < 0 implies debt), let a j ( a,  )  0 denote the balance on the credit
line with credit card interest rate ranking j  {1, ..., N } for a type- consumer:
                                      
                                       ¯j ( )                                                    j
                                                                                             ¯k ( )
                                      -l                                    if    a  -  k =1 l
                      a j ( a,  ) =
                                      min{ a +  j              ¯        ¯                                j  ¯k ( )
                                                                                                a > -  k =1 l
                                                       k =1 l k (  ) - l j (  ), 0 }       if

    A type  consumer who chooses to repay and is in good credit standing (i = g) may borrow from
                                            ¯j ( )):
the set S of credit lines or save ( a  -  N l          j =1


                             V R ( g,  ,  , , a) = max U (c) +  E                  |  V ( g,  ,      , ,a )
                                                        c, a

                                                s.t.
                                                                                       N
                                          c + a =w + (1 + r ) a +  j ( ) a j ( a,  ) +                               (9)
                                                                                       j =1
                                                               N
                                                a -l
                                                   ¯j ( )
                                                           j =1


      The remaining value functions undergo similar modifications.




                                                                     18
3.2.2   2016 Lenders

We assume there are N lenders that lend to type- consumers. They do not lend to other consumer types.
Each lender may issue one credit line to type- consumers, and so there are N credit lines available to
type- consumers. We maintain the assumption that lenders commit to the terms of their credit lines.
                                                                                                         ¯k ( )), to
For each lender k  {1, . . . , N } their objective is to choose the terms of their credit line, ( k ( ), l
                                             k (  ), discounted at rate r :
maximize their net present value of profits, t                           t

                                                                 t
                                                          1
                                                        1 + rt
                                                                     k
                                                                     t ( )
                                                 t =0

As before, the time subscripts are relevant only along the transition path. We will focus on steady states
in this exposition and drop the subscripts. Since lenders commit to credit card interest rates and limits,
                                                                                       ¯k ( )).
the lender's objective is to maximize steady state profits  k ( ) by choosing ( k ( ), l
                                                                          ¯j ( ) denote the credit
    Among the N lenders who make loans to type - consumers, let j ( ) and l
card interest rate and borrowing limit of the lender offering the jth highest credit card interest rate. The
flow profits resulting from offering the jth highest credit card interest rate are given by  j ( ):
                                       ^
                             j ( ) =        - (1 - p( g,  ,  , , a))j ( ) a j ( a,  )

                                       + p( g,  ,  , , a)(1 + r ) a j ( a,  ) d( g,  ,  , , a)                 (10)


   Total profits are therefore computed as  =    N
                                                 j=1  j (  ), which are rebated uniformly to con-
                                                   


sumers independent of their type.


3.2.3   2016 Lender Competition

Relative to the 1970s, we consider many more credit card lenders, e.g.,   N > N , and we allow
for price discrimination by permanent earnings ability. These modifications are designed to capture the
expansion of credit card networks and the rise of credit scoring, e.g., Drozd and Nosal (2008), Athreya,
Tam, and Young (2012), Livshits et al. (2016) and Sánchez (2018). Within each set of type- lenders, we
consider both (i) Collusive-Cournot and (ii) Perfect Competition. While indicators of competitiveness in
credit markets have improved over time, e.g., Grodzicki (2019), we show that even after calibrating to
the observed number of lenders in the data, Collusive-Cournot is still unable to generate observed spreads
in 2016.


4    Calibration
Given the computationally demanding nature of the model, we take as many standard parameters from
the literature as possible, and then we calibrate the remaining parameters to target 1971-75 moments. As


                                                           19
discussed in Section 2.1.1, the credit card industry was characterized by (1) lack of inter-regional compe-
tition, (2) non-competitive behavior, including antitrust litigation regarding the blocking of competitive
new entrant credit cards, and (3) alleged price collusion. Therefore, we calibrate the model assuming that
there is pure monopoly ( N = 1) in the 1970s as an approximation to the limited competition and regional
monopolies during that time period.
    We assume that each period corresponds to one year. Table 5 presents the parameters determined
outside of the model equilibrium. We use standard estimates for the capital share ( = 0.33), depreciation
rate ( = 0.045), and risk aversion ( = 2). The re-entry probability of good credit standing  = .1 is
chosen such that it takes the average consumer 10 years to re-enter the credit card market upon default.
The earnings process is taken from Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2000) (Table 1, Panel D).4 We assume
that permanent types are distributed such that ln( ) idd N (0, 2 ). We approximate this on a symmetric

two-point distribution, yielding equal masses of agents at  H = 1.46 and  L = 0.54. We assume that the
persistent component of income  follows an AR(1), ln( ) =  log( ) + u where u idd N (0, 2 ). Lastly,

the perfectly transitory component is log normally distributed, ln( ) idd N (0, 2 ).

                        Table 5: Parameters determined outside the model equilibrium

            Parameter      Description                                                                 Value

                           Capital share                                                               0.333
                           Depreciation rate                                                           0.045
                           Risk aversion                                                               2
                           Re-entry prob. good credit standing (10 year exclusion)                     0.1
             2             Variance permanent component                                                0.244
             2             Variance of innovation to AR(1) component                                   0.024
            2              Variance transitory component                                               0.063
                           Persistence of AR(1) component                                              0.977



    The remaining parameters { , ,  } are estimated to target moments between 1971 and 1975. We
estimate  = 0.968, which implies a discount rate of 3.31 percent per annum, to match the average real
interest rate of 1.27 percent from 1971 to 1975.5 We calibrate stigma  = 7.768 to match the average
charge-off rate of 2.57 from 1971-75, the earliest five years of available charge-off rate data (Ausubel,
1991). Since there are taste shocks, defaults may occur when agents have weakly positive net worth
which we attribute to unmodeled shocks. We interpret the data analogue of defaults attributable to unmod-
eled shocks as the share of bankruptcies due to divorce, health, or lawsuits reported by Chakravarty and
Rhee (1999). We therefore set  = .776 so that the share of defaults in the model with weakly positive net
worth coincides with the share of bankruptcies due to divorce, health, or lawsuits.



   4 The working paper version of Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004), since the working paper reports the relevant income
process for our exercise.
   5 We measure this as the Moody's AAA rate less inflation implied by the NIPA GDP Deflator.



                                                             20
                              Table 6: Parameters determined jointly in equilibrium

           Parameter            Value     Target                                                          Data     Model

          Stigma                 7.768    Charge-off rate                                                  2.57       2.43
          Scaling parameter      0.776    Fraction of bankruptcy due to divorce, health, lawsuits         44.81      45.19
          Discount rate          0.968    Risk free rate                                                   1.27       1.24


Notes: The charge-off rate is based on digitized data from the appendix of (Ausubel, 1991). Bankruptcy data statistics are
based on the PSID and taken from Chakravarty and Rhee (1999). The fraction of bankruptcy due to divorce, health and
lawsuits within model is the fraction of defaults that occur when an agent has weakly positive net worth. The risk-free rate is
the Moody's AAA rate less inflation implied by the NIPA GDP Deflator. See text for more discussion.



5     Gains from Inter-regional Competition: 1970s Monopoly to Duopoly
As discussed in Section 2.1.1, the 1970s credit card market was characterized by non-competitive behav-
ior, but landmark cases challenging exclusivity and legal reforms such as the Marquette decision in 1978
facilitated inter-regional competition. While we do not explicitly have regions in our framework, we
model these reforms as a transition from monopoly to a duopoly. We consider various forms of duopoly
in the lending market and compute the distribution of welfare gains and losses along the transition path.
These experiments are designed to measure the short- and long-run gains and losses associated with
the transition from regional monopolies in the 1970s to greater, but still limited, inter-regional competi-
tion. To provide an upper bound on welfare gains from early reforms in the credit card market, we also
measure outcomes along the transition path to perfectly competitive pricing.


5.1      Characterization of the Monopolist's Problem

In this section, we numerically explore the properties of the monopolist's problem. Figure 4 plots profits
                            ¯1 ) = 1 (1 , l
to the monopolist ( 1 ( 1 , l             ¯1 )) as a function of the spread  1 and the borrowing limit l
                                                                                                       ¯1 . The
monopolist maximizes profits at an interior spread and an interior borrowing limit. This is because if the
monopolist chooses a low spread, then the profit margin is low, and hence, profits are low. If the monop-
olist chooses a high spread, then consumers will borrow less, leading to low profits. If the monopolist
chooses a low borrowing limit, profits are low since there is limited borrowing. If the monopolist chooses
a high borrowing limit, then profits are low (or losses are high) due to high default rates.
      To understand why the profit function is concave and admits an interior solution, Figure 5 plots
the monopolist's optimal policy functions and corresponding profits. Panels (A) and (B) plot the limits
that maximize profits and the corresponding profits as a function of the spread. Hence, the spread that
maximizes profits in Panel (B) is the optimal contract. We see that for high values of the spread, the
monopolist restricts the amount that can be borrowed by cutting limits. This is because for high values
of the spread, the only agents who borrow are those who have realized extremely low earnings shocks,
and so they default at a very high rate. Panels (C) and (D) plot the spreads that maximize profits and the


                                                              21
                                        Figure 4: Monopolist profit function

                    0.0035




                                                                                                     profits (percent of GDP)
                    0.0030

                    0.0025

                    0.0020

                    0.0015

                    0.0010

                    0.0005
                          2.00 3.79                                                      8.61
                                           5.59                                 6.44
                                                   7.38 2.11          4.28
                       borrowing limit                                                spread
                      (percent of GDP)                                          (percentage points)
Notes: borrowing limits are expressed as a percent of GDP per capita. Spreads are expressed as percentage points over the
savings interest rate. Profits are expressed as a percent of GDP.



corresponding profits as a function of the limit. Hence, analogous to Panel (B), the limit that maximizes
profits in Panel (D) is the optimal contract. In Panel (C), spreads increase as the credit limit declines. This
feature is consistent with neoclassical models of monopoly where quantity restrictions raise prices.


5.2     Non-targeted Moments

Before discussing the reforms, we show that the monopoly model does a reasonable job at approximating
several of our key competitiveness indicators in the 1970s. Table 7 shows that the model generates a
spread of 5.4 percentage points, accounting for more than 60 percent of the observed spreads in the
data. The model generates an excess spread (the spread over and above the break-even spread) of 2.89
percentage points, accounting for more than 50 percent of the data. Hence, even with the most limited
form of competition ­ pure monopoly ­ almost half of excess spreads remain unaccounted for.
      The model produces a high bankruptcy rate of 0.10 percent per capita versus 0.06 percent in the
data. We generate reasonable bankruptcy rates for two reasons: (1) the model features taste shocks over
repayment and default, and (2) lender commitment to credit lines allows individuals to take high-default
net asset positions without facing a steep profile of interest rates.
      In terms of credit usage, the model's credit to GDP ratio is 0.11 percent versus 0.74 percent in the
data. Unlike in partial equilibrium environments (e.g., Livshits et al. (2007, 2010), Galenianos and Nosal
(2016), and Raveendranathan (2019)), lowering the discount factor does not increase credit in our gen-
eral equilibrium framework. In general equilibrium, a lower discount rate increases the risk-free rate



                                                            22
                                                       Figure 5: Monopolist policy functions

                                     (A) Limit                                                        (B) Profits (NPV)

                          7.00                                                                0.26
                                                                                                           5.41, 0.25
      percent of GDP pc




                                                                                              0.25




                                                                             percent of GDP
                          6.00          5.41, 5.79
                                                                                              0.24
                          5.00                                                                0.23
                                                                                              0.22
                          4.00
                                                                                              0.21
                          3.00                                                                0.20
                              3.80 4.80 5.80 6.80 7.80 8.80                                       3.80 4.80 5.80 6.80 7.80 8.80
                                   spread (percentage points)                                          spread (percentage points)

                                     (C) Spread                                                       (D) Profits (NPV)

                          7.00                                                                0.26
                                                                                                              5.79, 0.25
      percentage points




                                                                             percent of GDP

                          6.00                                                                0.24
                                          5.79, 5.41
                          5.00                                                                0.22

                          4.00                                                                0.20

                          3.00                                                                0.18
                              3.80 4.80 5.80 6.80 7.80 8.80                                       3.80 4.80 5.80 6.80 7.80 8.80
                                   limit (percent of GDP pc)                                           limit (percent of GDP pc)
Notes: Panel (A) plots the lender's optimal limit when their spread is fixed at the value on the x-axis. Panel (B) plots the
lender's NPV profits as a percent of GDP when their spread is fixed at the value on the x-axis and the limit is allowed to freely
adjust. Panel (C) plots the lender's optimal spread when their limit is fixed at the value on the x-axis. Panel (D) plots the
lender's NPV profits as a percent of GDP when their limit is fixed at the value on the x-axis and the spread is allowed to freely
adjust. Borrowing limits are expressed as a percent of GDP per capita. Spreads are expressed as percentage points over the
savings interest rate.




decreasing the incentive for the consumer to borrow. Since credit markets are likely to have significantly
affected U.S. savings rates since the 1970s (e.g., Carroll, Slacalek, and Sommer (2019) and Herkenhoff
(2017)), our benchmark model is in general equilibrium. As robustness in Section 7, we consider the
partial equilibrium version of our framework.


5.3                       Monopoly to Stackelberg Duopoly

We assume there is a one-time, unexpected, and permanent change from monopoly to duopoly at date
t = 1. The new entrant and incumbent compete as Stackelberg duopolists. Solving for an unrestricted


                                                                        23
                                   Table 7: Credit card market variables (1970s)

     Variable (unit=percent)                Monopoly      Data                         Source

     Spread                                        5.41    8.48    Board of Governors & Author's Calc.(1974-1975)
     Excess spread: actual - zero-profit           2.89    5.69   Board of Governors & Author's Calc. (1974-1975)
     Bankruptcy rate                               0.10    0.06                                  ABI (1971-1975)
     Credit to GDP                                 0.11    0.74            Board of Governors & NIPA (1971-1975)
     Borrowing limit to GDP per capita             5.79       _                                                 _


Notes: See Section 2 for details on construction of the excess spread in the data. The excess spread in model is
defined as avg - zero where avg =  N                      N
                                       j=1 j a j ( a ) /  j=1 a j ( a ) and zero = D (1 + r ) / (1 - D ) where D is the
economy-wide chargeoff rate.



path of spreads and limits would be computationally infeasible. Therefore, we make the following re-
striction: at date t = 1, lenders reoptimize and commit to their new strategies. That is, strategies are
restricted to be constant over time. The incumbent lender is the first mover and the new entrant is the
second mover, without loss of generality. Let  1 and l¯1 denote the first mover's new spread and new
limit. Let  2 and l¯2 denote the second mover's new spread and limit. At date t = 1, lenders choose
                                    ¯1 ), ( 2 , l
their new limits and spreads {( 1 , l           ¯2 )} to maximize the net present value of profits along the
transition path given by (6). To understand the transition path from monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly
in the 1970s, we first characterize each Stackelberg duopolist's optimal policy functions.
    It is important to note that since lenders in our economy will offer both a price (interest rate) and
a quantity constraint (borrowing limit), we cannot classify theoretically whether the interest rate and
borrowing limit policy functions are strategic complements or substitutes (e.g., Bulow, Geanakoplos,
and Klemperer (1985)). We must therefore quantitatively evaluate whether there is a first-mover or
second-mover advantage when considering Stackelberg competition.
              ¯1 be the spread and limit that maximize the first mover's profits. Figure 6 describes each
   Let  1 and l
Stackelberg duopolist's optimal spreads and limits. Panel (A) plots the second mover's best response of
                                             ¯1 ), holding fixed the first mover's limit at the profit maximiz-
spreads to the first mover's spread  2 ( 1 , l
ing limit. Panel (B) plots the corresponding profits for both the first mover and second mover. If the first
mover commits to a large spread ( 1 > 2.07%), the second mover will undercut the first mover and set  2
just below  1 ,  2 =  1 - for arbitrarily small . In this region ( 1 > 2.07%), spreads are strategic com-
                       ¯1 )
            d  2 (  1 ,l
plements,        d 1
                      0. If the first mover increases their spread, the second mover also increases their
spread and undercuts the first mover. This is typical in Stackelberg-Bertrand games. However, strategic
complementarity of spreads does not hold for all first-mover spreads. There is a threshold at which the
second mover's undercutting strategy is no longer profitable relative to the alternate strategy of charging
a higher spread and becoming the second-ranked lender. For extremely low spreads, the second mover
is made strictly better off by setting a high spread. The point that induces the second mover to abandon




                                                            24
                                                        Figure 6: Stackelberg policy functions

          (A) 2nd Mover's Best Response Spread                                                  (B) Profits (NPV) by 1st Mover Spread

                           8.00                                                                          0.35
                                          2.07, 6.90
       percentage points




                                                                                                         0.25                  2nd mover




                                                                                        percent of GDP
                           6.00

                           4.00                                                                          0.15
                                                                                                                   1st mover
                           2.00                                                                          0.05

                           0.00                                                                      -0.05
                               1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00 6.00                                              1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00 6.00
                                       spread: 1st mover                                                          spread: 1st mover

                 (C) 2nd Mover's Best Response Limit                                               (D) Profits (NPV) by 1st Mover Limit

                           6.00                                                                          0.25
   percent of GDP pc




                           5.00                                                                                      2nd mover
                                                                                        percent of GDP


                                                                                                         0.15
                                              2.05, 4.02
                           4.00
                                                                                                         0.05            1st mover
                           3.00

                           2.00                                                                      -0.05
                               1.00        2.00       3.00      4.00                                       1.00       2.00       3.00      4.00
                                 limit: 1st mover (percent of GDP pc)                                    limit: 1st mover (percent of GDP pc)
Notes: Panel (A) plots the 2nd mover's best response function for spreads. This is the optimal spread of the 2nd mover given
the 1st mover chooses the spread specified on the x-axis, holding the 1st mover's limit fixed at their optimum. Panel (B) plots
the corresponding NPV profits of the 1st and 2nd mover. Panel (C) plots the 2nd mover's best response function for limits.
This is the optimal limit of the 2nd mover given the 1st mover chooses the limit specified on the x-axis, holding the 1st
mover's spread fixed at their optimum. Panel (D) plots the corresponding NPV profits of the 1st and 2nd mover. Borrowing
limits are expressed as a percent of GDP per capita. Spreads are expressed as percentage points over the savings interest rate.




the undercutting strategy is the equilibrium in our calibration.6 Therefore, the equilibrium features the
first mover setting a low spread and the second mover setting a high spread.
                                                                                              ¯2 ( 1 , l
        Panel (C) plots the second mover's best response of limits to the first mover's limit l        ¯1 ), holding
fixed the first mover's spread at the profit maximizing spread. Analogous to Panel (B), Panel (D) plots
the corresponding profits for both the first mover and second mover. Panel (C) illustrates the fact that
credit limits are strategic substitutes. As the first mover sets a higher limit, default risk increases and the
                                                            ¯2 ( 1 ,l
                                                           dl       ¯1 )
second mover sets a lower limit,                                 ¯1
                                                                dl
                                                                            0. This is typical in Stackelberg-Cournot games, and tends
      6 This
         logic is also why a pure strategy Nash equilibrium does not exist. For low spreads, a profitable deviation is to set a
high spread. However, if your competitor sets a high spread then a profitable deviation is to undercut, etc.


                                                                                   25
to yield a first-mover advantage.
    Since lenders are choosing both spreads (which are complements) and limits (which are substitutes),
there are regions of the parameter space where the first-mover advantage dominates, and there are re-
gions of the parameter space where the second-mover advantage dominates. Our estimated parameters
yield a second-mover advantage. This is evident in Panels (B) and (D) where the second mover's profits
are higher than the first mover's profits.
    We begin by comparing the initial steady state (t = 0) and the terminal steady state. Column (2) of
Table 8 reports spreads, limits, and other credit-related summary statistics. As discussed above, Column
(2) demonstrates that the first mover chooses a low borrowing limit (2.05 percent of GDP per capita) and
a low spread (2.07 percent). The second mover chooses a borrowing limit that is almost twice that of the
first mover (4.02 percent of GDP per capita) and a significantly higher spread (6.90 percent). The second
mover captures a slightly smaller share of the market, 36.87 percent of outstanding credit. Recall that
all borrowers will first borrow from the first mover and then the second mover, given our equilibrium
ranking of spreads. However, the second mover charges a significantly higher spread, and therefore,
captures 72.03 percent of total lender profits.

                            Table 8: Comparison of steady state outcomes in the 1970s

                                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
     Summary Statistics                                        Monopoly        Stackelberg     Collusive-      Competitive
                                                                                               Cournot         Pricing

     Firm 1 (first mover in Stackelberg)
     Borrowing limit to initial GDP pc                         5.79            2.05            3.81            10.13
     Spread                                                    5.41            2.07            5.10            2.72
     Market share of outstanding credit                        100             63.13           50              100
     Market share of total profits                             100             27.97           50              100

     Firm 2 (second mover in Stackelberg)
     Borrowing limit to initial GDP pc                         -               4.02            3.81            -
     Spread                                                    -               6.90            5.10            -
     Market share of outstanding credit                        -               36.87           50              -
     Market share of total profits                             -               72.03           50              -

     Credit to GDP                                             0.11            0.13            0.16            0.39
     Bankruptcy rate                                           0.10            0.10            0.12            0.16
     Charge-off rate                                           2.43            2.10            3.14            2.58
     Excess spread: actual - zero-profit                       2.89            1.67            1.81            0


Notes: Table reports credit-related summary statistics for the initial monopoly steady state at t = 0 (Column (1)) relative to the
duopoly steady-state at the end of the transition path. Column (2) is Stackelberg duopoly, in which Firm 1 is the first mover.
Column (3) is Collusive-Cournot, in which lenders collude in the first stage on interest rates and then compete on limits in the
second stage. Column (4) is perfectly competitive pricing. We define the competitive pricing equilibrium to be the limit and
spread that maximize welfare of an unborn agent, subject to weakly positive profits.




                                                               26
    In terms of credit outcomes, Column (2) of Table 8 shows that total credit increases by more than
15 percent from 0.11 percent of GDP to 0.13 percent of GDP. Column (2) also demonstrates that while
total borrowing limits do not increase much from monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly (5.79 percent vs
6.07[=2.05+4.02] percent of GDP per capita), the excess spread decreases significantly from 2.89 percent
to 1.67 percentage points, a reduction of 42 percent.
    Figure 7 illustrates the optimal spreads and credit limits for the first and second mover along the
transition path. Panels (a) through (f) of Figure 8 plot key variables along the transition path from
monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly.

                                  Figure 7: Transition from monopoly to duopoly

                     (a) Spreads                                              (b) Borrowing Limits

  8.00                                                            0.16

                        2nd mover
  6.00                                                            0.12
                                                                                     2nd mover

  4.00                                                            0.08
                        1st mover
  2.00                                                            0.04
                                                                                     1st mover

  0.00                                                            0.00
         0            10            20            30                     0           10            20            30

Notes: The initial steady state (t=0) is a monopoly. At date t = 1, the economy unexpectedly transitions to a Stackelberg
duopoly. We assume perfect foresight for subsequent periods. Panel (a) plots the optimal spread of the first and second mover.
Panel (b) plots the optimal limit of the first and second mover.


    Since total borrowing limits increase and average spreads decrease, individuals begin to borrow
more. As a result, credit rises monotonically in Panel (a) of Figure 8. An implication of dissaving is
that the capital stock declines monotonically in Panel (b). Reduced saving has two general equilibrium
effects: a higher risk free rate and lower wage rate. Panel (c) illustrates that the risk-free interest rate in-
creases. With less capital, the marginal product of labor falls. As a result, the wage rate falls in Panel (d).
While these general equilibrium price effects are small in magnitude, they have important consequences
for the distributional burden of monopoly power, discussed in the next section.
    Since borrowing limits increase discontinuously and net assets slowly adjust according to the con-
sumers' Euler equations, utilization rates fall and consumers have extra slack in the credit market. This
generates the sharp drop in defaults shown in Panel (e). In the long run, however, consumers dissave
and borrow more, which causes defaults to rise in the cross-section. Panel (f) plots the resulting path
for aggregate lender profits. The consumer credit sector remains profitable throughout the transition
path. The discontinuous decline in defaults generates a positive spike in profits. However, increased
competition eventually lowers profits of lenders by roughly 30 percent.

                                                             27
                                                      Figure 8: Transition from monopoly to duopoly

                                            (a) Credit                                                            (b) Capital stock

                             0.14                                                                 100.01
                                                                                                  100.00




                                                                                index, year 0=100
     percent of GDP




                             0.13
                                                                                                     99.99
                             0.12
                                                                                                     99.98
                             0.11
                                                                                                     99.97
                             0.10                                                                    99.96
                                     0        10             20    30                                         0          10            20   30
                                                    years                                                                      years


                                         (c) Interest Rate                                                        (d) Wage Rate

                             1.238                                                                100.01
                                                                                index, year 0 =100



                             1.237                                                                100.00
     percent




                             1.236                                                                   99.99


                             1.235                                                                   99.98
                                     0         10            20    30                                         0          10            20   30
                                                    years                                                                      years

                                         (e) Default Rate                                                           (f) Profits

                             0.11                                                                 0.004
     percent of population




                                                                                 percent of GDP




                             0.10                                                                 0.003


                             0.09                                                                 0.002


                             0.08                                                                 0.001
                                     0        10             20    30                                     0            10              20   30
                                                    years                                                                     years

Notes: The initial steady state (t=0) is a monopoly. At date t = 1, the economy unexpectedly transitions to a Stackelberg
duopoly. We assume perfect foresight for subsequent periods.


                                                                           28
   Table 9 presents the welfare gains generated by transitioning from monopoly to duopoly in the 1970s.
We use two measures of welfare: consumption equivalent variation (CEV) and wealth equivalent varia-
tion (WEV). Consumption equivalent variation is a standard measure that calculates the lifetime increase
of consumption in the initial monopoly steady state such that a consumer is indifferent between the econ-
omy with a monopolist and an economy with a duopoly. In our model, we compute CEV numerically,
taking into account default costs and taste shocks.
   Wealth equivalent variation is the one-time transfer that the consumer requires in the initial monopoly
steady state to be as well-off with duopoly. Wealth equivalent variation is our preferred measure because
(1) it allows for aggregation across heterogeneous consumers and (2) it takes into account that consumers
re-optimize on their decisions given the one-time transfer. Following Conesa, Costa, Kamali, Kehoe, Ny-
gard, Raveendranathan, and Saxena (2018), it is calculated as follows:

                                               min WEV                                                    (11)
                                                         s.t.
                              V0 (i,  ,  , , z, a + WEV ) Vt (i,  ,  , , z, a)
                                                         ¯1
                                              a + WEV  - l                 if i = g
                                              a + WEV 0                    if i = b,

V0 (i, , z, a + WEV ) refers to the value at the initial steady state (monopolist) given a one-time transfer of
WEV , Vt (i, , z, a) refers to the value in period t along the transition path, and l¯1 refers to the borrowing
limit in the initial steady state. The last two inequalities ensure that the minimization problem is well
defined. When computing V0 (i, , z, a + WEV ), the consumer takes into account price changes resulting
from the reform, but not price changes resulting from the WEV transfers. When measuring welfare
for unborn agents, we assume agents enter in good standing with zero assets and that they draw their
earnings states from the ergodic earnings distribution. When aggregating wealth equivalent variation
over living cohorts, we use the initial steady state distribution of agents.
   Column (1) of Table 9 provides both consumption and wealth equivalent gains from Stackelberg
duopoly. At the date of the transition experiment (t = 1), an unborn agent requires an increase in lifetime
consumption of 0.09 percent to be as well-off living in an economy with a single monopoly lender rather
than a Stackelberg duopoly. Equivalently, an unborn agent requires a one-time transfer at birth worth
0.42 percent of initial GDP per capita to be as well-off living in an economy with a single monopoly lender
rather than a Stackelberg duopoly. Among those that are alive at the date of the transition experiment
(t = 1), the aggregate sum of wealth equivalent variation across workers equals 0.24 percent of GDP.
Lastly, 93 percent of agents are better off from a new lender entrant.
   Panel (a) of Figure 9 plots wealth equivalent variation by earnings decile. Individuals in the lowest
earnings decile require a transfer worth $200 (2016 dollars) to be indifferent between the status quo and
transitioning to Stackelberg duopoly. Individuals in the highest earnings decile require a transfer worth
$300. Panel (b) of Figure 9 expresses the WEV as a ratio of earnings in each decile. Individuals in the


                                                        29
                                              Table 9: Welfare gains from different forms of competition in the 1970s.

                                                                                                              (1)                                (2)              (3)
      Welfare gains: Monopoly to...                                                                      Stackelberg                        Collusive-       Competitive
                                                                                                                                            Cournot          pricing

      CEV unborn at t = 1 (% of lifetime consumption)                                                    0.09                               0.14             0.55
      WEV unborn at t = 1 (% of initial GDP pc)                                                          0.42                               0.66             2.74
      WEV alive at t = 1 (% of initial GDP)                                                              0.24                               0.38             1.66
      Population better off (% of population)                                                            92.55                              95.51            99.40


Notes: This table reports welfare gains along the transition path relative to monopoly steady state. When measuring wealth or
consumption equivalent variation for unborn agents, we assume agents enter in good standing with zero assets and that they
draw their earnings states from the ergodic income distribution. When aggregating wealth equivalent variation over living
cohorts, we use the initial steady state distribution of agents. Welfare is measured as either (a) consumption equivalent
variation (CEV) for an unborn agent at the date of the transition t = 1, (b) the wealth equivalent variation (WEV) using
equation (11) for unborn agents, or (c) WEV for the cohort that is alive at the date of the transition t = 1. Column (1) is
Stackelberg duopoly. Column (2) is Collusive-Cournot, in which lenders collude in the first stage on interest rates and then
compete on limits in the second stage. Column (3) is competitive pricing.



Figure 9: Welfare gains by earnings decile along transition path from monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly

    (a) Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV) by earnings                                    (b) Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV) over earnings by
    decile                                                                               earnings decile
                                        400                                                                                 4.0
         one-time equivalent transfer




                                                                                             one-time equivalent transfer




                                        300                                                                                 3.0

                                        200                                                                                 2.0

                                        100                                                                                 1.0

                                          0                                                                                 0.0
                                              1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                              1    2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                  deciles of earning distribution                                                     deciles of earnings distribution

Notes: Welfare gains from the transition are measured using wealth equivalent variation in Panel (a). Panel (b) takes the ratio
of the wealth equivalent variation to earnings in each decile.



lowest decile of earnings would require a transfer worth nearly 4 percent of their annual earnings to be
indifferent between the status quo and transitioning to Stackelberg duopoly. Individuals in the highest
deciles would require transfers worth very little of their annual earnings.
    Given that profits and wages fall, it is not necessarily the case that high earning individuals gain
from increased competition in the lending market. For our parameterization, the majority of high earn-
ing individuals realize welfare gains. General equilibrium price adjustments play an important role in
determining who realizes welfare gains and losses. Panel (a) of Figure 10 illustrates the distribution of



                                                                                    30
Figure 10: Welfare gains by earnings decile along transition path from monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly

      (a) General Equilibrium vs. Partial Equilibrium Wealth                              (b) Percent of the population with positive welfare gain
      Equivalent Variation by earnings decile                                             by wealth decile
                                         400                                                                      100
          one-time equivalent transfer




                                                   GE   PE




                                                                                              percent of population
                                                                                                                      95
                                         300
                                                                                                                      90
                                         200                                                                          85
                                                                                                                      80
                                         100
                                                                                                                      75
                                          0                                                                           70
                                               1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                      1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                   deciles of earning distribution                                             deciles of wealth distribution

Notes: In Panel (a) GE refers to general equilibrium. PE refers to partial equilibrium. PE economy holds interest rates and
wages constant at initial steady state levels. Panel (b) plots fraction realizing positive welfare gain along transition path from
monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly.



welfare gains in general equilibrium (GE) and partial equilibrium (PE). In partial equilibrium, r and w
are held fixed at their initial steady state values. Without general equilibrium price adjustments, welfare
gains among the top two earnings deciles would be close to zero.
      Panel (b) of Figure 10 plots the percent of individuals who realize welfare gains after the new lender
enters, stratified by their wealth. Those at the low-end of the wealth distribution can now borrow more
cheaply. Those at the high-end earn more on their savings. But those in the middle are more likely to
lose since wages fall and they are not borrowing or saving significant amounts.
      In summary, the welfare costs of monopoly in the lending market are borne primarily by low and
high earning individuals. Eliminating monopoly benefits those in the tails of the earnings distribution.
High earning individuals benefit from higher interest rates on savings, whereas low earning individ-
uals benefit from lower credit card spreads and higher limits. As a percent of earnings, low earning
individuals are willing to give up the most to eliminate monopoly in the credit market.


5.4     Monopoly to Collusive-Cournot

In this section, we consider a different form of competition between duopolists: Collusive-Cournot.
Motivated by the evidence of interest rate collusion discussed in Section 2, we develop a two-stage
game in which lenders collude to set a common spread ( ) in the first stage and then they compete
over borrowing limits in the second stage. In the second stage, we assume the lenders compete in a
simultaneous move game, and we consider the symmetric Nash equilibrium of that game.
      Figure 11 illustrates lender policy functions in each stage of the game for the case with two lenders.
Panel (a), which plots the net present value of profits as a function of the spread, shows that in the first
stage lenders collude on a spread of 5.1 percentage points to maximize their second stage profits. Since


                                                                                     31
the second stage yields a symmetric outcome, all lenders agree on the optimal spread and earn the same
profits. Taking the spread from the first stage as given, lenders simultaneously compete over borrowing
limits. Panel (b) plots the best response function of the lenders in the second stage for the case where the
spread is 5.1 percentage points. The symmetric Nash equilibrium is determined by the point where the
best response function crosses the 45 degree line. Each lender sets a borrowing limit to GDP per capita
of 3.8 percent.

                                           Figure 11: Collusive-Cournot policy functions

   (a) Net present value of profits in stage 1                        (b) Borrowing limit best response in stage 2

                    0.30                                                                8
                                                                                                    player i best
                                        5.10, 0.23                                                  response
   percent of GDP




                                                                                        6



                                                                       limit player j
                    0.20
                                                                                                                    player j best
                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                    response
                    0.10
                                                                                        2

                    0.00                                                                0
                           2   3   4     5    6      7   8                                  0   2         4            6            8
                                       spread                                                       limit player i


Notes: Panel (a) plots lender profits as a function of the spread in the first stage. Lenders collude in the first stage to set the
spread that maximizes profits. Panel (b) plots the lenders' best response functions in the second stage. The symmetric Nash
equilibrium is the point where the limits cross the 45 degree line.



      Column (3) of Table 8 compares the initial monopoly steady state to the terminal Collusive-Cournot
steady state. Spreads decline from 5.4 percent with a monopoly lender to 5.1 percent with two Collusive-
Cournot lenders. The Collusive-Cournot lenders equally split profits and market-share since the Nash
equilibrium is symmetric. Relative to a monopoly lender, the aggregate borrowing limit to GDP ratio
increases by 30 percent from 5.8 to 7.6 percent (=2*3.8 percent since there are two lenders). The excess
spread drops from 2.89 to 1.81 percentage points, a reduction of more than 37 percent.
      Column (2) of Table 9 provides both consumption and wealth equivalent gains from Collusive-
Cournot duopoly. At the start of the transition, an unborn agent would require an increase in lifetime
consumption of 0.14 percent to be as well-off living in an economy with a single monopoly lender rather
than a Collusive-Cournot duopoly. In terms of wealth equivalent variation, an unborn agent would re-
quire a one-time transfer at birth worth 0.66 percent of initial GDP per capita to be indifferent between a
single monopoly lender and Collusive-Cournot duopoly. Among those alive at the start of the transition,
96 percent are better off in Collusive-Cournot duopoly. The corresponding aggregate wealth equivalent
variation across workers equals 0.38 percent of GDP. Relative to Stackelberg duopoly, Collusive-Cournot
generates larger welfare gains. This is because the Collusive-Cournot economy features both higher


                                                                 32
limits and lower spreads.
    When we decompose the source of the gains between credit limits and spreads, we find that roughly
80 percent of the welfare gains are due to increased limits. That is, the aggregate wealth equivalent varia-
tion across consumers equals 0.31 percent of GDP if we increase only the limits (0.31/0.38  0.8). Limits
are the dimension along which lenders compete, and thus limits move closer towards what competitive
pricing would dictate. Since lenders collude on spreads, only 20 percent of the welfare gains are due to
lower spreads. That is, the aggregate wealth equivalent variation across consumers equals 0.06 percent
of GDP if we decrease only the spreads (0.06/0.38  0.2).

Figure 12: Welfare gains by earnings decile along transition path from monopoly to Collusive-Cournot
duopoly


    (a) Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV) by earnings                                     (b) Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV) over income by
    decile                                                                                earnings decile
                                        500                                                                                  8.0
         one-time equivalent transfer




                                                                                              one-time equivalent transfer
                                        400
                                                                                                                             6.0
                                        300
                                                                                                                             4.0
                                        200
                                                                                                                             2.0
                                        100

                                          0                                                                                  0.0
                                              1    2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                              1    2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                  deciles of earnings distribution                                                     deciles of earnings distribution

Notes: Welfare gains from the transition are measured using wealth equivalent variation in Panel (a). Panel (b) takes the ratio
of the wealth equivalent variation to earnings in each decile.



    Similar to our prior findings, Figure 12 shows that the welfare losses from monopoly are largest at
the extremes of the earnings distribution. Panel (a) plots wealth equivalent variation by earnings decile.
Individuals in the lowest earnings decile would require a transfer worth $400 to be indifferent between
monopoly and transitioning to Collusive-Cournot duopoly. Individuals in the highest earnings decile
would require a similar magnitude transfer. Expressing the wealth equivalent variation as a ratio of
earnings in Panel (b), we find that individuals in the lowest decile of earnings would require a transfer
worth over 6 percent of their annual earnings to be indifferent between monopoly and transitioning to
Collusive-Cournot duopoly.
    In summary, a Collusive-Cournot duopoly generates larger increases in limits than Stackelberg duopoly.
The resulting welfare gains of transitioning to Collusive-Cournot duopoly are therefore larger. Nonethe-
less, the distributional implications from Collusive-Cournot and Stackelberg duopoly are similar ­ those
in the lowest and highest earnings deciles benefit most from new lender entry.




                                                                                     33
5.5     Monopoly to Perfectly Competitive Pricing

The last 1970s transition path we consider is from monopoly pricing to perfectly competitive pricing.
Unlike the prior experiment, there is no lender entry in this section. Rather, we assume that there is a
single lender that unexpectedly and permanently changes from monopoly pricing to perfectly compet-
itive pricing at t = 1. This captures an upper bound on welfare gains from competitive pricing in the
1970s.
      We must define what perfectly competitive pricing means in this context. Our first condition for
competitive pricing is zero profits. However, this condition alone is not sufficient to uniquely determine
the equilibrium. For any given limit, Figure 4 shows that there are two zero-profit spreads. Likewise, for
any given spread, there are two zero-profit credit limits.
      The way we resolve this issue is to define perfectly competitive pricing to be the combination of
spreads and limits that maximizes the expected utility of an unborn agent in good standing with zero
assets, subject to weakly positive lender profits:

                                         max E , , V0 ( g,  ,  , , 0)
                                            ¯
                                           ,l

                                                s.t.
                                                                t
                                                         1
                                                       1 + rt
                                                                    t  0
                                                t =0

      Column (4) of Table 8 describes the competitive pricing steady state with a single lender, N = 1.
Compared to monopoly pricing, the credit limit is nearly twice as large (10.13 versus 5.79 percent) and the
spread falls by 50 percent (5.41 vs. 2.72 percentage points). Credit to GDP more than triples, increasing
from 0.11 to 0.39 percent. A side-effect of increased borrowing is a 60 percent greater default rate, rising
from 0.10 to 0.16 percent. Because the lender breaks even, excess spreads are zero by construction.
      The large reduction in spreads and increase in limits generates considerable welfare gains. Column
(3) of Table 9 shows that an unborn agent would require an increase in lifetime consumption of 0.55
percent to be as well-off living in an economy with a single lender that behaves monopolistically rather
than a single lender that behaves competitively. The wealth equivalent gain to the same consumer,
expressed as a one-time transfer, is equal to 2.74 percent of initial GDP per capita. Among those alive
at the start of the transition, 99.4 percent are better off with a single lender that behaves competitively.
The aggregate wealth equivalent variation across workers who are alive at the date of the transition
equals 1.66 percent of GDP. Relative to the other transition experiments, a single competitive lender
generates welfare gains that are 4 to 7 times larger than Stackelberg or Collusive-Cournot duopoly. Of
the aggregate wealth equivalent variation, 50 percent of the welfare gains (worth 0.86 percent of GDP)
are explained by higher limits alone. The remaining welfare gains are generated by lower spreads, as
well as the interaction between lower spreads and higher limits.
      We now find much larger distributional effects of monopoly. Panel (a) of Figure 13 shows that the
lowest earning individuals would require a one-time transfer worth $1,600 to be indifferent between a


                                                         34
single lender that prices monopolistically and a single lender that prices competitively. Individuals in
the highest earnings decile would require a transfer worth $1,800. Expressing the wealth equivalent
variation as a ratio of earnings in Panel (b), we find that individuals in the lowest decile of earnings
would require a transfer worth over 25 percent of their annual earnings to be indifferent between a
single lender that prices monopolistically and a single lender that prices competitively.

Figure 13: Welfare gains by earnings decile along transition path from monopolistic single lender to a
perfectly competitive single lender.


      (a) Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV) by earnings                                   (b) Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV) over income by
      decile                                                                              earnings decile
                                    2,000                                                                               30
         one-time equivalent transfer




                                                                                             one-time equivalent transfer
                                    1,600                                                                               25
                                                                                                                        20
                                    1,200
                                                                                                                        15
                                        800
                                                                                                                        10
                                        400                                                                                 5
                                          0                                                                                 0
                                              1    2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                           1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                  deciles of earnings distribution                                                  deciles of earnings distribution

Notes: Welfare gains from the transition are measured using wealth equivalent variation in Panel (a). Panel (b) takes the ratio
of the wealth equivalent variation to earnings in each decile.




5.6     What Drives Welfare Gains Among Low Earning Individuals?

To better understand what drives the welfare gains among low-earning individuals, we study implica-
tions for average consumption, variance of consumption, average net assets, and default probabilities
of agents in the lowest decile of earnings at the start of the transition experiment (t = 1). We compare
implications between remaining in the monopoly economy and transitioning to a duopoly. We find that
low earning individuals benefit from higher average consumption, lower variance of consumption, and
lower default rates along the transition path.
      Panel (a) of Figure 14 plots the relative average consumption profile of agents in the bottom-decile of
earnings at the time of the transition (t = 1). More specifically, Panel (a) plots the ratio of average con-
sumption along the duopoly transition path divided by the status quo average consumption if the agent
remained in the monopoly economy. Agents consume roughly 0.5 percent more along the transition
path to Stackelberg duopoly relative to status quo. With competitive pricing, agents on average consume
roughly 3 percent more during the transition relative to status quo. In terms of consumption volatility,
increased lender competition allows agents to better smooth consumption. Panel (b) shows that the vari-
ance of consumption decreases by 0.5 percent along the transition path to Stackelberg duopoly relative
to status quo. With competitive pricing, consumption variance falls by nearly 5 percent relative to status

                                                                                     35
quo. Over time, consumption variance remains significantly low, especially in the case of competitive
pricing. Panel (c) shows that low earning individuals are able to dissave relatively more with greater
lender competition. In the case of competitive pricing, their net asset position falls by nearly 8 percent
towards the end of the transition relative to status quo, consistent with time series patterns documented
by Carroll et al. (2019). Because credit limits expand, default rates initially decline in Panel (d). In the
long run, however, default rates rise above the monopoly case because agents accumulate more debt.
While not the focus of our paper, these patterns are broadly consistent with the evolution of defaults in
the U.S. (e.g., Livshits et al. (2010)).

                          Figure 14: Average consumption, asset, and default profiles of a low earning newborn

                                  (a) Average Consumption                                                         (b) Variance of Consumption



                        104                                                                                 104
     duopoly/monopoly




                        102                                                              duopoly/monopoly   102
                        100                                                                                 100
                        98                                                                                   98
                        96                                                                                   96
                                    Stackelberg     2-stage    Perfect comp.                                          Stackelberg     2-stage    Perfect comp.
                        94                                                                                   94
                              0             10                20               30                                 0           10                20               30
                                                  periods                                                                           periods



                                   (c) Average Net Assets                                                               (d) Default Rate



                        102                                                                                 200
     duopoly/monopoly




                                                                                         duopoly/monopoly




                        100                                                                                 150
                        98
                                                                                                            100
                        96
                        94                                                                                   50
                                    Stackelberg     2-stage    Perfect comp.                                          Stackelberg     2-stage    Perfect comp.
                        92                                                                                    0
                              0             10                20               30                                 0           10                20               30
                                                  periods                                                                           periods

Notes: Panels (a) through (d) derived from simulating agents in the bottom-decile of earnings at date t = 1 on the transition
path to (1) Stackelberg duopoly (Stackelberg), (2) the Collusive-Cournot duopoly (2-stage), and (3) single-lender competitive
pricing (Perfect Comp.). Panel (a) plots the average consumption path along the transition path expressed as a ratio to average
consumption if the agent remained in a world with a single-lender monopoly. Panel (b) plots the variance of consumption
along the transition path expressed as a ratio to the variance of consumption if the agent remains in a world with a
single-lender monopoly. Panels (c) and (d) repeat the same exercise for net assets and defaults, respectively.




                                                                                    36
5.7   Summary of Findings

Overall, consumers benefit moderately when lenders enter and compete imperfectly (e.g., Stackelberg or
Collusive-Cournot). However, they gain substantially from perfect competition. In each case considered,
we find that the extremes of the earnings distribution stand to benefit the most from competitive reforms
in the lending market. We interpret Stackelberg duopoly as providing a lower bound on the welfare gains
from increased competition in the credit market and we interpret competitive pricing as providing an
upper bound. In the case of Stackelberg duopoly, the lowest earners require a transfer worth 4 percent
of their annual earnings to be indifferent between monopolistic and Stackelberg pricing. In the case of
competitive pricing, the lowest earners require a transfer worth 25 percent of their annual earnings to
be indifferent between monopolistic and competitive pricing. Those in the bottom decile of the earnings
distribution gain from their greater ability to smooth consumption. Those in the top decile gain from
general equilibrium price effects and the ability to reduce their stock of precautionary savings.


6     Gains from National Competition: Duopoly to 2016 Oligopoly
As various barriers to inter-state credit card competition fell in the 1970s (Evans and Schmalensee (2005)),
and as lawsuits continued to challenge exclusivity clauses and other restrictions to credit card competi-
tion (e.g., Appendix C.3), credit card markets became nationally competitive. While we do not explicitly
model regions, we capture these changes in credit card competition by measuring the welfare gains
from transitioning between duopoly in the 1970s (our proxy for limited inter-regional competition) to
oligopoly in 2016. Unlike our prior exercise, we now allow lenders to price discriminate with respect
to the worker's permanent earning ability, which we discretized into two types,   { L ,  H }. This is
designed to capture the adoption of credit scoring, the digitization of banking, and other factors that led
to the rise of heterogeneous interest rate pricing (inter alia Mester (1997) and Livshits et al. (2016)). Based
on the observation that nine lenders control roughly 90 percent of the credit card market in 2016 (see Ta-
ble 1), we assume that there are nine lenders for each level of permanent earnings in the 2016 oligopoly,
i.e., N = 9 for   { L ,  H }. All other preference and technology parameters are fixed at 1970s values
given by Tables 5 and 6. Subsequently, we study the role for policy in 2016. In particular, we measure
the welfare consequences of homogeneous interest rate caps that have been proposed recently.


6.1   Duopoly to 2016 Oligopoly

The main challenge to modeling oligopolistic competition in 2016 is allowing for strategic interactions
among nine lenders. We make the problem computationally feasible by maintaining the assumption of
Collusive-Cournot competition within each consumer type,   { L ,  H }. Within each consumer type,
lenders first collude on the spread and then compete on limits. The resulting Nash equilibrium yields
monotone best response curves for the limits within each consumer type. This market structure allows
us to preserve price dispersion and to also solve the problem.



                                                      37
    We begin by showing that with N = 9 lenders, our model does well at matching several non-targeted
credit market moments in 2016. Table 10 shows that we account for almost all of the total borrowing limit
in 2016. Our model produces a borrowing limit to GDP per capita of 28 percent compared to 30 percent
in the data. We also do well at matching the default rate. Our model generates a default rate of 0.17
versus 0.15 percent in the data. Lastly, even though we assume fairly restrictive competition among
lenders, we are only able to account for 20 percent of the excess spreads observed in the data. Given our
understatement of excess spreads, we view the gains from competitive reforms as conservative estimates.

                                  Table 10: Credit card market variables (2016)

                   Variable (unit=percent)                            N = 9           Data

                   Borrowing limit to GDP per capita                  28.26           30.21
                   Default rate                                       0.17            0.15
                   Charge-off rate                                    2.38            3.15
                   Excess spread: actual - zero-profit                1.14            5.31


Notes: This table reports non-targeted 2016 moments under the assumption of Collusive-Cournot equilibrium with nine
lenders ( N = 9). Preference and technology parameters remain fixed at 1970 values given by Tables 5 and 6.



    Panels (a) through (d) of Figure 15 plot outcomes from Collusive-Cournot competition among N 
{2, 3, 5, 9, 14} lenders by low and high income types. Analyzing implications across income types, Panel
(a) shows that low-type individuals ( L ) face much tighter credit limits than high-type individuals ( H ).
The main force generating this result is the higher default rate among low-type individuals. Figure 16
illustrates the default policy functions for low- and high-type individuals. For the majority of the state
space, low types default at a higher rate. However, for small negative net asset positions, the opposite is
true since low types are hurt more by entering autarky. The higher default rate leads to higher spreads
for low-type individuals and makes them less profitable to lenders (Figure 15, Panels (b) and (c)). This
pattern of lower limits and higher interest rates among low earning individuals is consistent with SCF
data, as explored in Raveendranathan (2019).
    When more lenders enter the market, limits increase for both low-type and high-type individuals.
There are two opposing effects on spreads: (1) competitive forces lower spreads, and (2) since individu-
als cannot commit to borrow from only one lender, debt dilution raises spreads (e.g., Bizer and DeMarzo
(1992) and Hatchondo and Martinez (2018)). Since lenders collude on spreads, the portfolio choice of
individuals is indeterminate. Regardless of the allocation rule of individual borrowing across lenders,
debt dilution will be present. The individual is always free to borrow their next dollar from another
lender and thus raise the default propensity on all past amounts borrowed. Since we assume that the
lender commits to an interest rate and credit limit ex-ante, they must price their loans taking into account
subsequent borrowing at other lenders by the individual. Panel (b) shows that, initially, the competitive
effect of entry prevails and steady state spreads fall for both the low- and high-type individuals. How-
ever, as more lenders enter the economy, debt dilution eventually puts upward pressure on spreads. As


                                                          38
                                                    Figure 15: Oligopoly with price discrimination


                                         (a) Limit by type                                                                  (b) Spread by type


                             60                                                                               6
         percent of GDP pc




                                                                                   percentage points
                                              high type                                                       5                 low type
                             40
                                                                                                              4
                             20
                                                                                                              3                high type
                                             low type
                              0                                                                               2
                                  2        5       8        11      14                                            2          5       8        11        14
                                            number of lenders                                                                 number of lenders


                                      (c) Total profits by type                                                       (d) WEV by type ($2016 dollars)


                         1                                                                                    3,500
                                                                               one-time equivalent transfer




                                                                                                              3,000                   high type
        percent of GDP




                                                                                                              2,500
                                       high type                                                              2,000
                                                                                                              1,500
                                                                                                              1,000
                                      low type                                                                  500                    low type
                         0                                                                                        0
                              2          5       8        11        14                                                  2       5      8       11       14
                                          number of lenders                                                                     number of lenders

Notes: X-axis is number of lenders in steady state. Panel (a) plots the credit limit expressed as a percent of GDP per capita.
Panel (b) plots the spread, Panel (c) plots profits by type expressed as a percent of GDP, and Panel (d) plots wealth equivalent
variation by type in 2016 dollars where the WEV is computed individually and then aggregated according to the ergodic
distribution within each type.



more lenders enter the market, total profits decline, especially from high-type individuals. However,
profits still remain greater than zero, even with fourteen lenders.
    Panel (d) plots wealth equivalent variation across steady states by type. We compute wealth equiva-
lent variation for each agent according to (11). High types require a transfer worth $2,800 to be indifferent
between living in an economy with two instead of nine lenders. Low types, however, would gain very
little. They require a transfer worth $150 to be indifferent between living in an economy with two instead
of nine lenders.


                                                                         39
    Figure 16: Default policy function p(·) by individual type for N = 9 Collusive-Cournot lenders.


                                                              0.5




                                    default probability (p)
                                                              0.4
                                                              0.3
                                                                       low type
                                                              0.2
                                                              0.1
                                                                      high type
                                                              0.0
                                                                    -0.5   -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3            0.5
                                                                            current period assets (a)



    Despite the large welfare gains generated by moving from two to nine lenders, the marginal welfare
gains generated by moving from nine to fourteen lenders are small. For example, in Figure 17, we ag-
gregate the wealth equivalent variation across individuals. We find individuals would require a transfer
worth approximately 1.87 percent of GDP to be as well off living in an economy with two instead of nine
lenders; however, individuals would only require a marginally larger transfer worth approximately 1.95
percent of GDP to be as well off living in an economy with two instead of fourteen lenders. As Figure 17
shows, moving from nine to fourteen lenders generates small welfare gains.

                           Figure 17: Aggregate Wealth Equivalent Variation (WEV)
                                      2
                                    percent of GDP




                                                              1




                                                              0
                                                                  2         5          8         11     14
                                                                                number of lenders
Notes: Aggregate wealth equivalent variation computed using equation (11). WEV expressed as one-time transfer required to
be indifferent between the economy with N = 2 lenders and the economy with N = X lenders (as specified by the x-axis).
WEV is aggregated using the initial distribution in the N = 2 economy.



    For the remainder of this section, we show that although more lender entry leads to small gains,
competitive pricing in 2016 would lead to large gains. In Table 11, we report (1) welfare gains from lender


                                                                                     40
entry in Collusive-Cournot competition, (2) welfare gains if only interest rates were set competitively,
and (3) welfare gains if both interest rates and limits were set competitively. These exercises inform us
how far the 2016 oligopoly is from perfect competition with respect to welfare. We define Competitive-
Cournot (case (2)) to be where lenders set the spread that maximizes the welfare of an unborn (given
low- or high-type) subject to weakly positive profits in the first stage and then compete on limits in the
second stage. We define perfectly competitive pricing (case (3)) to be the combination of spreads and
limits for low and high types that maximize a newborn's expected utility subject to weakly positive
profits. We maintain the assumption that the newborn is born in good standing with zero assets and
draws their persistent and transitory earnings from the ergodic distribution. We find welfare gains that
are significantly larger in Competitive-Cournot (case (2)) and competitive pricing (case (3)) compared to
Collusive-Cournot (case (1)). The wealth equivalent variation for the current cohort from Competitive-
Cournot pricing is equivalent to 2.55 percent of GDP, a 36 percent (2.55/1.87) increase relative to the
gains from lender entry. The wealth equivalent variation from perfectly competitive pricing is even
larger, totaling 3.20 percent of GDP. That is roughly 71 percent (3.20/1.87) more than the gains from
lender entry. Despite understating lender spreads relative to the data, our 2016 oligopoly economy
implies significant deviations from perfectly competitive pricing. In the next section, we explore what
fraction of these potential welfare gains can be captured by recently proposed credit market regulations.

Table 11: Comparison of Collusive-Cournot, Competitive-Cournot, and Perfectly Competitive Pricing.

                                                                           (1)               (2)              (3)
      Welfare gains: 2-Lender Collusive-Cournot to...                 9-Lender          9-Lender         Competitive
                                                                      Collusive-        Competitive-     Pricing
                                                                      Cournot           Cournot

      CEV unborn at t = 1 (% of lifetime consumption)                 0.17              0.27             0.31
      WEV unborn at t = 1 (% of initial GDP pc)                       0.81              1.38             1.70
      WEV low-unborn at t = 1 (% of initial GDP pc)                   0.30              0.78             0.92
      WEV high-unborn at t = 1 (% of initial GDP pc)                  4.93              6.30             8.02
      WEV alive at t = 1 (% of initial GDP)                           1.87              2.55             3.20
      Population better off (% of population)                         73.77             83.58            81.52


Notes: This table reports welfare gains along the transition path relative to 2-Lender Collusive-Cournot steady state (with
price discrimination). When measuring wealth or consumption equivalent variation for unborn agents, we assume agents
enter in good standing with zero assets and that they draw their earnings states from the ergodic earnings distribution. When
aggregating wealth equivalent variation over living cohorts, we use the initial steady state distribution of agents. Welfare is
measured as either (a) consumption equivalent variation (CEV) for an unborn agent at the date of the transition t = 1, (b) the
wealth equivalent variation (WEV) using equation (11) for unborn agents, or (c) WEV for the cohort which is alive at the date
of the transition t = 1. Column (1) is 9-Lender Collusive-Cournot. Column (2) is 9-Lender Competitive-Cournot in which
lenders choose the spread that maximizes the welfare of an unborn (given low- or high-type) subject to weakly positive profits
in the first stage and then compete on limits in the second stage. Column (3) is competitive pricing. We define the competitive
pricing equilibrium to be the limit and spread that maximize welfare of an unborn agent (given low- or high-type), subject to
weakly positive profits.




                                                              41
6.2      Policy: Capping Lender Spreads in 2016

In this section, we ask whether there is a role for policy to correct lender market power. One policy
that is often discussed in the context of lender market power is an interest rate cap. Credit card interest
rate caps fall under the umbrella of usury laws (see Evans and Schmalensee (2005) for more discussion
of usury laws in the U.S.). While roughly half of U.S. states have no interest rate cap on credit cards,
they still maintain usury laws that apply to non-bank entities such as payday lenders and loans that are
made without a written contract. For credit card lenders, the Marquette decision was an important legal
ruling. It established that credit card lenders are subject to the usury laws of the states in which they
are headquartered. After the Marquette decision, many credit card lenders moved their headquarters
to states with no maximum interest rate. Thus the Marquette decision effectively nullified state interest
rate caps. Recently, however, policymakers have renewed discussions of interest rates caps, including
a non-discriminatory federal interest rate cap.7 Our model provides a unique opportunity to study the
effects of interest rate cap policies.
      Similar to existing and proposed laws, we consider a non-discriminatory cap on lender spreads,
which can be equivalently implemented as an interest rate cap. Panels (a) through (d) of Figure 18 plot
equilibrium credit limits and wealth equivalent variation resulting from various interest rate caps. Panel
(a) plots the credit limit offered to low-type individuals as a function of the cap on lender spreads. When
the cap begins to bind, limits offered to the low-type begin to increase. At some point, however, the cap
is so tight that credit limits decline substantially below initial pre-cap levels. Panel (b) plots the wealth
equivalent variation. Low type individual households benefit most from a 3 percent cap on spreads.
Once the cap on spreads becomes tighter than 3%, low-type individuals are worse off. Despite the lower
spreads, credit limits contract enough to impede consumption smoothing. Panel (c) plots credit limits
for high-type individuals. High type individuals face much lower equilibrium credit card interest rates.
As a result, spread caps greater than 2.65 are non-binding for these individuals. We find that high-type
individuals benefit most from a 2 percent cap on spreads. High type individuals would require a one-
time transfer worth $700 (2016 dollars) to be just as well off in the pre-cap economy. Aggregating across
high and low-type individuals, we find that imposing a cap of 2 percent on spreads would yield one-
third of the welfare gains from competitive pricing. However, at a cap of 2%, low income individuals
face both tighter credit limits and have weakly negative welfare losses.
      Although caps on spreads generate gains for each type in isolation, there is no common spread cap
that generates welfare gains simultaneously among both low- and high-type individuals. A one-size-
fits-all cap on lender spreads generates welfare losses among either low- or high-type individuals. Caps
that are too tight benefit high-earning individuals at the expense of low-earning individuals. Overall,
homogeneous interest rate caps may have unintended distributional consequences and can only capture
a fraction of the welfare gains from perfect competition.



      7 For
        example, the proposal by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Bernie Sanders calls for a common federal interest rate cap:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-05-09/aoc-bernie-sanders-credit-card-interest.


                                                           42
                                   Figure 18: Oligopoly with price discrimination


                       (a) Low type limit                                    (b) Low type welfare ($2016 dollars)




                       (c) High type limit                                   (d) High type welfare ($2016 dollars)




Notes: X-axis is non-discriminatory interest rate cap. Panel (a) plots the resulting credit limit for the low-type individuals.
Panel (b) plots the resulting wealth equivalent variation of the low-type individuals. Panels (c) and (d) repeat the exercise for
high-type individuals.



7    Robustness
In this section, we discuss several robustness exercises. We consider (1) fixed costs of lender entry, (2)
an alternate redistribution of lender profits to high-earning households, and (3) a partial equilibrium
recalibration that matches credit usage.
    First, we assess the role of lender entry costs for our welfare analysis. We use our simulated lender
profits and our aggregate wealth equivalent variation to provide bounds on what private parties and/or
society would be willing to pay for a new entrant. Our first exercise recomputes household welfare if
there is a fixed lender cost equal to the net present value of lender profits that must be paid up-front.


                                                               43
The net present value of profits is the maximum amount a lender would be willing to pay to enter the
market. The initial lender loss is equally distributed among households. We know that there was lender
entry in the 1970s, and so the fixed cost must be weakly lower than the discounted stream of profits.
    Our second exercise is to compute the amount society would be willing to give up to have another
lender enter. This amount is given by aggregating across wealth compensating variation (WCV), which
we define in equation (12). WCV is negative for households that are better off with lender entry and
positive for households that are worse off. In the case that WCV is a negative number, this is the amount
households are willing to give up along the transition path with greater lender entry to be just as well-off
as they were in the initial monopolistic steady state. Similar to WEV, WCV can be aggregated across
households to obtain the total amount individuals would be willing to give up for lender entry.8



                                              min WCV                                                                 (12)
                                                        s.t.
                                     V0 (i,  ,  , , z, a) Vt (i,  ,  , , z, a + WCV )
                                                        ¯1
                                             a + WEV  - l                if i = g
                                             a + WEV 0                   if i = b,

    Table 12 reports our results for the 1970 Stackelberg duopoly and the 1970 Collusive-Cournot duopoly.
In both cases, we measure welfare among the cohort that is alive at the date of the transition. In the case
of Stackelberg duopoly, the wealth compensating variation is nearly identical to the wealth equivalent
variation in our benchmark counterfactual. Society would be willing to give up 0.24 percent of initial
GDP for a new Stackelberg entrant. If we assume that the entry cost of the new Stackelberg lender is
equal to the discounted flow profits of the lender, then the aggregate wealth equivalent variation from
the new Stackelberg entrant falls to 0.16 percent of initial GDP. The fixed cost reduces the welfare gain by
one-third relative to our benchmark counterfactual. We find a similar result when considering Collusive-
Cournot. Given that there was profitable lender entry in the 1970s, we view an entry cost equal to the
net present value of lender profits as an upper bound, and thus our reported welfare gains in 12 can be
viewed as lower bounds.
    Our second robustness check is to consider an alternative distribution of lender profits. We assume
that lender profits are only rebated to households in the top 0.1 percent of the earnings distribution.
We recompute welfare gains in the 1970s from lender entry in Table 13. We find that welfare gains are
generally higher in this economy. Low earning households no longer have flow-profits from lenders
each period, and thus the fall in total profits does not affect them. As a result, individuals alive at the
date of the transition from monopoly to Stackelberg duopoly would require a transfer worth 0.28 percent
of GDP to be as well-off in the initial equilibrium. This welfare gain is roughly 16 percent larger than our

                                                          ¯1
   8 Due to the timing assumption on the transition path, l
                                                        is still the relevant borrowing constraint for WCV since previously
borrowed money is owed to the prior monopoly lender. That monopoly lender committed to lend l    ¯1 .


                                                               44
Table 12: Welfare along transition path from 1970 monopoly to Stackelberg Duopoly or Collusive-
Cournot under alternative assumption for lender fixed costs.

                                                                                           Stackelberg       Collusive-Cournot
 Benchmark WEV of alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)                                          0.24              0.38
 Wealth Compensating Variation (WCV) of alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)                    0.24              0.37
 Fixed cost equal to NPV lender profits, WEV of alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)            0.16              0.27

Notes: ` Benchmark WEV of alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)' taken from Table 9, expresses aggregate WEV of the cohort alive at
the time of the transition over GDP in the initial equilibrium. `Wealth Compensating Variation (WCV) of alive at t=1 (% of
initial GDP)' defined in equation (12). `Fixed cost equal to NPV lender profits, WEV of alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)' assumes
lenders initially make a loss equal to the NPV of future profits. The loss is equally distributed among households.



benchmark counterfactual. We find similar results when we consider Collusive-Cournot competition.

Table 13: Welfare along transition path from 1970 monopoly to Stackelberg Duopoly or Collusive-
Cournot assuming lender profits distributed to only those in the top 0.1 percent of the earnings dis-
tribution.

                                                                                           Stackelberg       Collusive-Cournot
 Benchmark WEV alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)                                             0.24              0.38
 Profits distributed to top 0.1%, WEV alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)                      0.28              0.39

 Benchmark fraction who gain from lender entry                                             92.6              95.5
 Profits distributed to top 0.1%, Fraction who gain from lender entry                      97.4              96.5

Notes: ` Benchmark WEV of alive at t=1 (% of initial GDP)' taken from Table 9, expresses aggregate WEV of the cohort alive at
the time of the transition over GDP in the initial equilibrium. `Profits distributed to top 0.1%, WEV alive at t=1 (% of initial
GDP)' computes aggregate WEV assuming that lender profits are only distributed to households in the top 0.1% of the
earnings distribution.



    Lastly, we recompute welfare in a partial equilibrium model with greater credit access. There are
many partial equilibrium models that are capable of matching credit utilization rates (e.g., (Livshits
et al., 2007, 2010), Galenianos and Nosal (2016), and Raveendranathan (2019)) by simply lowering the
discount factor of households. Unlike these models, however, our cost of funds is endogenous, similar
to Chatterjee et al. (2007). As a result, lowering the discount factor raises the risk-free rate, which mutes
any borrowing response of households. We therefore drop the assumption of general equilibrium, and
recalibrate our model economy to match observed credit to GDP and other target moments in 1970-
75. We report the recalibration in Appendix D. We recompute welfare gains of transitioning to perfect
competition in 1970. We find that gains in terms of wealth equivalent variation for the current cohort
are 3.98 percent of GDP, which is significantly larger than the estimate in the benchmark of 1.66 percent.
Therefore, we view our paper's benchmark welfare analysis as conservative.




                                                              45
8   Conclusion
The U.S. credit card industry is characterized by a large degree of market concentration, excess spreads,
and excess profits relative to the banking industry. However, workhorse consumer credit models assume
atomistic zero-profit lenders. We relax this assumption and propose a new model that incorporates
oligopoly in the consumer credit market. Our model accounts for 20 to 50 percent of the excess spreads
observed in the data between 1970 and 2016.
    We use our estimated model to measure the gains from (i) increased lender entry, and (ii) competitive
pricing. In an environment without lender price discrimination in the 1970s, we find moderate gains
from increased lender entry. Individuals would require a one-time transfer worth between .24 and .38
percent of GDP to be as well-off in an economy with a single lender as a duopoly. Competitive pricing
generates a much larger welfare gain that is equivalent to a one-time transfer worth approximately 1.66
percent of GDP. We find similarly large numbers when we consider the transition from 1970s duopoly
with price discrimination to the nine lender oligopoly in 2016. We find individuals would require a
transfer worth approximately 1.87 percent of GDP to be as well off living in an economy with two instead
of nine lenders. Moreover, the welfare gains from competitive pricing in 2016 are worth roughly 3.20
percent of GDP.
    We then turn to the distribution of welfare losses. We find that eliminating monopoly benefits those
in the tails of the earnings distribution. High earning individuals benefit from greater interest rates, and
low earning individuals benefit from lower credit card spreads, greater limits, and an improved ability
to smooth consumption. In the case of competitive pricing in the 1970s, those in the lowest decile of
the earnings distribution require a one-time transfer worth 25 percent of their annual earnings to be
indifferent between monopolistic and competitive pricing.
    Lastly, we use our model to assess the welfare implications of homogeneous caps on credit card
interest rates. In particular, we consider a uniform cap on lender spreads over the risk-free rate. We
find that in our calibrated economy, homogeneous caps on spreads generate welfare losses among either
high-income or low-income individuals, and caps on spreads that are too tight can harm low-income
individuals.
    While our article tackles several important issues, many questions remain. Are strategic interactions
among credit card lenders limiting pass-through of monetary policy to households? Does lender market
power inhibit innovation and the adoption of new lending technologies? What type and magnitude of
aggregate fluctuations would generate negative profits for lenders, and what types of policies would
prevent lenders from exiting various segments of the credit card market? We believe that our framework
is tractable enough for future researchers to make progress on these questions as well as other important
and unanswered questions in the consumer credit literature.




                                                    46
References
Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2015). Regulating consumer financial
  products: evidence from credit cards. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1), 111­164.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2004). Competition and financial stability. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
  453­480.

Athreya, K., J. Mustre-del Río, and J. M. Sánchez (2019). The persistence of financial distress. The Review
  of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Athreya, K., X. S. Tam, and E. R. Young (2012). A quantitative theory of information and unsecured
  credit. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(3), 153­83.

Auclert, A. and K. Mitman (2018). Bankruptcy and aggregate demand. In 2018 Meeting Papers, Number
  1085. Society for Economic Dynamics.

Ausubel, L. M. (1991). The failure of competition in the credit card market. American Economic Re-
  view 81(1), 50­81.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2017). Productivity and misallocation in general equilibrium. NBER Working
  Paper 24007, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Benetton, M. (2018). Leverage regulation and market structure: An empirical model of the uk mortgage
  market. Available at SSRN 3247956.

Berger, D. W., K. F. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey (2019). Labor market power. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Bizer, D. S. and P. M. DeMarzo (1992). Sequential banking. Journal of Political Economy 100(1), 41­61.

Boyd, J. H. and G. De Nicolo (2005). The theory of bank risk taking and competition revisited. The Journal
  of Finance 60(3), 1329­1343.

Braxton, J. C., K. Herkenhoff, and G. Phillips (2018). Can the unemployed borrow? implications for
  public insurance. Working paper.

Bulow, J. I., J. D. Geanakoplos, and P. D. Klemperer (1985). Multimarket oligopoly: Strategic substitutes
  and complements. Journal of Political Economy 93(3), 488­511.

Carroll, C. D., J. Slacalek, and M. Sommer (2019). Dissecting saving dynamics: measuring wealth, pre-
  cautionary, and credit effects. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chakravarty, S. and E.-Y. Rhee (1999). Factors affecting an individual's bankruptcy filing decision. Avail-
  able at SSRN 164351.


                                                    47
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, K. Dempsey, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2019). A theory of credit scoring and the
  competitive pricing of default risk. Manuscript.

Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2007). A quantitative theory of unsecured
  consumer credit with a risk of default. Econometrica 75(6), 1525­1589.

Conesa, J. C., D. V. Costa, P. Kamali, T. J. Kehoe, V. M. Nygard, G. Raveendranathan, and A. Saxena
  (2018). Macroeconomic effects of medicare. The Journal of Economics of Ageing 11, 27­40.

Corbae, D. and P. D'Erasmo (2019). Capital requirements in a quantitative model of banking industry
  dynamics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Corbae, D., P. D'erasmo, et al. (2011). A quantitative model of banking industry dynamics. Manuscript,
  University of Wisconsin, Madison, and University of Maryland.

Drozd, L. and J. Nosal (2008). Competing for customers: A search model of the market for unsecured
  credit. Working paper.

Drozd, L. and R. Serrano-Padial (2013). On prepayment and rollover risk in the u.s. credit card market.
  Working paper.

Drozd, L. and R. Serrano-Padial (2017). Modeling the revolving revolution: the debt collection channel.
  American Economic Review 107(3), 897­930.

Edmond, C., V. Midrigan, and D. Y. Xu (2018). How costly are markups? NBER Working Paper 24800,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Egan, M., A. Hortaçsu, and G. Matvos (2017). Deposit competition and financial fragility: Evidence from
  the us banking sector. American Economic Review 107(1), 169­216.

Evans, D. S. and R. Schmalensee (2005). Paying with plastic: the digital revolution in buying and borrowing.
  MIT Press.

Galenianos, M. and A. Gavazza (2019). Regulatory interventions in consumer financial markets: The
  case of credit cards. Available at SSRN 3405897.

Galenianos, M. and J. Nosal (2016). Segmented markets and unsecured credit. Working paper.

Grodzicki, D. (2015). Competition and customer acquisition in the us credit card market. Technical
  report, Mimeo.

Grodzicki, D. (2019). The evolution of competition in the credit card market. Working paper.

Harberger, A. C. (1954). Monopoly and resource allocation. The American Economic Review, 77­87.

Hatchondo, J. C. and L. Martinez (2018). Credit risk without commitment. Working paper.


                                                     48
Herkenhoff, K. (2017). The impact of consumer credit access on unemployment. Review of Economic
  Studies, Forthcoming.

Hunt, R. M. (2003). An introduction to the economics of payment card networks. Review of Network
  Economics 2(2).

Knittel, C. R. and V. Stango (2003). Price ceilings as focal points for tacit collusion: Evidence from credit
  cards. American Economic Review 93(5), 1703­1729.

Kovrijnykh, N., I. Livshits, and A. Zetlin-Jones (2019). Building credit history with heterogeneously
  informed lenders. Technical report.

Livshits, I., J. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2007). Consumer bankruptcy: A fresh start. American Economic
  Review 97(1), 402­418.

Livshits, I., J. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2010). Accounting for the rise in consumer bankruptcies. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1), 165­193.

Livshits, I., J. C. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2016). The democratization of credit and the rise in consumer
  bankruptcies. The Review of Economic Studies, rdw011.

Mateos-Planas, X. and G. Seccia (2006).         Welfare implications of endogenous credit limits with
  bankruptcy. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30(11), 2081­2115.

Mateos-Planas, X. and G. Seccia (2013). A model of credit limits and bankruptcy. Economics Letters 121(3),
  469­472.

Mester, L. J. (1997). What's the point of credit scoring? Business review 3(Sep/Oct), 3­16.

Mongey, S. (2017). Market structure and monetary non-neutrality. Job market paper. http://www. simon-
  mongey. com/uploads/6/5/6/6/65665741/mongey_market_structure_monetary_nonneutrality_draft. pdf .

Nelson, S. T. (2018). Private information and price regulation in the us credit card market. Technical
  report, Mimeo.

New York Times News Service, . (1991). Injunction against visa lets sears issue its cards. The Baltimore
  Sun, February, 26.

Petrosky-Nadeau, N. and E. Wasmer (2013). The cyclical volatility of labor markets under frictional
  financial markets. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(1), 193­221.

Raveendranathan, G. (2019). Revolving credit lines and targeted search. Working paper.

Sánchez, J. M. (2018). The information technology revolution and the unsecured credit market. Economic
  Inquiry 56(2), 914­930.



                                                     49
Schmitz, J. A. (2012). New and larger costs of monopoly and tariffs. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
  Research Department Staff Report 468.

Schmitz, J. A. (2016). The cost of monopoly: A new view. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Region.

Storesletten, K., C. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2000). Consumption and risk sharing over the life cycle. NBER
  Working Paper (w7995).

Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004). Consumption and risk sharing over the life cycle.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 51(3), 609­633.

Wang, Y., T. M. Whited, Y. Wu, and K. Xiao (2018). Bank market power and monetary policy transmis-
  sion: Evidence from a structural estimation. Available at SSRN 3049665.

Wasmer, E. and P. Weil (2004). The macroeconomics of labor and credit market imperfections. American
  Economic Review 94(4), 944­963.

White, G. (1992). 2 banks settle cardholder suit for 55 million. Los Angeles Times, April, 4.

Wildfang, K. C. and R. W. Marth (2005). The persistence of antitrust controversy and litigation in credit
  card networks. Antitrust LJ 73, 675.




                                                     50
Appendix

A           Discount Factor Comparative Statics in Partial Equilibrium
Figure 19 plots comparative statics with respect to the discount factor in the economy with the 1970
monopoly in a small open economy. The risk-free savings rate is fixed at its 1970-75 target. The figure
shows that a lower discount rate leads to higher levels of credit and default (panels c and d). However,
most of the adjustment is through higher limits. There is little variation in the spread. Hence, with long-
term contracts, lower discount factors in partial equilibrium don't account for the spreads observed in
the data.


                              Figure 19: Discount Factor Comparative Statics for Monopoly in Partial Equilibrium

                                        (a) Spread                                                            (b) Limit

                         8                                                                        80
                                                                          percent of GDP pc
     percentage points




                         6                                                                        60

                         4                                                                        40

                         2                                                                        20

                         0                                                                         0
                          0.89       0.91     0.93      0.95                                        0.89   0.91     0.93      0.95
                                        discount rate                                                         discount rate

                                        (c) Credit                                                         (d) Default Rate

                         30                                                                       2
                                                                          percent of population
     percent of GDP




                         20
                                                                                                  1
                         10


                          0                                                                       0
                           0.89      0.91     0.93      0.95                                       0.89    0.91     0.93      0.95
                                        discount rate                                                         discount rate




B        Computational Algorithm
                                                        ¯1 ), . . . , (N , l
    · Define grid on spreads and borrowing limits: (1 , l                  ¯N )  (R+ , R+ ) N


                                                                     51
                                            ¯1 ), . . . , (N , l
   · For each set of credit lines S = {(1 , l                  ¯N )}  (R+ , R+ ) N }, solve for the terminal station-
     ary equilibrium:

        1. Guess aggregate capital K (S) and total profits (S)
        2. Given aggregate capital and total labor (exogenous), back out wage rate w(S) and interest rate
           r (S)
        3. Given set of credit lines, total profits, interest rate, and wage rate, solve consumer's problem
           through value function iteration
        4. Given policy functions, simulate economy and solve for terminal stationary distribution of
           (i,  ,  , , a; S) where  : { g, b} × R+ × R+ × R+ × R  [0, 1]
        5. Given stationary distribution, update aggregate capital and total profits
        6. Repeat 2-5 until convergence
                                            ¯1 ), . . . , (N , l
   · For each set of credit lines S = {(1 , l                  ¯N )}  (R+ , R+ ) N }, solve for the transition path:

        1. Guess sequence of aggregate capital K (S) and total profits (S) for transition path
        2. Given sequence of aggregate capital and total labor (exogenous), back out sequence of wage
           rate w(S) and interest rate r (S)
        3. Given set of credit lines, and sequence of total profits, interest rate, and wage rate, solve
           consumer's problem in each period through backward induction
        4. Given policy functions, simulate economy and solve for new sequence of aggregate capital
           and total profits
        5. Repeat 2-4 until convergence

   · Solve for monopoly, Stackelberg duopoly, Collusive-Cournot, and perfectly competitive pricing

        ­ Monopoly: pick spread and borrowing limit that maximizes total profits across steady states
        ­ Stackelberg duopoly: solve for best response function of the second mover for all spreads
                                                         ¯1 )  (R+ , R+ ). Pick first mover's spread and
          and borrowing limits of the first mover, ( 1 , l
           borrowing limit that maximizes her net present value of profits
        ­ Collusive-Cournot
            1. Given number of lenders N and spread  , solve for best response limit function of the
                   second mover given the first mover's limit
            2. Solve for the symmetric Nash equilibrium limit (stage 2 outcome) for every spread 
            3. Given stage 2 outcomes, pick the spread that maximizes profits in stage 1
        ­ Perfectly competitive pricing: solve for spread and borrowing limit that maximizes the wel-
           fare of unborn agent subject to weakly positive profits

   If there is discrimination, we allow the lender to pick contracts that are dependent on the permanent
component of earnings.

                                                        52
C     Data Appendix
C.1   Identifying Credit Card Banks

We follow Grodzicki (2019) and in each year, we identify banks as being a "Credit Card Bank" if they are
in the top 25 holders of credit card assets ( RCFD2008 which we call creditcards) for the first quarter of
that year.


C.2   Computing Return on Assets

Following Grodzicki (2019), we calculate return on assets for bank i in year t according to the following
formula
                       RIAD4000it + RIAD4230it - (RIAD4635it - RIAD4605it )
               ROAit =
                                     RCFD2170it - RCFD2143it
                                                                                                        (13)
                       incomeit + loanleaselossit - (chargeoffsit - loanrecoveriesit )
                     =
                                          assetsit - intangibleit
    Note that since the RIAD series is year-to-date income, we use the third quarter data for all income
variables, and the first-quarter data for the asset variables assets and intangible, as in Grodzicki (2019).
This measure of profitability should not be interpreted as annual ROA, but rather as a general measure
of profitability. We compute for each year the average ROA for both credit card banks and non-credit
card banks. For credit card banks, we weight by credit card assets. For non-credit-card banks, we weight
by total assets. Table 14 includes the computed ROA series.




                                                    53
                       Table 14: Return on Assets, 1990 to 2018 (Source: Call Reports)

                      Year           Return on Assets,   Return on Assets,   Spread: ROA-CC
                                     All Banks (ROA-     Top 25 CC Banks     Minus ROA-All
                                     All)                (ROA-CC)
                      1990           6.70%               14.82%              8.12%
                      1991           6.12%               14.82%              8.70%
                      1992           5.29%               14.35%              9.06%
                      1993           5.10%               14.65%              9.55%
                      1994           4.86%               14.87%              10.01%
                      1995           5.40%               15.03%              9.63%
                      1996           5.34%               14.99%              9.65%
                      1997           5.54%               14.40%              8.86%
                      1998           5.35%               14.93%              9.58%
                      1999           5.62%               16.92%              11.30%
                      2000           5.59%               17.15%              11.56%
                      2001           5.98%               14.31%              8.33%
                      2002           5.43%               12.47%              7.04%
                      2003           5.00%               10.38%              5.38%
                      2004           4.54%               9.14%               4.60%
                      2005           5.13%               9.16%               4.03%
                      2006           5.36%               10.19%              4.83%
                      2007           6.24%               11.38%              5.14%
                      2008           5.25%               11.07%              5.82%
                      2009           4.41%               9.91%               5.51%
                      2010           4.06%               6.51%               2.45%
                      2011           3.56%               6.40%               2.83%
                      2012           3.44%               6.16%               2.72%
                      2013           3.10%               6.10%               3.00%
                      2014           3.07%               6.11%               3.04%
                      2015           2.87%               5.47%               2.61%
                      2016           3.07%               5.33%               2.27%
                      2017           3.36%               5.55%               2.18%
                      2018           3.65%               7.20%               3.55%

Notes. See text for details of series construction.



C.3    Lawsuits

Table C.3 describes several relevant lawsuits against the credit card industry.




                                                         54
                                                              Table 15: Lawsuits against credit card payment networks and banks
       Topic                Year Filed    Year      Set-   Type     of    Plaintiffs      Defendants                Description of case                                                               Resolution
                                          tled             Suit
       Interchange    Fee   2010          2010             Government US                  Visa, Mastercard          Focus was on anti-steering provisions in the merchant contracts. Merchants        Settled immediately. Agreed to end practice
       Collusion                                           Antitrust                                                were previously prohibited from steering consumers to lower cost cards by
                                                                                                                    offering discounts, telling consumers about high fees, etc. . . Steering is now
                                                                                                                    allowed.a
       Interchange    Fee   2010          2018             Government US                  American Express          Fought decision. Supreme court has ruled the anti-steering provisions are not     American Expresss won case.
       Collusion                                           Antitrust                                                anticompetitiveb
       Interchange    Fee   2005          2018             Class Ac- Merchants            Visa, Mastercard, JP      Visa/Mastercard accused of price fixing interchange fees through anti-            $6.2 billion
       Collusion                                           tion                           Morgan,     Citigroup,    steering provisions (see above)c                                                  Breakdown: Visa ordered to pay $4.1 billion
                                                                                          and Bank of America                                                                                         Mastercard ordered to pay $900 million Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Banks ordered to pay $1.3 billion
       Interchange    Fee   2005          Present          Class   Ac-    Merchants       American Express          Anti-steering provisionsd                                                         Currently Unresolved. Likely was on hold
       Collusion                                           tion                                                                                                                                       awaiting outcome of the government antitrust
                                                                                                                                                                                                      case. Since the Supreme Court has ruled that
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Amex's interchange fee structure was not anti-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      competitive, this case is probably dead
       Collusion       to   2017          Present          Private Suit
                                                                      Black Card          Visa, JP Morgan, Chase,   Visa colluded with JP Morgan and Capital One to block entry of Black Card         Currently Unresolved.
       Block Entry                                                    LLC                 Capital One               LLCe
       Exclusionary         1998          2001             Government US                  Visa, Mastercard          Government enforcement suit over rules that Visa and Mastercard had pro-          1. Ordered to stop using exclusionary rules 2.
       Contracts                                           Antitrust                                                hibiting their constituent banks from doing business with American Express        Finding of fact that the rules were anticompeti-
                                                                                                                    or Discover. Appeals ended in 2004 when Supreme Court refused to hear             tive
                                                                                                                    casef
       Exclusionary         2004          2007             Private Suit   American        Visa                      Related to 2001 US gov't settlement. Visa refused to allow their member           Visa ordered to pay $2.25 billion
       Contracts                                                          Express                                   banks to issue Amex cardsg
       Exclusionary         2004          2008             Private Suit   American        Mastercard                Related to 2001 US gov't settlement. Mastercard refused to allow its member       Mastercard ordered to pay $1.8 billion
       Contracts                                                          Express                                   banks to issue Amex cardsh




55
       Exclusionary         2004          2008             Private Suit   Discover        Visa, Mastercard          Related to 2001 US gov't settlement. Visa and Mastercard refused to allow its     Defendants ordered to pay $2.8 billion
       Contracts                                                                                                    member banks to issue Discover cardsi                                             Breakdown: Visa ordered to pay $1.9 billion
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mastercard ordered to pay $900 million
       Honor All Cards      1996          2003             Class   Ac-    Merchants       Visa, Mastercard          Visa and Mastercard required merchants to accept debit cards, and then im-        $3.05 billion settlement
       Rule                                                tion           (4 million                                posed high swipe-fees on debit card purchases.                                    Breakdown: Visa paid $2.025 billion Master-
                                                                          members                                   Note that since the Durbin Amendment (2010) there are limits to the debit         card paid $1.025 billion
                                                                          of the class)                             card fees that credit card companies can charge.j                                 Agreed to change the rules
       Pin vs. Signature    2016          2017             Private Suit   Walmart         Visa                      Walmart wanted to require debit card users to use their pin instead of signing    Undisclosed Settlement
                                                                                                                    for purchases because pin transactions are routed over a lower cost network
                                                                                                                    than transactions that are verified by signature.
                                                                                                                    As part of the litigation, in 2016 Walmart threatened to stop accepting visa
                                                                                                                    cards in its Canadian stores.k


       a https://www.mintz.com/insights-center/viewpoints/2016-08-what-have-merchants-gained-payment-card-antitrust-litigation
       b https://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-supreme-court/16-1454.html
       c https://www.wsj.com/articles/mastercard-visa-agree-to-settle-merchant-antitrust-suit-1537273419
       d https://www.mintz.com/insights-center/viewpoints/2016-08-what-have-merchants-gained-payment-card-antitrust-litigation
       e https://www.courthousenews.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/BlackCard.pdf
       f https://www.rollcall.com/news/Mallory-Duncan-Credit-Card-Market-Is-Unfair-Noncompetitive-215965-1.html
     United States v. Visa USA, Inc., 163 F. Supp. 2d 322 (S.D.N.Y. 2001)
       g Kim, J. J. (2007, Nov 08). Visa, American Express settle over lawsuit. Wall Street Journal Retrieved from http://login.ezproxy.lib.umn.edu/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.ezp3.lib.umn.edu/docview/399094692?accountid=14586
       h https://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/26/business/26credit.html
       i Discover settles with rivals. (2008, Oct 15). Los Angeles Times Retrieved from http://login.ezproxy.lib.umn.edu/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.ezp3.lib.umn.edu/docview/422213258?accountid=14586
       j https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1403161/000119312507140569/dex101.htm
       k https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-01-12/visa-nixes-need-for-chip-card-signatures-in-victory-for-wal-mart
D      Parameters for Partial Equilibrium Re-calibration
We assume the small open economy risk free rate is 1.27 percent, which was our calibration target for
the general equilibrium model.

                            Table 16: Parameters determined jointly in equilibrium

         Parameter           Value    Target                                                    Data    Model

        Stigma                8.490   Charge-off rate                                            2.57     2.73
        Scaling parameter     0.651   Fraction of bankruptcy due to divorce, health, lawsuits   44.81    42.69
        Discount rate         0.953   Credit to GDP                                              0.74     0.73




                                                        56
