                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE GLOBAL IMPACT OF BREXIT UNCERTAINTY

                                    Tarek Alexander Hassan
                                      Stephan Hollander
                                      Laurence van Lent
                                        Ahmed Tahoun

                                      Working Paper 26609
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26609


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




For valuable comments, we thank Tom Ferguson and seminar participants at Boston University,
Stanford, and Tilburg University. For excellent research assistance, we thank Aakash Kalyani,
Adam Oppenheimer, and Markus Schwedeler. Tahoun sincerely appreciates continued support
from the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET). Van Lent gratefully acknowledges
funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Project ID 403041268 - TRR 266. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tarek Alexander Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Global Impact of Brexit Uncertainty
Tarek Alexander Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 26609
January 2020
JEL No. D8,E22,E24,E32,E6,F0,G18,G32,G38,H32

                                         ABSTRACT

Using tools from computational linguistics, we construct new measures of the impact of Brexit on
listed firms in the United States and around the world; these measures are based on the proportion
of discussions in quarterly earnings conference calls on the costs, benefits, and risks associated
with the UK's intention to leave the EU. We identify which firms expect to gain or lose from
Brexit and which are most affected by Brexit uncertainty. We then estimate effects of the
different types of Brexit exposure on firm-level outcomes. We find that the impact of Brexit-
related uncertainty extends far beyond British or even European firms; US and international firms
most exposed to Brexit uncertainty lost a substantial fraction of their market value and have also
reduced hiring and investment. In addition to Brexit uncertainty (the second moment), we find
that international firms overwhelmingly expect negative direct effects from Brexit (the first
moment) should it come to pass. Most prominently, firms expect difficulties from regulatory
divergence, reduced labor mobility, limited trade access, and the costs of post-Brexit operational
adjustments. Consistent with the predictions of canonical theory, this negative sentiment is
recognized and priced in stock markets but has not yet significantly affected firm actions.


Tarek Alexander Hassan                          Laurence van Lent
Department of Economics                         Frankfurt School of Finance and Management
Boston University                               Adickesallee 32-34
270 Bay State Road                              60322 Frankfurt am Main
Boston, MA 02215                                Germany
and NBER                                        l.vanlent@fs.de
thassan@bu.edu
                                                Ahmed Tahoun
Stephan Hollander                               London Business School
Tilburg University                              26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
Warandelaan 2                                   NW1 4SA London
5037 AB Tilburg                                 atahoun@london.edu
the Netherlands
s.hollander@tilburguniversity.edu
   Three years after the British electorate voted to leave the European Union, it is still
uncertain how the economic relation between the EU and its former member country will
evolve. While this persistent uncertainty clearly weighs on the minds of British voters (for
example, witness Boris Johnson's pledge to "get Brexit done"), many commentators, business
leaders, and politicians have also pointed to the high economic costs of this uncertainty. Some
British and European leaders have even suggested that it might be preferable for the UK to
leave the EU without a negotiated deal than to endure additional years of uncertainty.1
   Indeed, corporate executives and stock-market participants around the world have had
to consider a bewildering sequence of hard and soft Brexit proposals made by a succession
of British prime ministers and question how each proposal might affect the corporate world,
financial markets, and, ultimately, the economy. Their pressing question is how the prospect
of Brexit and its related uncertainty affects firms' actions.
   While economists have made some progress in estimating the direct and indirect effects of
Brexit on UK-based firms, attempts to quantify the effect on and responses of firms outside
the UK have proven more complicated. Indeed, the exposure of non-UK-based (international
hereafter) firms to Brexit is hard to measure for at least three reasons. First, Brexit exposure
can come from many potentially interdependent sources; these sources include barriers to
product market access; frictions in managing relationships with customers, suppliers, and
subsidiaries; and hurdles in expanding business. This means that any attempt to quantify
Brexit exposure for an international firm may overlook economically meaningful but poten-
tially indirect determinants. Second, exposure to Brexit is not a time-invariant trait. Indeed,
the prolonged political process stemming from the 2016 referendum has yielded a sequence
of potential negotiation outcomes, which each come with their own implications for a given
firm. A firm might be a Brexit "winner" one day, only to be in a disadvantaged position the
next. Thus, any proposed measure of exposure to a shock like Brexit (which varies substan-
tially over time in both scope and potential outcome) needs to be able to track longitudinal
   1
     Most notably, French President Emmanuel Macron has publicly taken this position (Waterfield et al.
(2019) in The Times ).


                                                  1
impact while also accounting for cross-sectional variation. Third, in addition to the impact
on uncertainty (second moment), exposure to Brexit also stems from Brexit's effect on ex-
pectations about the mean of firms' fortunes (first moment). Indeed, before Brexit (and the
future relationship between the UK and the EU) is finalized and legislatively and admin-
istratively enacted, one might expect that most of the impact occurs through uncertainty,
where mean effects are perhaps limited to firms' costly preparations for implementation and
to precautionary measures that reduce impact. Ultimately, however, quantifying the first
and second-moment effects of Brexit must be achieved empirically.
   Our study addresses each of these challenges. We propose a general text-classification
method for isolating first and second moment shocks stemming from specific events (Gentzkow
et al., 2019; Hassan et al., 2019). Our approach identifies the exposure of firms to a given
event (in this case, Brexit) by counting the number of times the event is mentioned in a
given firm's (quarterly) earnings conference call with financial analysts. These calls usually
happen in conjunction with an earnings release and are an opportunity for management to
describe the current affairs of the company. Importantly, after the management's presen-
tation, a Q&A session is held during which analysts probe management on challenges the
firm is facing. In this "market place" of information, we intuit that managers and analysts
devote more time to events that are of greater importance to the firm, which makes the time
spent discussing a powerful measure of a firm's exposure to a particular event. Since call
participants are arguably among the foremost experts on the firm's business, any significant
impact of Brexit--through financial, product, and labor markets or otherwise--will likely
come up in conversations. Concerns about missing the difficult-to-observe effects of Brexit
on international firms are therefore plausibly mitigated. Thus, using these calls to measure
Brexit exposure allows us to identify its market-assessed, over-time variation from the mo-
ment that talks of a Brexit referendum began (before 2016) until the present. Indeed, our
method allows us to track any changes in firm-level Brexit exposure (due to, for example,
developments in the EU-UK negotiations) and without the need to conduct surveys of ex-


                                              2
ecutives in multiple countries. Finally, we adapt the Hassan et al. (2019) (HHLT) method
of measuring firm-level political risk and sentiment in order to bifurcate our overall measure
of Brexit exposure into first (BrexitSentiment ) and second-moment (BrexitRisk ) scores. We
determine whether call participants use "risk" or "uncertainty" synonyms near the term
"Brexit" to measure BrexitRisk and use positive- and negative-tone words near "Brexit" to
capture BrexitSentiment.
   Using these newly constructed measures, we document a set of novel empirical findings
on the impact of Brexit on firms in 71 countries. While these findings validate our Brexit
exposure measures, they are also significant in their own right. For example, not only
do we show that concerns about Brexit explode for UK firms in the most recent quarters
of our sample period (extending to the second quarter of 2019 where a "no deal" Brexit
became a real possibility), we also show widespread worries about Brexit-related risks among
international firms. For instance, Irish firms on average discuss Brexit significantly more
than do UK firms. Remarkably, Brexit exposure is strongly felt as far afield as the United
States, South Africa, and Singapore.
   It is also noteworthy that both UK and non-UK firms overwhelmingly expect negative
consequences from Brexit. When we aggregate the Brexit sentiment up to the country level,
there is no single country with a significantly positive average. Only in extraterritorial tax
havens such as the UK Channel Islands and the British Virgin Islands is the average Brexit
sentiment of local firms positive, though this is not statistically distinguishable from zero.
Next, we conduct a human audit of text snippets from conference calls that mention Brexit
in order to determine the content of the associated discussions. We find that firms mostly
expect Brexit headwinds from regulatory divergence, reduced labor mobility, limited trade
access, and heightened uncertainty.
   There are some instances where firms articulate positive outlooks--in the most optimistic
text snippets, managers expect little exposure to Brexit or expect windfalls from the Brexit-
induced depreciation of the British Pound. Notably, we find little or no discussion about the


                                              3
major economic benefits touted by the Leave campaign (such as looser regulation or better
trade deals), even for UK-based firms.2
      We next examine how US and other international firms respond to Brexit exposure. Using
our time-varying, firm-level measure, we show that Brexit exposure mostly affects firm-level
actions through risk (rather than through sentiment); we document large, negative effects
of BrexitRisk on investment and employment decisions as well as on contemporaneous stock
returns. As an example, we estimate that due to Brexit risk, the average Irish firm decreased
its investment rate by 3.9% and reduced its employment growth rate by 4.2% relative to the
mean in every year since the Brexit referendum. For US-based firms (which are, on average,
less exposed to Brexit than Irish firms), reductions in average investment and employment
growth rates are 0.4% and 1.2%, respectively.
      We supplement these analyses with two key pieces of evidence. First, we investigate how
stock markets reacted to information about the (surprising) outcome of the 2016 referendum.
Pricing effects can stem from the effect of the Brexit vote on the expected discount rate or on
the market's expectation of future cash flows (Gorbatikov et al., 2019). We disentangle these
two sources and show that the mean of firm-level exposure to Brexit (i.e., BrexitSentiment )
is positively associated with stock returns in a narrow event window around the date of the
referendum, whereas the association with the variance of firm-level exposure (i.e., BrexitRisk )
is significantly negative. In other words, both first- and second-moment exposure to Brexit
is quickly incorporated into stock prices after the announcement of the referendum result.
      Second, we examine whether the average Brexit exposure in a given UK district is asso-
ciated with the share of that district's electorate who voted to leave the EU in 2016. Our
findings show that constituents who live closer to the firms most negatively affected by Brexit
tended to vote to remain in the EU. For example, a one-standard-deviation increase in the
district-level Brexit risk is associated with a 1.4 percentage-point decrease in the proportion
  2
    The Leave campaign focused on deregulation (from EU laws), new jobs in the UK, reduced UK contri-
butions to the EU, and increased trade/exports from new trade agreements made on sovereign terms. See:
http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/our case.html



                                                  4
of votes for leaving the EU.
       Taking this evidence together, we conclude that up to this point, the Brexit vote has
mostly acted as an uncertainty shock. While stock markets have recognized and priced both
the expected effects on future cash flows and the discount rates, the first moment effects
of Brexit have not yet been realized. So far, firms' real decisions have been a response to
increased uncertainty, but not to the changes in the mean of their exposure to Brexit (i.e.,
whether the shock is good or bad news for the firm). In this sense, our analysis suggests
that many of Brexit's effects have yet to materialize.
       Related literature. Our paper builds on several strands of literature. We particularly
rely on the literature on investment under uncertainty, which argues that any increase in risk
should decrease a firm's investment and employment growth (e.g., Pindyck (1988); Bernanke
(1983); Dixit and Pindyck (1994); Bloom et al. (2007)).3
       A few studies have attempted to specifically quantify the impact of Brexit uncertainty.
For example, Bloom et al. (2019) use a survey of decision makers in UK firms to measure
Brexit-related uncertainty and its associated (negative) impact on investment and produc-
tivity.4 While we also show economically meaningful negative consequences for UK firms, we
further add to these studies by highlighting the economic consequences of Brexit for non-UK
firms, documenting the (potentially surprising) far-reaching global effects associated with
this shock.5 Not only does our method allow us to explore the impact of exposure to Brexit
across our sample, it also lets us disentangle the effect of Brexit on the variance (second
moment) from its effect on the mean. In this way, we provide a deeper understanding of how
   3
      In macroeconomic models, an increase in aggregate risk may increase or decrease aggregate investment
due to general equilibrium effects on the interest rate (see, e.g., Fern´
                                                                        andez-Villaverde et al. (2015) and Hassan
and Mertens (2017)). However, this ambiguity does not usually exist at the firm level (i.e., it is conditional
on a time fixed effect). In models with adjustment costs, a firm facing a relative increase in firm-level risk
should always decrease its investment as compared to other firms.
    4
      Papers documenting a negative impact of Brexit on UK investments, employment, wages, trade, lending,
and competition include Born et al. (2019); Berg et al. (2019); Van Reenen (2016); Sampson (2017); Breinlich
et al. (2018); Davies and Studnicka (2018); Dhingra et al. (2017); Graziano et al. (2018); Garetto et al. (2019);
Costa et al. (2019); McGrattan and Waddle (2017); Steinberg (2019).
    5
      Campello et al. (2018) document the investment and hiring effects of Brexit on a sample of US firms
exposed to the UK economy.



                                                       5
cross-sectional variation in Brexit risk is linked with receiving (bad or good) news about the
mean of the political shock, i.e., about Brexit's expected effect on future cash flows. While
the ability to quantify firm-level Brexit exposure and to trace its development over time is
valuable in its own right, our method also lets us use the source text of conference calls to
better describe firms' concerns about Brexit at specific moments in time.
   We also add to the important literature on the microeconomic effects of uncertainty
(Bloom et al., 2018). While prior studies have shown that uncertainty has far-reaching
consequences on firm policies of first order importance (such as investments and hiring), this
work has been hampered by the lack of "sound, flexible measures of uncertainty" (Altig et al.,
2019). Our work highlights the versatility of text-based measures of uncertainty, adding to
recent work which pioneered these approaches in the context of political uncertainty (Baker
et al., 2016; Hassan et al., 2019) and applied them to themes like trade policy (Handley and
Li, 2018; Caldara et al., 2019; Kost, 2019).
   Finally, our results also speak to the large international macroeconomics literature on the
spillover of shocks across borders and on "contagion." A long-standing idea in this literature
is that an uncertainty shock from one region can affect valuations and investment across
the world (Forbes and Warnock, 2012; Rey, 2015). Our work shows a concrete and well-
identified example of such a spillover, where a shock originating in the UK affects valuations,
investment, and other precautionary behavior in the United States and in other countries.


                                          1.   Data

Our primary data are transcripts of quarterly earnings conference calls from publicly listed
firms. From Refinitiv EIKON, we collect the complete set of 145,902 English-language tran-
scripts from 2011 to 2019 from 7,733 firms headquartered in 71 countries. Firms host these
calls in conjunction with their earnings announcements, allowing financial analysts and other
market participants to ask questions about the firm's financial performance over the past
quarter and to more broadly discuss current affairs with senior management (Hollander


                                               6
et al., 2010).6 Our data coverage, as shown in Table 1 Panel A, consists of 7,733 unique
firms: 1,367 are headquartered in EU countries (396 in the UK), 3,791 are in the United
States, and 2,575 are in the rest of the world. Panel B shows the extensive global coverage of
listed firms in our sample. This coverage is important because Brexit exposure is not likely
to be limited to firms headquartered in the UK or in adjacent countries; firms may have
subsidiaries, suppliers, customers, competitors, or shareholders in the UK, or they may use
UK facilities as a hub for hiring or communication. Of the roughly 3,800 US-based firms,
1,633 have disclosed establishments in the UK.
       Financial statement data, which includes information on employment, investments, rev-
enue, and earnings, are taken from the Standard and Poor's Compustat North America (US)
and Compustat Global (non-US) files. Stock return information is from the Center for Re-
search in Security Prices and Refinitiv Datastream. UK district voting results on the Brexit
referendum (as well as basic demographic data on these districts) are from the Office for
National Statistics.


          2.   Measuring Firm-Level Brexit Exposure, Risk, and Sentiment

To create a time-varying measure of a given firm's Brexit exposure, we parse the earnings
call transcripts and count the number of times the word "Brexit" is used. We then divide
this number by the total number of words in the transcript to account for differences in
transcript length7

                                                            B
                                                         1 it
                              BrexitExposureit =                1[b = Brexit],
                                                        Bit b=1
   6
     As an alternative measure, we could have used firms' annual reports (10-K filing) as a text source
(see, Campello et al. (2018)). We decided against this approach and follow HHLT, who document better
measurement properties of firm-level risk measures using conference call transcripts instead of financial
statements. Anecdotally, according to a Wall Street Journal report, the SEC Chairman Mr. Jay Clayton
lamented that firms fail to sufficiently disclose the potential risk posed by Brexit (Shumsky, 2018). If this is
true, relying on 10-Ks would underestimate a firm's exposure to the shock.
   7
     Google Trends shows the first use of the term "Brexit" in October 2012. Usage of the word increased in
January 2016 and peaked in June 2016. "Bri xit" was proposed as an alternative term, but does not have a
meaningful volume on Google Trends in the sample period.

                                                       7
where b = 0, 1, ...Bit are the words contained in the call of firm i in quarter t.8
       To construct a measure of Brexit risk, we augment this procedure by conditioning on the
proximity to synonyms for risk or uncertainty:

                                           B
                                     1 it
                     BrexitRiskit =         {1[b = Brexit] × 1[|b - r| < 10]},
                                    Bit b=1

where r is the position of the nearest synonym of risk or uncertainty. Following the example
of HHLT, we condition on a neighborhood of 10 words before and after the mention of
Brexit and obtain a list of synonyms for "risk" and "uncertainty" from the Oxford English
Dictionary.9 To aid interpretation, we standardize BrexitRisk by the average BrexitRisk
for UK headquartered firms as measured in the period after the Brexit referendum (i.e., after
the second quarter of 2016).
       A major challenge in measuring risk is that innovations to the variance of shocks are likely
correlated with innovations to the conditional mean. For example, a French exporter who
learns that there may be future tariffs on her exports to the UK may conclude that she faces
lower expected profits (a lower conditional mean) in addition to a higher variance (the tariffs
may or may not materialize). Thus, teasing out the effects of Brexit-related uncertainty
on a firm's actions also requires controlling for Brexit's effect on the conditional mean of
the firm's future earnings. Thus, the construction of Brexit sentiment closely follows the
procedure for BrexitRisk in that it counts the word Brexit; however, instead of conditioning
on the proximity to words associated with risk, we condition on positive- or negative-tone
words to capture the first moment. These positive and negative words are identified using
the Loughran and McDonald (2011) sentiment dictionary.

                                               B                           b+10
                                      1 it
                 BrexitSentimentit =               {1[b = Brexit] ×                S (c)   ,
                                     Bit b=1                              c=b-10

   8
     This procedure can easily be modified to obtain counts of variations on Brexit (e.g., "hard" or "soft"
Brexit) and of other phrases that have become meaningful in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum (e.g.,
"no deal" or "WTO terms."
   9
     See Appendix Table 1 for a list of these synonyms.


                                                    8
where S assigns sentiment to each c:
                                                 
                                                  +1 if c  S+
                                                 
                                       S (c) =    -1 if c  S       -
                                                 
                                                 0 otherwise.
                                                 


Positive words include `good,' `strong,' `great,' while negative include `loss,' `decline,' and
`difficult.'10 , 11 Appendix Tables 2 and 3 show the most frequently used tone words in our
corpus.
       As for BrexitRisk , we standardize BrexitSentiment by the average BrexitSentiment
for UK headquartered firms after 2016 Q2; a value of -1 denotes the average sentiment of
UK firms after 2016.
       For use in robustness checks and as control variables, we also measure each firm's non-
Brexit-related risk and sentiment using the above approach, defining R as the set of synonyms
for risk and uncertainty taken from the Oxford English Dictionary:

                                                  Bit
                                         1
                     N onBrexitRiskit =                 {1[b  R] } - BrexitRiskit ,
                                        Bit        b


and
                                                        Bit
                                           1
                  N onBrexitSentimentit =                      S (b) - BrexitSentimentit .
                                          Bit              b
  10
     We choose to sum across positive and negative sentiment words rather than simply conditioning on their
presence to allow multiple positive words to outweigh the use of one negative word, and vice versa.
  11
     One potential concern that has been raised with this kind of sentiment analysis is the use of negation,
such as `not good' or `not terrible' (Loughran and McDonald (2016)). However, we have found that the use
of such negation is exceedingly rare in our sample, so we chose not to complicate the construction of our
measures by explicitly allowing for it.




                                                       9
                                       3.   Validation

                               3.1.   Global Exposure to Brexit

In this section, we explore the properties of our measures, BrexitExposure, BrexitRisk ,
and BrexitSentiment, to corroborate that they capture firm-level variation in the global
corporate response to Brexit. First, we show that firms' BrexitExposure is significantly
correlated with observable business links to the UK. We then consider the constituent parts
of BrexitExposure separately, describing (in detail) the patterns of both BrexitRisk and
BrexitSentiment over time and across countries. To further validate our method, we present
the results of a human audit of the text fragments (or"snippets") where Brexit is mentioned.
   Exposure. Table 2 presents cross-sectional regressions of the mean BrexitExposure
of each firm across time onto firm-specific characteristics that are ex ante likely to affect a
firm's exposure to Brexit. In particular, we consider the geographical location of the firm's
operational headquarters and establishments as well as the proportion of total (worldwide)
sales earned in the UK. Because of the stickiness of firm location choice, we average the
Brexit exposure of each firm across our sample from 2016 until the first quarter of 2019
and report robust standard errors. Table 2 Columns 1 and 2 only consider geographical
location (and have a larger number of observations), while Columns 3 and 4 also include
the proportion of UK sales. Across specifications, we find a positive association between
mean BrexitExposure and a firm having a UK subsidiary. The estimated coefficient is
about 0.2, implying that foreign firms with UK subsidiaries mention Brexit about one fifth
as often as do firms headquartered in the UK. (Recall that our measure of Brexit exposure
is normalized so that the average exposure of a UK firm during the 2016-2019 period is 1.)
We find a similar positive association between a firm being headquartered in the UK and
mean BrexitExposure, but the estimated coefficient is sensitive to including the proportion
of UK sales revenues. We include two different proxies for UK revenues: the first is based on
UK sales reported before the Brexit vote, while the second is based on the period after the


                                              10
vote. We also find that firms headquartered in the EU but outside the UK are more exposed
to Brexit than firms headquartered internationally. Once more, this effect appears to be
subsumed by post-referendum UK sales. Taken together, these findings are consistent with
the notion that BrexitExposure varies meaningfully with firm characteristics that increase
the probability of a firm being commercially connected to the UK.
       Risk and Sentiment. Having offered evidence that supports the validity of BrexitEx-
posure, we next explore the properties of BrexitRisk and BrexitSentiment. Figure 1 Panel A
plots the across-firm average of BrexitRisk at each point in time for firms headquartered in
the UK and for firms headquartered in the rest of the world. Consistent with the outcome of
the 2016 referendum being a surprise to most parties, we find very low levels of BrexitRisk
before 2016 in the UK (right) and in the rest of the world (left). BrexitRisk increases some-
what in the run up to the referendum in the first half of 2016. Non-UK firms' BrexitRisk
peaks in the immediate aftermath of the referendum at about 0.8; in other words, imme-
diately after the referendum, Brexit risk for international firms reaches almost the height
of the average UK-firm Brexit risk in the 2016-2019 period. UK firms have a similar peak,
with average BrexitRisk reaching over 1.5 immediately following the referendum.12 While
BrexitRisk subsides in 2017, it rises sharply in the second half of 2018, nearly reaching 3
for UK firms (and about 0.5 for non-UK firms). This time-series pattern closely mimics the
negotiation process between the EU and the UK, particularly at the end of 2018, where the
specifics of the deal reached between Theresa May's government and the EU became in-
creasingly clear, as did the difficulties of obtaining parliamentary approval for that deal. In
2019, at the end of our sample, the prospect of the UK leaving the EU without a deal (and
resorting back to WTO trade terms) became more likely, consistent with the uncertainty
about Brexit reaching unprecedented levels in the UK at that time.
       Figure 2 shows the average BrexitRisk by firm-headquarters country for all countries
with non-zero BrexitRisk and a minimum of five headquartered firms. Country level val-
  12
    Fisman and Zitzewitz (2019) show a similar (aggregate) pattern for the period between July-December
2016 using their Brexit Long-Short Index based on the stock returns of equities.


                                                  11
ues are calculated by taking the mean BrexitRisk for all firms headquartered in a given
country and computing each firm's average BrexitRisk using all available post-2015 obser-
vations. Countries with zero country-level BrexitRisk include those far from the UK, such
as Thailand, Nigeria, and Argentina; we also do not register any Brexit risk in some nearby
countries including Portugal and the Czech Republic. By construction, the UK country-level
BrexitRisk in this period equals unity. Perhaps the most dramatic takeaway from this fig-
ure is the position of Ireland with a country-level Brexit risk of 1.68, far greater than the
Brexit risk of the average UK firm.13 (This difference is statistically significant. Standard
errors are given in Appendix Table 4.) Distance to the UK matters, as other high-scoring
countries include nearby France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Denmark (all EU member
states). The non-EU countries most affected by Brexit risk are South Africa, Switzerland,
Singapore, and Australia. Many non-EU countries with relatively high Brexit risk scores
have longstanding Commonwealth ties to the UK. On the other hand, the Channel Islands
are not part of the Commmonwealth, the UK, or the EU, but are major offshore financial
centers and tax havens. Their BrexitRisk falls between the UK's and Ireland's. In all,
EU-member states appear to have higher country-level Brexit risk than do affected countries
in other parts of the world. The BrexitRisk of the average US firm is 0.11, around 10% of
the average UK firm and similar to the average Italian firm.
       In Figure 3, we plot the mean BrexitRisk by industry for both UK and non-UK head-
quartered firms. The mean industry BrexitRisk is computed by averaging all firms in a
particular industry; we observe that in almost all industries (Health Services is an excep-
tion), the mean BrexitRisk is significantly larger in the UK than it is in non-UK countries.
The difference between the UK and the rest of the world is particularly prominent in the
Services and Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate industries.
  13
    Interestingly, this finding mirrors the result in Garetto et al. (2019), which uses a model to quantify the
total welfare effect of Brexit on EU economies. They find that the Brexit shock most reduces purchasing
power (i.e., real income) in Ireland. More generally, the literature on geography and trade argues that market
and supplier access to neighboring countries is most important for small economies (Redding and Venables,
2004).



                                                      12
       Finally, we tabulate and review text fragments centered at the moment when the conver-
sation in the earnings call turns to Brexit and its associated risks. Table 3 reports excerpts of
transcripts with the highest BrexitRisk among firms with the highest firm-level BrexitRisk .
In Panel A, these excerpts are taken from UK companies such as Bellway, Millennium and
Copthorne Hotels, and Endava, and are dated from 2016 to 2019. In all cases, a reading of
the excerpts confirms that call participants are discussing risks associated with Brexit. For
example, the July 2017 transcript of Berendsen Ltd. says that "Brexit raises any number of
uncertainties for every single business." The transcript for the January 2019 call of SThree
Plc. states that "there's also a lot of uncertainty around the UK and Brexit and that will
affect most markets." Panel B shows snippets discussing Brexit from companies headquar-
tered outside of the UK. The top scoring transcripts are from a range of countries and come
from across the post-Brexit-referendum sample period. In all cases, reading the text con-
firms that the discussion centers on the Brexit-related uncertainty faced by the firm. For
example, in October 2018 the Swedish firm Sweco claimed that "there is still an uncertainty
when it comes to Brexit and some weakness in the real estate market." Similarly, during
their January 2019 call, FBD Holdings in Ireland recorded that "our agri and agribusiness
customers are very exposed to a hard Brexit."
       We next repeat the same steps for BrexitSentiment; in Figure 1 Panel B, we start
with a plot of the respective time series for UK and non-UK firms.14 For both UK and
non-UK firms, BrexitSentiment is negative overall. We observe a sharp fall in sentiment
immediately after the Brexit referendum (a phenomenon more pronounced in UK firms than
in international firms) with sentiment scores reverting to slightly below zero for most of 2017.
In 2018, the average BrexitSentiment drops sharply both in the UK and internationally
(though again, the effect is especially pronounced in the UK) with the drop continuing well
into 2019.
       Figure 4 plots the mean BrexitSentiment by country. Overwhelmingly, sentiment in
  14
    In the firm-year panel beginning in 2016, the correlation between BrexitRisk and BrexitSentiment is
0.16.


                                                  13
the UK and elsewhere remains negative. Ireland continues to have the strongest negative
sentiment scores, even compared to the UK. However, firms from EU member states like
Germany, Austria, Italy, Denmark, Sweden, and France also hold strong negative views
about the impact of Brexit. The one anomalous area is the UK Channel Islands, where
BrexitSentiment is hugely positive with a value of +2 (truncated in the figure to save
space). Due to the limited number of firms based in the Channel Island (8), however, we
lack statistical power to distinguish their BrexitSentiment from zero. (Appendix Table 4
gives standard errors.)
   These findings raise the question of what specific concerns underlie this widespread ag-
gregate negative sentiment. And for firms expecting to benefit from Brexit, what advantages
do they perceive? We answer these questions by classifying excerpts from the top 100 posi-
tive and negative BrexitSentiment firms, reading 349 positive-sentiment excerpts (128 are
specific enough to be classified) and 549 negative-sentiment fragments (162 have specific
reasoning). We classify the perceived benefits and concerns into six categories each. These
categories are chosen based on an initial reading of the text excerpts, but with an eye to
the concerns and benefits raised by politicians and other pundits active in the public debate
about Brexit. Turning first to excerpts that express positive sentiment about Brexit (in
Table 4), we find that over 80 percent of positive excerpts in the UK and elsewhere mention
that the firm is not exposed to (and therefore does not expect much of an impact from)
Brexit. The next most commonly perceived benefit of Brexit is a weaker pound. A telling
example comes from the transcript of Millennium and Copthorne Hotels, who "saw a spike
in leisure occupancy after the Brexit referendum in June as tourists took advantage of the
cheaper pound." About 20 percent of the positive excerpts from both UK and non-UK firms
are classified in this category. The final positive sentiment for UK firms is connected with
relocation opportunities (4.55 percent). Non-UK firms with positive sentiment about Brexit
also highlight the benefits associated with higher government expenditures or better trade
access. For example, the Frankfurt-based Deutsche Boerse AG considers a scenario in which


                                             14
Brexit negatively affects London as a center of business; they have "seen a number of firms
announcing that Frankfurt would ultimately be their European hub" and can see "potential
opportunity coming from Brexit." An analyst on the call of the Dutch firm ForFarmers
thinks "Brexit could be beneficial for ForFarmers" and that it "might have a positive impact
on [their] position in the UK."
   Importantly, we did not find a single excerpt from UK-based firms referring to any of
the three major potential economic upsides of Brexit touted during the Brexit referendum
campaign: better trade deals, decreased regulation, and more flexibility in UK government
spending.
   As might be expected, some expected outcomes of Brexit are positive for certain firms
but negative for others. Indeed, as tabulated in Table 4, worsening trade access and a
weaker pound are reasons for the negative Brexit sentiment in 5.88 (26.21) and 47.06 (60.69)
percent, respectively, of the snippets in (non-)UK firms. Fears about decreased trade access
are particularly prominent for non-UK firms, as illustrated by the excerpt from the Irish
budget airline Ryan Air Holdings: "if the UK is unable to negotiate access to the single
market or open skies it may have implications for our three UK domestic routes." UK firms
are more negative than non-UK firms about adjustment and transition costs, with about 18
percent of UK but only 0.69 percent of non-UK firms mentioning costs related to Brexit
preparations. New and/or multiple regulatory regimes and labor market frictions appear in
equal measure in excerpts for UK and non-UK firms (about 10 percent). For example, the
Russian Yunipro expresses the hope that "for the implementation of the Brexit, reasonable
solutions will be found that will preserve to a large extent the rules of the single market for
energy." Falling consumer confidence, our final category, comes mostly from snippets from
UK firms (5.88 percent as compared to 1.38 percent for non-UK firms).
   Taking these findings together, the following picture emerges: In the UK, Brexit senti-
ment is negative and has precipitously declined since the last quarter of 2018. In that same
period, average Brexit risk (which peaked after the 2016 referendum) has steeply increased,


                                              15
surpassing the risk measured immediately after the vote. Overwhelmingly, the firm-level
negative sentiment in the UK stems from the weak pound, preparation costs for Brexit,
and the possibility of multiple regulatory regimes post-Brexit. Even the vast majority of
hopeful firms base their positive outlook on either their lack of exposure to Brexit or on the
depreciation of the currency. On average, countries outside of the UK mirror the UK's time
series pattern in risk and sentiment, albeit to a lesser extent. EU member states generally
experience higher Brexit risk than do countries father afield and, with few exceptions, their
sentiment is negative.15 At the firm-level, negative international Brexit sentiment centers
mostly on the weak pound, concerns about trade access, and multiple regulatory regimes.


                      3.2.   Event Study: The Asset Market Effects of Brexit

We turn next to the asset pricing implications of the June 23, 2016 referendum to leave
the EU. The outcome of this vote was a complete surprise to most observers (Fisman and
Zitzewitz, 2019); polling in the preceding months had persistently shown a "Remain" victory
(Born et al., 2019). Famously, the British politician Boris Johnson, then one of the leading
figures of the Leave campaign, went to bed resigned to losing the vote only to wake up to
the sound of demonstrators protesting the vote's outcome at his private residence.16 The
lack of anticipation of the outcome creates favorable conditions for an event study assessing
the asset pricing effects of Brexit. When investors learned the referendum's outcome, they
formed new expectations about the future of publicly listed firms. Stock price changes
capture changes in investors' expectations about the direct and indirect consequences of
Brexit for the cash flows of the firm and for its discount rate (Fisman, 2001; Hill et al.,
2019; Davies and Studnicka, 2018). For this reason, we investigate the response of firms'
equity prices to the Brexit vote; this response captures the market's assessment of a given
firm's exposure to Brexit. Correlating the market's assessment with our measures of Brexit
   15
      These findings are broadly consistent with Vandenbussche et al. (2019), who use a country-sector analysis
to find substantial losses in value added and employment across the 27 EU member states, though there is
significant heterogeneity in effect size that corresponds to the country's position in the global value chain.
   16
      ITV report on 24 June 2016.


                                                      16
exposure also serves to validate our method.
      Summary statistics. Table 5 presents the mean, median, and standard deviation of
the variables used in our event study. In Columns 4 and 6, we also provide the mean and
standard deviation of each variable for the subsamples of UK and non-UK firms. As before,
our key variables of interest are Brexit exposure, risk, and sentiment. For the purpose of
this analysis, we consider both the "average Brexit" and "pre-Brexit" Exposure, Risk, and
Sentiment. Brexit variables are computed by averaging all available Brexit scores from 2016
to 2019, while pre-Brexit variables are based on the sample of earnings conference calls
before June 23, 2016. Brexit exposure, risk and sentiment are larger (in absolute value) in
the UK than internationally regardless of whether they are calculated before or after the
Brexit vote. For example, the mean BrexitRisk in the full sample is 0.195, but in the UK
sample, the corresponding value is equal to 1 (by construction). Sentiment across our sample
is on average negative. Median values of Brexit-related variables are zero, consistent with
analysts and senior management discussing Brexit only when they expect that their firm
may be impacted. Stock returns are calculated using a narrow window of four trading days
starting on June 24 and ending on June 28, 2016 (since the referendum took place on a
Thursday).17
      Regression results. In Table 6, we present estimates of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
regressions of the following form:


(1)                           ri = 0 + j + c + Brexiti + Xi  +               i




where ri is the four-trading-day return following the Brexit vote; j and c are industry and
headquarter-country fixed effects, respectively, Brexiti represents either BrexitExposure,
BrexitRisk , BrexitSentiment, P reBrexitRisk , or P reBrexitSentiment of firm i ; the vec-
tor Xi,t always includes the log of a firm's assets to control for firm size. In some specifica-
  17
     We restrict the event study to firms with return data available on CRSP, i.e., to firms (cross)listed in
the US.



                                                     17
tions, we also include stock return betas, which are calculated by regressing daily returns in
2015 for firm i on the S&P500 or on the FTSE100 index (to measure a firm's exposure to the
US and the UK capital markets, respectively). We exclude firms from the "Non Classifiable"
sector and firms with fewer than ten earnings call transcripts.
       In Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A (which reports the full sample estimates18 ), we find a
negative coefficient estimate between BrexitExposure and asset prices. For a firm with a
post-Brexit-vote exposure equal to that of the average UK-headquartered firm (i.e., with a
value of 1), we find that equity prices drop by 2.6 percent over the course of the four trading
days. The magnitude of the coefficient remains unchanged after controlling for the (US- and
UK-market) CAPM-betas of the stock, implying that the effect is not explained by differences
in exposure to US or UK market risk. We then "decompose" the Brexit exposure into a
mean and variance component, i.e., we consider how markets priced differential exposure to
BrexitRisk and BrexitSentiment in the short time window surrounding the announcement
of the referendum result (Columns 3 and 4). We find that higher Brexit risk leads to lower
stock returns (^=-0.011, std. err.=0.002), consistent with the event revising discount rates

upward in the cross-section of firms. In addition to this effect of the second moment, we find
that an increase in Brexit sentiment leads to higher stock prices (^=0.002, std. err.=0.001),

consistent with the view that firms negatively exposed to Brexit lose significant market
valuation immediately after the referendum results become known. Our coefficient estimates
remain unaffected when we control for CAPM-betas (in Column 4).
       In an effort to estimate the market's response using only the information available during
the referendum, in the final column, we use the P reBrexitRisk and P reBrexitSentiment
variables to explain the short window price response. In Column 5, we find a negative effect
of P reBrexitRisk on the stock price change (^ = -0.006, std. err.=0.002) However, we do

not find a significant effect of P reBrexitSentiment on short window returns, though the
sign and size of the coefficient is similar to those in prior columns.
  18
     Note once more that the full sample consists of firms listed in the US. In Panel B, we restrict the sample
to include only those firms who are both listed and headquartered in the US


                                                      18
       We repeat the same analysis in Panel B, but restrict the sample to firms headquartered
in the United States. Our estimates for the US-headquartered sample do not deviate mean-
ingfully from the full sample. Indeed, the coefficient estimates on BrexitExposure for the
US-headquartered sample are only slightly smaller in Columns 1 and 2. When we tease out
the two components of exposure to Brexit in Columns 3 and 4, we find a slightly stronger
stock price response to BrexitSentiment and a somewhat weaker response to BrexitRisk .
Both are statistically significant at the one percent level. Finally, in Column 5, w find that for
firms headuartered in the United States, P re - BrexitSentiment and P re - BrexitRisk are
significantly positively associated with stock price changes (both at the five percent level).
       We further examine the event study results in Figure 5, which graphically summarizes
the OLS regression estimates of P reBrexitRisk (corresponding to Column 5 of Panel B in
Table 6) onto a sequence of four-day return windows centered on the June 23, 2016 Brexit
vote. Each event window consists of four consecutive trading days, where the "treatment"
window stretches from June 24 to 28 and the remaining event windows are distributed in the
periods before and after the treatment. As the referendum outcome was largely unexpected,
we should not find a significant ^ before the vote. Similarly, if the effects of the leave vote

are quickly reflected in asset prices, the effect should not linger after the vote. In line with
these expectations, we find a significant negative coefficient estimate on P reBrexitRisk
only during the treatment window, not before or after. These results bolster our confidence
that the event-study estimates for Brexit risk are not inadvertently picking up some other
factor/event. Importantly, the results also suggest that Brexit was not anticipated and that
financial-market prices quickly reflected the news.19
       Finally, in Figure 6, we estimate the asset pricing effect of the Brexit referendum sep-
arately for UK and non-UK firms. Indeed, the figure shows two panels of binned added-
variable plots of four-trading-day returns over BrexitRisk . The left panel shows the rela-
  19
    Consistent with these results, Appendix Figure 1 shows the result of a placebo exercise where we re-run
the same regression for each four-day window between Jan 1 2012 and Dec 31 2015. Reassuringly, we find
only a slight tendency to over-reject the null.



                                                    19
tion for the sample of UK-headquartered firms and the right panel shows the relation for
non-UK-headquartered firms. The plots are again based on panel regressions that control
for BrexitSentiment, the log of assets, and sector and time fixed effects. We see a negative
relation in both panels (although the slope coefficient is more negative in the UK sample),
implying that the pricing response to Brexit uncertainty is negative for both UK and non-UK
firms.


                                3.3.   Regional Support for Brexit

The final empirical validation for our Brexit exposure measures builds on a simple intuition:
When voters live in a region where a firm with elevated Brexit exposure is headquartered,
they are more likely to vote against Brexit. Previous studies have generally focused on voter
characteristics (such as age, ethnicity, and educational achievements) to explain geographical
variation in voting (Alabrese et al., 2019; Fetzer, 2019). We propose that a voter's referendum
choice will also be guided by their assessment of how Brexit will affect local economic and
employment conditions. Thus, if local companies find Brexit risky, the regional share in
support of "Leave" is likely to decrease. We test this intuition in Table 7.
      We first determine each firm's location using the area code of its operational headquarters;
we then map these locations into electoral districts. Next, we compute the district-level
Brexit risk and sentiment by averaging BrexitRiski (BrexitSentimenti ) across firms in the
district. We then estimate cross-sectional regressions of the district-level vote in support
of Leave (%leavec ) onto BrexitRiskd , BrexitdSentimentd , and two demographic controls
(share UK born, i.e., the proportion of the districts' population born in the UK, and income
per capita). Specifically,


(2)             %leaved =  + BrexitRiskd + BrexitSentimentd + Xd  +               d




These OLS regressions are estimated using data from 110 districts and their inferences are



                                                 20
based on robust standard errors. Note that the distribution of sample firms in the UK
is geographically clustered. Appendix Table 8 provides additional details. Many districts
have only a single sample firm, but there are few districts in which many sample firms are
headquartered (e.g., the City of London and Greater London).
      In Column 1, where we only consider district-level BrexitRiskd , we find a negative as-
sociation with the Leave vote share. Turning to BrexitSentimentd in Column 2, we show
that when firms in the district view Brexit negatively, the association with the Leave vote
share is strongly negative. In Column 3, we include both Brexit variables and find results
which are very similar to the separate estimates. The estimated coefficients imply that a
one standard deviation increase in BrexitRiskd (1.59) is associated with 1.48 percentage
point decrease in share of the vote for leaving the EU. Similarly, a one standard deviation
decrease in BrexitSentimentd (4.44) is related to a 1.71 percentage point drop in support for
Brexit.20 Figure 7 shows this association graphically. For completeness, note that wealthier
districts and districts with a larger immigrant population have lower support for Leave.
      These findings support the effort to validate our Brexit measures. However, they also
speak to Alabrese et al. (2019) and Fetzer (2019), who find substantial geographical het-
erogeneity in the extent to which demographic variables can explain the Brexit vote. Our
findings suggest that "spillovers" from local companies might be a partial source of this
geographical heterogeneity.


                            4.   The Firm-level Effects of Brexit

Two substantive facts emerge from the validation exercise in the previous section. First,
firms are exposed to the shock of the Brexit referendum, not just in the UK, but globally;
though the shock is perhaps strongest in the (nearby) EU countries, it extends as far as the
United States, Singapore, and South Africa. Second, stock markets quickly impound both
the first and second moment implications in asset prices; increases in Brexit risk lead to
 20
      The partial R2 of these two variables in Column 3 is about 5%.



                                                     21
price drops while increases in Brexit sentiment (implying that Brexit is viewed positively)
lead to price gains in a tight window around the 2016 referendum. While these findings are
consistent with the forward-looking properties of equity markets, they also leave open the
question of the degree to which individual firms respond to the Brexit referendum shock. We
therefore estimate the effect of firm-level Brexit risk and sentiment on investments, hiring,
and sales using the following specification:


(3)        yi,t+1 = j + t + c + BrexitRiski,t + BrexitSentimenti,t + Xi,t  +                 i,t




where yi,t is the firm-level outcome of interest; j , t , and c are industry, year, and headquarter-
country fixed effects, respectively; and where the vector Xi,t always includes the log of the
firm's assets to control for firm size, NonBrexit Risk, and NonBrexit Sentiment. BrexitRisk
and BrexitSentiment are computed annually by averaging all available earnings call tran-
scripts in a given year. Inferences are based on standard errors clustered at the firm-level.
Firm outcomes are measured yearly from 2011 to 2018. Summary statistics on all firm-level
variables are presented in Table 5.
      It is well-recognized in both theoretical and empirical work that uncertainty can directly
influence firm-level investments and employment (Pindyck, 1988; Bernanke, 1983; Dixit and
Pindyck, 1994; Bloom et al., 2007). Furthermore, recent developments in the literature have
highlighted that first and second moment shocks can appear together, either amplifying or
confounding each other (Bloom et al., 2018; Berger et al., 2017; Hassan et al., 2019). We
examine these predictions in the context of Brexit, which (it has been argued) represents
an "almost ideal" uncertainty shock inasmuch as it was large, unanticipated, and delayed in
implementation (Fisman and Zitzewitz, 2019; Born et al., 2019).21
      Figure 8 shows a binned added-variable plot of firm-level capital investment (Ii,t+1 /Ki,t )
  21
     Bloom et al. (2019) points out that Brexit presents a persistent uncertainty shock that should have a
heterogeneous impact on UK firms; the impact depends on firms' prior exposure to the EU. Moving beyond
the impact on UK firms, however, we are also able to estimate the effects of this shock on non-UK firms
generally or on US firms specifically.



                                                   22
over BrexitRiski,t while controlling for BrexitSentimenti,t , the log of assets, and sector
and time fixed effects. The red (blue) line represents the slope estimate for the sample
of UK (international) firms. In both panels, BrexitRiski,t is negatively and significantly
associated with the capital investment rate. In fact, the estimated coefficients are very
similar in magnitude: -0.609 (s.e.=0.011) in the UK and -0.670 (s.e.=0.001) in the non-UK
sample. The latter coefficient implies that for each year after 2016, an international firm
with a BrexitRisk equal to that of the average UK firm experienced a 2.6% decrease in its
investment rate relative to the mean (24.5).
    In Table 8, we conduct a more systematic analysis of the relation between a firm's capi-
tal investment rate and Brexit risk and sentiment. In Panel A, we consider the full sample
of UK and international firms. Column 1 presents estimates of a base specification with
BrexitRiski,t and BrexitSentimenti,t (our variables of interest), time and sector fixed ef-
fects, and the log of assets as controls. As expected, we find a significant negative association
between BrexitRiski,t and the capital investment rate (^=-0.843, std. err.=0.175). How-

ever, we find no significant association between BrexitSentimenti,t and Ii,t+1 /Ki,t . Next,
we add an interaction term between BrexitRiski,t and an indicator variable that takes the
value of unity when the firm is headquartered in the UK (zero otherwise) in order to explore
whether the relation between uncertainty and investment is different for UK and non-UK
firms.22 Consistent with the evidence in Figure 8, however, we find no statistically reliable
evidence for such a difference. Specifically, with a comparable exposure to Brexit risk, the
elasticity of investment with respect to Brexit risk is not significantly different for UK and
international firms.
    In the next three columns, we work towards our preferred specification by adding sector-
by-time and country fixed effects (Column 3) and controls for the firm's overall (i.e., non-
Brexit related) risk and sentiment (Columns 4 and 5, respectively). Reassuringly, we find
that firms exposed to more overall uncertainty (calculated based on textual analysis of their
  22
     As expected, the main effect of a given firm being headquartered in the UK is negative (-3.63, s.e.=0.808).
For brevity, we suppress details in the table.


                                                      23
earnings call as outlined in section 2) have lower investment rates. Similarly, firms that have
more good news (measured using our earnings-call based measure of sentiment) have higher
investment rates. Turning to our variables of interest, we find that our earlier conclusions
regarding Brexit-related risk and sentiment are unchanged when we include these additional
controls. We continue to find a negative association between BrexitRiski,t and investments,
with only a minor attenuation of the estimated coefficient. Indeed, the estimated effect of
BrexitRiski,t suggests that for firms exposed to a Brexit risk equal to that of an average
post-referendum UK firm (1), investments decrease by 0.640 percentage points (or 2.6 percent
relative to the mean).
   Extrapolating from the country-specific means in Figure 2, the estimate in Column 5
implies a 0.64 × 1.86/27.52 × 100 = 3.91 percent decrease in the investment rate for the
average Irish firm and a 0.64 × 0.60/18.63 × 100 = 1.99 percent decrease for the average
South African firm in our sample. Appendix Table 4 repeats this calculation to give the
specific estimated impact of Brexit risk for each country shown in Figure 2.
   As for the full sample, so for the sub-sample of firms headquartered in the US. In Panel
B, we repeat the same sequence of specifications as in Panel A but report only the coefficient
estimates on BrexitRiski,t to save space. Our estimates for US firms are somewhat larger
than in the full sample, potentially because firm-level variables are measured with less error in
this more homogeneous sub-sample. Our preferred estimate in Column 5 (-1.026, s.e.=0.346)
suggests that Brexit risk accounts for a 0.37% decrease in the investment rate of the average
US-based firm in each year after 2016.
   Despite the rich set of controls included in the standard specification in Column 5, there
are three remaining concerns with the interpretation of our results. First, executives might
use Brexit and Brexit risk as an excuse to justify bad performance, even if their firm is not
really exposed to the shock. The correlation between our measure BrexitRisk and the de-
cline in investment might then be spurious, picking up "cheap talk" about Brexit. However,
we have already seen that introducing controls for the firm's Brexit and overall (non-Brexit


                                               24
related) sentiment has no perceptible effects on our coefficient of interest (compare Columns
4 and 5 of Table 8). In Columns 2 and 3 of Table 9, we also add controls for the firm's
recent performance. All specifications in this table include our standard controls, but for
brevity show only the coefficients on Brexit risk and the newly added controls. Column 2
adds a measure for the firm's earnings surprise and Column 3 adds the firm's contempora-
neous stock return, since bad performance should correlate with lower earnings and lower
contemporaneous stock returns. Although the latter is arguably endogenous to Brexit's ef-
fect, neither of the two controls significantly attenuate the coefficient of interest, bolstering
our confidence that our estimates are not driven by cheap talk.
   The second concern with our results is that firms affected by Brexit risk might also be
disproportionately affected by other types of risk. Again, controlling for non-Brexit-related
discussions of risk and uncertainty had no perceptible effect on our estimates (compare
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8), demonstrating that the reduction in investment we document
is specific to Brexit-related risk. Furthermore, Column 4 of Table 9 also controls for the
firm's exposure to trade policy risk (P RiskT radeit ). This variable (developed in HHLT)
is constructed in the same way as BrexitRisk , but counts synonyms of risk or uncertainty
near words that indicate a discussion of political decisions about trade policy. As expected,
we find that exposure to trade-policy risk lowers the firm's investment rate (a one standard
deviation increase in P RiskT radeit is associated with a 0.402 (s.e.=0.209) percentage point
decrease in that firm's investment rate). However, including this control has essentially no
effect on our coefficient of interest, which remains stable at -0.692 (s.e.=0.186).
   The third and final concern with our results is that UK-exposed international firms may
be systematically different and may generally invest less than do other firms. To address this
concern, Column 5 adds a firm's average sales in the UK before the Brexit referendum as a
control variable. Column 6 further adds a firm-level, time-invariant measure of Brexit expo-
sure that is calculated using all observations of a given firm in the sample (BrexitExposurei ).
Note that both of these variables are "bad controls" (Angrist and Pischke, 2008) inasmuch


                                               25
as they are potential proxies for Brexit-related risk and/or sentiment and might therefore
inappropriately reduce the explanatory power of our variables of interest. Despite these
econometric concerns, we find little evidence that adding these additional controls changes
the tenor of our main findings. Neither the pre-Brexit UK sales nor (BrexitExposurei )
are significantly associated with the investment rate. Furthermore, the significance of the
estimated coefficient on BrexitRiski,t is not affected by their inclusion. Figure 9 shows the
results of a placebo exercise where we re-estimate our standard specification in Column 5
of Table 8, but erroneously assign each firm's BrexitRisk to a three-year period prior to
2016. The first coefficient shows the results when we assign each firm's BrexitRisk to the
years from 2011 to 2013. The second repeats the exercise for the years 2013 to 2015. Com-
fortingly, point estimates are close to zero, and we find no statistically significant effect of
Brexit risk prior to 2016. For comparison, the third coefficient shows the actual Brexit risk
from our standard specification. Taken together, these results bolster our confidence that
our estimates do indeed capture the causal effect of Brexit risk on firm-level investment.
   Having established a consistent negative association between Brexit risk (though not
sentiment) and the capital investment rate, we now turn to firms' employment and sales
growth. In Table 10, we report panel regressions that correspond to our preferred specifi-
cation in Column 5 of Table 8, both with and without the full set of fixed effects. In all of
these regressions, we provide estimates based on the full sample, and, separately, our sample
of US firms.
   Prior work on the economic consequences of uncertainty suggests that hiring and invest-
ment should respond similarly to rises in uncertainty since both activities are associated with
adjustment costs. In line with these predictions, Panel A in Table 10 shows (across both
samples) a significant negative association between BrexitRiski,t and employment growth
empi,t /empi,t-1 . Our preferred coefficient estimates are -0.391 (std. err.=0.179) and -1.272
(std. err.=0.460) for the full sample and for the US, respectively, where the point estimate
for US-based firms remains larger than the one for the full sample. The former estimate


                                              26
implies that a firm with the average Brexit risk of a UK-based firm experiences a decrease
in its employment growth of 4.5% relative to the sample mean. (Appendix Table 4 breaks
these numbers down by individual country.) As for the capital investment rate, we find no
evidence of a significant association between BrexitSentimenti,t and employment growth.
As before, the coefficients on N onBrexitRisk and N onBrexitSentiment are statistically
significant and have the predicted sign (see Appendix Table 6 for details and additional
robustness checks).
   Finally, we consider sales growth in Panel B. While we still find a negative relation
between BrexitRiski,t and sales growth in all sample partitions, the association is no longer
significant. This is consistent with the predictions of the real options literature, which
postulates a larger short-run effect of risk on hard-to-reverse investments in physical and
human capital than on short-run sales growth. In sharp contrast, however, and consistent
with sales responding more directly to both good and bad news events, we find a positive
and significant coefficient estimate between BrexitSentimenti,t and sales growth. These first
moment effects are again larger in the US sample, where our estimated coefficient of 0.410
(std. err.=0.167) implies that firms with Brexit sentiment equal to that of the average UK
firm after the referendum vote (-1) have 0.41 percentage point lower sales growth in each
year after 2016. Appendix Table 7 shows additional variations and robustness checks.
   In Table 11, we examine the timing of the effect of Brexit risk on investment and employ-
ment outcome variables. We regress both the capital investment rate and the employment
growth rate onto contemporaneous BrexitRiski,t and onto one-period-lagged BrexitRiski,t-1 .
We find that employment responds more quickly than investment to changes in Brexit risk.
Indeed, firm hiring responds more to concurrent than to lagged Brexit risk, while the opposite
is true for the investment rate.




                                             27
                                      5.   Conclusion

Assessing the economic impact of specific policy measures, reforms, and other shocks requires
measuring how these events affect the calculations and expectations of decision makers. In
this paper, we develop a simple and adaptable text-based method to measure the costs, ben-
efits, and risks that thousands of international decision makers associate with specific events.
Our method offers several helpful features that address some of the challenges identified in
recent research. First, it measures perceptions directly and in real time without conducting
expensive large-scale surveys. Second, it meaningfully distinguishes between the perceived
risks, costs, and opportunities associated with a given event, thus separating variation in
first and second moments stemming from the event. This is particularly interesting in the
context of Brexit, where policymakers have long pointed to the potentially detrimental ef-
fects of Brexit-related uncertainty, which we quantify directly. Third, many shocks do not
(fully) play out in a short period of time, but present persistent challenges to economic ac-
tors. A method allowing researchers to measure over-time variation in a firm's exposure to
a persistent shock is particularly valuable in light of recent evidence that the response to
a persistent shock might be very different from the response to a shock that quickly fades
away (Bloom et al., 2019).
   We use our method to assess the extent to which international firms are affected by the
outcome of the 2016 Brexit referendum. Our measures of Brexit exposure, risk, and sentiment
behave in economically meaningful ways, strengthening our validity claims. In the process,
we also document that firms inside and outside of the UK overwhelmingly view Brexit as
"bad news." There are significant cross-country differences in Brexit risk: Ireland's Brexit
risk is larger even than the UK's; nearby EU countries experience the strongest increase in
risk; and Brexit risk also has a material (though weaker) impact in the United States and
other non-EU countries. Within the UK, we observe that geographical variation in the vote
share for Brexit is correlated with the Brexit exposure of local firms (i.e., firms in the same



                                              28
electoral district).
   When examining the earnings call discussions of individual firms, we find that even
"Brexit winners" most often simply point out that they are currently not much affected
by the prospect of Brexit. Those who see Brexit as negative, however, expect concrete
difficulties for their businesses as a result of regulatory divergence, reduced labor mobility,
decreased trade access, and post-Brexit operational adjustment. Indeed, when we examine
how executives adjust firm policies in the face of rising Brexit uncertainty, we find consistently
lower investment rates and reduced hiring. We also find that asset markets quickly impound
both the future cash flow consequences of the Brexit vote and its impact on the discount
rate; Brexit sentiment and Brexit risk both partially explain the pricing response on equity
markets in the days following the referendum.
   A casual reading of our findings might lead the reader to conclude that a speedy resolution
of Brexit uncertainty is necessary to minimize harmful effects on the economy. Indeed, our
empirical evidence does show that firms are cutting investments and hiring in the face of high
Brexit uncertainty; resolution of this uncertainty could possibly return firms back to their
normal policies. This, however, depends crucially on the way in which Brexit is resolved.
Financial markets' pricing response to the Brexit vote does not only anticipate the negative
effects of uncertainty, but also the direct negative effects of Brexit itself. Our reading of the
evidence suggests that the greater the rupture between the UK and the EU, the larger these
direct effects (including post-Brexit adjustment costs) will be. When Brexit is enacted, the
consequences for investments and employment may well be larger than those associated with
Brexit uncertainty alone.




                                               29
                                       References

Alabrese, E., S. O. Becker, T. Fetzer, and D. Novy (2019). Who voted for Brexit? Individual
  and regional data combined. European Journal of Political Economy 56, 132 ­ 150.
Altig, D., J. M. Barrero, N. Bloom, S. J. Davis, B. H. Meyer, and N. Parker (2019, June).
  Surveying business uncertainty. Working Paper 25956, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
 companion. Princeton university press.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1593­1636.
Berg, T., A. Saunders, L. Sch¨afer, and S. Steffen (2019). 'Brexit' and the contraction of
  syndicated lending. Available at SSRN 2874724 .
Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio (2017). Uncertainty shocks as second-moment news
  shocks.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983). Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 98, 85­106.
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen (2007). Uncertainty and investment dynamics.
  Review of Economic Studies 74, 391­415.
Bloom, N., P. Bunn, S. Chen, P. Mizen, P. Smietanka, and G. Thwaites (2019, September).
  The impact of Brexit on UK firms. Working Paper 26218, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2018). Really
  uncertain business cycles. Econometrica 86, 1031­1065.
Born, B., G. Mueller, M. Schularick, and P. Sedl´
                                                a cek (2019). The costs of economic nation-
  alism: Evidence from the Brexit experiment. The Economic Journal 129 (10), 2722­2744.
Breinlich, H., E. Leromain, D. Novy, T. Sampson, and A. Usman (2018). The economic
  effects of Brexit: Evidence from the stock market. Fiscal Studies 39 (4), 581­623.
Caldara, D., M. Iacoviello, P. Molligo, A. Prestipino, and A. Raffo (2019). The economic
  effects of trade policy uncertainty. Journal of Monetary Economics .
Campello, M., G. Cortes, F. d'Almeida, and G. Kankanhalli (2018). Exporting uncertainty:
  The impact of Brexit on corporate America. Available at SSRN 3078220 .
Costa, R., S. Dhingra, and S. Machin (2019). Trade and worker deskilling. Working paper,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Davies, R. B. and Z. Studnicka (2018). The heterogeneous impact of Brexit: Early indications
  from the FTSE. European Economic Review 110, 1­17.
Dhingra, S., H. Huang, G. Ottaviano, J. Paulo Pessoa, T. Sampson, and J. Van Reenen (2017,
 10). The costs and benefits of leaving the EU: trade effects. Economic Policy 32 (92), 651­
 705.


                                            30
Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994). Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton University
  Press.
Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerr´on-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ram´irez (2015).
  Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity. The American Economic Review 105 (11),
  3352­3384.
Fetzer, T. (2019, November). Did austerity cause Brexit? The American Economic Re-
  view 109 (11), 3849­86.
Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the value of political connections. The American Economic
  Review 91 (4), 1095­1102.
Fisman, R. and E. Zitzewitz (2019). An event long-short index: Theory and applications.
  American Economic Review: Insights 1 (3), 357­72.
Forbes, K. J. and F. E. Warnock (2012). Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and
  retrenchment. Journal of International Economics 88 (2), 235­251.
Garetto, S., L. Oldenski, and N. Ramondo (2019). Multinational expansion in time and
 space. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gentzkow, M., B. Kelly, and M. Taddy (2019). Text as data. Journal of Economic Litera-
 ture 57 (3), 535­74.
Gorbatikov, E., L. van Lent, N. Naik, V. Sharma, and A. Tahoun (2019). Is firm-specific
 political exposure priced? Working paper, London Business School .
Graziano, A., K. Handley, and N. Lim~
                                    ao (2018). Brexit uncertainty and trade disintegration.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Handley, K. and J. F. Li (2018). Measuring the effects of firm uncertainty on economic
  activity: New evidence from one million documents. Technical report, Mimeo., University
  of Michigan.
Hassan, T. A., S. Hollander, L. van Lent, and A. Tahoun (2019). Firm-level political risk:
  Measurement and effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (4), 2135­2202.
Hassan, T. A. and T. M. Mertens (2017). The social cost of near-rational investment. The
  American Economic Review 107 (4), 1059­1103.
Hill, P., A. Korczak, and P. Korczak (2019). Political uncertainty exposure of individual
  companies: The case of the Brexit referendum. Journal of Banking & Finance 100, 58­76.
Hollander, S., M. Pronk, and E. Roelofsen (2010). Does silence speak? an empirical analysis
  of disclosure choices during conference calls. Journal of Accounting Research 48 (3), 531­
  563.
Kost, K. (2019). Trade policy uncertainty, investment, and lobbying. Working paper, Uni-
 versity of Chicago.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald (2011). When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
  dictionaries, and 10-Ks. The Journal of Finance 66 (1), 35­65.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald (2016). Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A survey.
  Journal of Accounting Research 54 (14), 1187­1230.

                                            31
McGrattan, E. R. and A. Waddle (2017). The impact of Brexit on foreign investment and
 production. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Pindyck, R. S. (1988). Irreversible investment, capacity choice, and the value of the firm.
  American Economic Review 78 (5), 969.
Redding, S. and A. J. Venables (2004). Economic geography and international inequality.
  Journal of International Economics 62 (1), 53­82.
Rey, H. (2015). Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
  independence. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sampson, T. (2017). Brexit: the economics of international disintegration. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 31 (4), 163­84.
Shumsky, T. (2018, Nov). SEC calls for more detailed disclosure on Brexit impact. Wall
  Street Journal .
Steinberg, J. B. (2019). Brexit and the macroeconomic impact of trade policy uncertainty.
  Journal of International Economics 117, 175­195.
Van Reenen, J. (2016). Brexit's long-run effects on the UK economy. Brookings papers on
  economic activity , 367­383.
Vandenbussche, H., W. Connell Garcia, and W. Simons (2019). Global value chains, trade
  shocks and jobs: an application to Brexit.
Waterfield, B., O. Wright, and H. Zeffman (2019, Oct). Growing risk of no-deal in six days
 after Macron blocks Brexit extension. www.thetimes.co.uk .




                                            32
                Table 1: Data Coverage

                                        Number of Sample Firms

                                   Headquarter             with UK
                                     country              subsidiaries

 Panel A: By country group

 UK                                    396                    NA
 EU non-UK                             971                    432
 US                                   3,791                  1,633
 Rest of the world                    2,575                   776

 Panel B: By country

 USA                                  3,791                  1,633
 Canada                                546                    155
 UK                                    396                    NA
 Australia                             321                    105
 India                                 270                     65
 China                                 181                     24
 Japan                                 153                     95
 Germany                               150                     79
 Sweden                                147                     40
 Brazil                                139                     17
 France                                130                     77
 Switzerland                           98                      51
 Hong Kong                              77                     28
 Netherlands                            76                     40
 Italy                                  75                     35
 South Africa                          74                      36
 Norway                                 68                     23
 Mexico                                 68                      7
 Bermuda                                63                     40
 Israel                                61                      28
 Spain                                  61                    29
 Ireland                                53                     32
 Denmark                                50                     24
 Finland                                45                     19
 Singapore                              41                     11
 Russia                                 41                      2
 New Zealand                            39                      5
 S. Korea                              34                      14
 Luxembourg                            34                      12
 Taiwan                                 33                     11
 Belgium                                31                      9
 Austria                                31                     15
 Poland                                 28                      6
 Chile                                  25                      3
 Turkey                                23                       7
 Thailand                               21                      5
 Greece                                20                       1
 Malaysia                               18                      5
 Argentina                              17                      0
 Philippines                            15                      4
 Colombia                               15                      2
 Indonesia                              15                      1
 UK Channel Islands                     15                      6
 Cyprus                                 14                      4
 United Arab Emirates                   14                      5
 Nigeria                                12                      5
 Cayman Islands                         11                      3
 Peru                                   10                      0
 Monaco                                 10                     1
 Portugal                               9                      4
 Czech Republic                         6                      2
 Puerto Rico                             5                      0

Notes : This table reports the number of firms in our sample that are head-
quartered in each country (left column) and the number of these with one
or more subsidiaries in the UK (right column). Panel A splits the sample
by country group; Panel B splits by country. Countries with fewer than five
headquartered firms are excluded.
                                   33
                     Table 2: Validation of BrexitExposure

                                                BrexitExposurei
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)

 1{UK HQ}i                         0.872***   0.909***       0.064    0.116
                                    (0.075)    (0.075)    (0.088)    (0.092)
 1{UK subsidiary}i                 0.188***   0.200***   0.227*** 0.227***
                                    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.022)    (0.021)
 1{EU non-UK HQ}i                             0.263***       0.073    0.072
                                               (0.032)    (0.087)    (0.084)
 % of sales in UK (2010-2015)                            1.842***
                                                          (0.405)
 % of sales in UK (2016-present)                                     1.766***
                                                                     (0.403)

 R2                                  0.086      0.103        0.120    0.121

 N                                   7,733      7,733        3,497    3,678

Notes : This table reports OLS estimates from cross-sectional regressions that
use BrexitExposurei as the dependent variable. We use 85,468 earnings calls
between 2015Q1 and 2019Q1 to calculate firm-level mean Brexit exposure.
Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                      34
                                             Figure 1: Time Series of BrexitRisk and BrexitSentiment

                                                                      Panel A: Brexit risk
                                                  Non-UK                                                                                UK
                                         Brexit referendum                                                                   Brexit referendum

                                                                                                                3
                               .8
    Mean(BrexitRiski,t)




                                                                                     Mean(BrexitRiski,t)
                               .6                                                                               2
                               .4
                                                                                                                1
                               .2

                               0                                                                                0
                                2015q1       2016q1     2017q1     2018q1   2019q1                               2015q1        2016q1     2017q1    2018q1   2019q1
                                                        Quarter                                                                           Quarter


                                                                   Panel B: Brexit sentiment
                                                  Non-UK                                                                                UK
                                             Brexit referendum                                                               Brexit referendum
    Mean(BrexitSentimenti,t)




                                                                                     Mean(BrexitSentimenti,t)




                                    0                                                                            1

                                                                                                                 0
                                -.5
                                                                                                                -1
                                -1
                                                                                                                -2

                               -1.5                                                                             -3

                                    2015q1     2016q1    2017q1    2018q1   2019q1                                  2015q1     2016q1     2017q1    2018q1   2019q1
                                                         Quarter                                                                          Quarter


Notes : This figure plots the quarterly mean of non-UK and UK headquartered firms' Brexit risk
(Panel A) and Brexit sentiment (Panel B). BrexitRiski is normalized using the average BrexitRiski
of UK-headquartered firms; BrexitSentimenti is normalized using the average |BrexitSentimenti |
of UK-headquartered firms. The Brexit referendum line indicates the quarter when the referen-
dum took place (2016q2).




                                                                              35
                          Figure 2: Mean BrexitRisk by Country




Notes : This figure shows the country-by-country mean of BrexitRiski,t across all firms head-
quartered in a specific country. Countries with zero BrexitRiskc or countries for which we
have fewer than five headquartered firms are excluded. Zero BrexitRisk countries include
Puerto Rico, Thailand, Cayman Islands, Portugal, Indonesia, Cyprus, Nigeria, Czech Re-
public, United Arab Emirates, Argentina, Peru, Phillipines, and Columbia.


                                             36
                             Figure 3: BrexitRisk by Industry




Notes : This figure shows the mean BrexitRiski,t by one-digit SIC industry for UK and non-
UK firms. The confidence intervals around the industry means for BrexitRisks are calculated
as {BrexitRisks - tN -1  N
                           , BrexitRisks + tN -1 N
                                                   }, where  is the standard deviation, N
is the number of firms in the industry group, and tN -1 is t-statistic with N - 1 degrees of
freedom.




                                            37
                    Table 3: Top BrexitRisk Firms' Transcript Excerpts

                                                        Panel A: UK firms

 Company                  BrexitRiski Country Quarter        Transcript excerpts

 Bellway PLC              18.89         GB        2018 Q4    deliver completions in fy we are mindful of the uncertainty sur-
                                                             rounding brexit and we will wait to see whether customer senti-
                                                             ment is affected


 Berendsen Ltd            14.14         GB        2016 Q3    and we have i think a pretty proven resilient business however
                                                             brexit raises any number of uncertainties for every single busi-
                                                             ness so were


 SThree PLC               13.64         GB        2019 Q1    year theres also a lot of uncertainty around the uk and brexit
                                                             and that will affect most markets but i think again the


 Endava PLC               12.9          GB        2019 Q1    plans with us as a result of the uncertainties caused by brexit
                                                             mark will talk about how weve mitigated fx risk in his


 Millennium &             10.48         GB        2018 Q1    as you know there is still uncertainty about british economy and
 Copthorne Hotels                                            brexit for example we are seeing a rise in costs here because
 PLC

                                                     Panel B: Non-UK firms

 Company                  BrexitRiski Country Quarter        Transcript excerpts

 Northstar Realty         18.35         US        2016 Q3    give rise to greater uncertainty this uncertainty has been exas-
 Europe Corp                                                 perated by brexit the prospect of brexit has resulted in a high
                                                             degree of


 Ryanair Holdings         18.29         IE        2017 Q1    airlines the pricing environment has also been affected by the post
 PLC                                                         brexit uncertainty which has seen weaker sterling and a switch
                                                             of charter


 Breedon Group PLC        17.58         JE        2019 Q1    quarter and the increased input costs but also an element of brexit
                                                             uncertainty in ireland our performance was strong and benefited
                                                             from the


 Sweco AB                 12.58         SE        2018 Q4    but still there is still an uncertainty when it comes to brexit and
                                                             some weakness in the real estate market so once again


 Stonegate Mortgage       11.65         US        2016 Q3    markets primarily driven by economic concerns abroad in particular
 Corp                                                        uncertainty around brexit played a major role related to the
                                                             instability of interest rates


 FBD Holdings PLC         10.76         IE        2019 Q1    our agri and agribusiness customers are very exposed to a hard
                                                             brexit and any contingency planning that we can do and we have


 Nanosonics Ltd           9.9           AU        2019 Q1    this in the uk but there is some underlying uncertainty around
                                                             brexit with the likes of confirmation of product supply chain ques-
                                                             tionnaires that


 Bank of Ireland          9.18          IE        2019 Q1    of the sme market continues to be impacted by the ongoing brexit
 Group PLC                                                   uncertainties our corporate banking business which includes
                                                             property lending had a


 Cairn Homes PLC          8.75          IE        2019 Q1    enjoys we are all faced with uncertainty with the uncertainty
                                                             which brexit brings from a cairn perspective our operations are
                                                             currently all focused


 EQT Holdings Ltd         8.58          AU        2019 Q1    about brexit and whether the uncertainty being driven by the
                                                             ultimate brexit solution and the timing of that is causing an issue
                                                             for

Notes : This table shows transcript excerpts for the top five UK (Panel A) and the top ten non-UK (Panel B) firms ranked by
BrexitRiski . BrexitRiski is calculated as the mean across all of a firm's available transcripts of earnings calls held between 2016
to 2019. Synonyms of risk and mentions of "Brexit" are in boldface.


                                                                38
                       Figure 4: Mean BrexitSentiment by Country




Notes : This figure shows the country-by-country mean of BrexitSentimenti,t across all firms
headquartered in a specific country. Countries with zero BrexitRiskc or countries for which
we have fewer than five headquartered firms are excluded. Zero BrexitRisk countries include
Puerto Rico, Thailand, Cayman Islands, Portugal, Indonesia, Cyprus, Nigeria, Czech Repub-
lic, United Arab Emirates, Argentina, Peru, Philippines, and Columbia. BrexitSentimentc
for the UK Channel Islands has a value of 2 but is truncated at 0.5 for visual clarity.


                                            39
Table 4: Brexit-Related Concerns and Opportunities Expressed by Management

                                            Panel A: Positive Brexit sentiment

  Category                UK         Non-UK         Transcript excerpts
                          (in %)     (in %)
                                                    despite whats going on with the brexit noise so thus far we havent
  Not exposed             81.82      81.48          seen a whole lot of softening and just to remind you our uk office
                                                    portfolio we have no financial institution exposure (Kennedy-Wilson
                                                    Holdings Inc, US, 2019 Q1)
                                                    saw a spike in leisure occupancy after the brexit referendum in june as
  Weak pound              18.18      17.59          tourists took advantage of the cheaper pound (Millennium &
                                                    Copthorne Hotels PLC, UK, 2017 Q1)

                                                    potential opportunity coming from brexit and weve seen a number of
  Relocation
                          4.55       2.78           firms announcing that frankfurt would ultimately be their european
  opportunities
                                                    hub (Deutsche Boerse AG, DE, 2017 Q3)

                                                    probably greater amount of private capital going into those assets
  Higher government                                 simply because of the other pressures on government spending so i
                          0          1.85
  expenditure                                       think brexit is neutral to who knows maybe mildly positive for us
                                                    (International Public Partnerships Ltd, GG, 2016 Q3)
                                                    brexit could be beneficial for forfarmers i can understand that it
  Better trade access     0          1.85           might have a positive impact on your position in the uk (ForFarmers,
                                                    NL, 2019 Q1)


  Less regulation         0          0              NA


                                            Panel B: Negative Brexit sentiment

  Category                UK         Non-UK         Transcript excerpts
                          (in %)     (in %)

                                                    on the cost side weve had some cost headwinds fx particularly as
  Weak pound              47.06      60.69          sterling has still been weaker this year than last after brexit has
                                                    impacted us (Flybe Group PLC, UK, 2018 Q2)

                                                    gbp million related to our investment in our operating platform
  Adjustment and
                          17.65      0.69           regulatory developments and brexit preparations (Jupiter Fund
  transition costs
                                                    Management PLC, UK, 2019 Q1)

                                                     i sincerely hope that for the implementation of the brexit
  New, multiple                                     reasonable solutions will be found that will preserve to a large
                          11.76      10.34
  regulatory regimes                                extent the rules of the single market for energy (Yunipro PAO,
                                                    RU, 2016 Q3)
                                                    labor market is getting tighter brexit will bring additional
  Labor market                                      challenges with regard to particularly experienced people within
                          11.76      8.97
  frictions                                         all over banking organizations in ireland (Permanent TSB Group
                                                    Holdings PLC, IE, 2018 Q3)
                                                    if the uk is unable to negotiate access to the single market or
  Worse trade access      5.88       26.21          open skies it may have implications for our three uk domestic
                                                    routes (Ryan Air Holdings, IE, 2016 Q3)

                                                     brexit has been and will continue to be a significant focus for
  Falling consumer                                  the industry over the coming months we will be affected by the
                          5.88       1.38
  confidence                                        outcomes to the extent that there is significant changes in
                                                    consumer confidence (Auto Trader Group PLC, UK, 2018 Q4)

 Notes : We manually classify positive (Panel A) and negative (Panel B) Brexit sentiment excerpts (+/- 10 words
 around a sentiment word) from earnings call transcripts into predefined categories. The numbers in the `UK' and
 `Non-UK' columns denote percentages from classified excerpts. They need not equal 100 because a transcript excerpt
 can be assigned to multiple categories. We classified excerpts from the top 100 positive and negative BrexitSentiment
 firms. We classified 128 out of 349 total positive sentiment excerpts, and 162 out of 549 total negative sentiment
 excerpts. Any remaining excerpts did not intersect with the predefined categories. Positive or negative tone words
 and mentions of "Brexit" are in boldface.
                                                           40
                                            Table 5: Summary Statistics

                                                  All firms                   UK firms            Non-UK firms        Total

                                         Mean      Median       SD        Mean         SD        Mean        SD         N


 Panel A: Firm-level risk and sentiment
 BrexitExposurei                  0.211             0.000      0.674      1.000      1.496      0.169       0.568     7,733
 BrexitRiski                      0.195             0.000      0.931      1.000      2.287      0.152       0.771     7,733
 BrexitSentimenti                -0.255             0.000      2.104      -1.000     4.196      -0.215      1.920     7,733

 Panel B: Event study variables
 Pre-BrexitExposurei                0.037           0.000      0.304       0.281     0.782      0.029       0.274     3,907
 Pre-BrexitRiski                    0.032           0.000      0.441       0.173     1.199      0.028       0.395     3,907
 Pre-BrexitSentimenti              -0.048           0.000      1.087      -0.131     2.121      -0.045      1.040     3,907
 Stock Returnsi : June 24-28, 2016 -0.034           -0.030     0.066      -0.096     0.096      -0.032      0.064     4,691

 Panel C: District level variables
 Pct Votes for Leavec              48.816          50.769      11.334      NA         NA          NA         NA        116
 Brexit Riskc                      1.000           0.375        1.585      NA         NA          NA         NA        116
 Brexit Sentimentc                 -1.000          -0.065      4.442       NA         NA          NA         NA        116

 Panel D: Firm-year outcomes
 BrexitExposurei,t                       0.083      0.000       0.502      0.414      1.216     0.067       0.433     44,665
 BrexitRiski,t                           0.060      0.000       0.619      0.300      1.620     0.049       0.522     44,665
 BrexitSentimenti,t                      -0.088     0.000       1.822     -0.351     4.215      -0.075      1.618     44,665
 Non-BrexitRiski,t                      69.076     59.037     43.277      56.999    33.664     69.660       43.604    44,665
 Non-BrexitSentimenti,t                 646.250    656.221    510.038    841.494    471.875    636.809     509.925    44,665
 Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100                     24.208     14.250     40.367      19.568     31.431    24.449      40.763     43,868
 empi,t /empi,t-1 · 100                  8.168      2.941      29.492      6.853     27.155     8.240      29.613     47,713
 salesi,t /salesi,t-1 · 100              17.452     6.538     70.393      11.069     47.544     17.766     71.314     55,402

Notes : This table shows the mean, median, standard deviation, and the number of firms for the variables used in the
subsequent analysis. Columns 1 to 3 refers to the sample of all firms, Columns 4 and 5 to the sample of UK firms, and
Columns 6 and 7 to the sample of non-UK firms. BrexitExposure, BrexitRisk, BrexitSentiment, Non-BrexitRisk and Non-
BrexitSentiment are calculated, as defined in section 2, for every call transcript by each firm in the sample. In Panel A,
BrexitExposurei , BrexitRiski , and BrexitSentimenti are averages for each firm in the sample from 2016-2019, normalized by
the mean BrexitRiski , the mean BrexitRiski and absolute value of mean BrexitSentimenti of firms in the UK, respectively. In
Panel B, Pre-BrexitExposurei , Pre-BrexitRiski , and Pre-BrexitSentimenti are calculated as in Panel A except with transcripts
before June 23, 2016 (day of the Brexit Referendum). Stock returnsi are calculated as t    =N
                                                                                          t=0 log (Pi,t /Pi,t-1 ), where t is at a
daily frequency, and [0,N] represents the period of four trading days (including weekend days) following the Brexit referendum
starting on June 24 and ending on June 29, 2016. In Panel C, Pct Votes for Leaved is percentage votes for leave cast by a
district in the UK, and BrexitRiski and BrexitSentimenti are calculated by taking an average across firms headquartered in
a district. BrexitRiski and BrexitSentimenti are normalized such that the mean of BrexitRiski is 1 and BrexitSentimenti
is -1 across cross-section of districts. In Panel D, the sample period for yearly outcomes is 2011-2018; BrexitExposurei,t ,
BrexitRiski,t , BrexitSentimenti,t , Non-BrexitRiski,t and Non-BrexitSentimenti,t are calculated as firm-year averages across
all transcripts by a firm in a year. BrexitRiski,t and Non-BrexitRiski,t are normalized by the average BrexitRiski,t for UK
firms post 2016. BrexitSentimenti,t is normalized by the absolute average of BrexitSentimenti,t for UK firms post 2016.




                                                               41
                                Table 6: Event Study

                                           Stock Returns: June 24-28, 2016

                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)

 Panel A:                                               All firms

 BrexitExposurei            ­0.026***     ­0.026***
                             (0.003)       (0.003)
 BrexitRiski                                           ­0.011***     ­0.011***
                                                        (0.002)       (0.002)
 BrexitSentimenti                                       0.002**       0.002**
                                                        (0.001)       (0.001)
 Pre-BrexitRiski                                                                   ­0.006***
                                                                                    (0.002)
 Pre-BrexitSentimenti                                                                0.001
                                                                                    (0.001)
 Constant                    ­0.008*        0.003        ­0.007         0.005        0.005
                             (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.006)

 R2                           0.156         0.192         0.140         0.175         0.170
 N                            3,875         3,834         3,875         3,834         3,422

 Panel B:                                               US firms

 BrexitExposurei            ­0.024***     ­0.023***
                             (0.003)       (0.002)
 BrexitRiski                                           ­0.008***     ­0.007***
                                                        (0.001)       (0.002)
 BrexitSentimenti                                      0.004***      0.004***
                                                        (0.001)       (0.001)
 Pre-BrexitRiski                                                                    ­0.005**
                                                                                     (0.002)
 Pre-BrexitSentimenti                                                               0.002**
                                                                                     (0.001)
 Constant                    ­0.009*        0.009        ­0.007        0.010*        0.010*
                             (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.006)

 R2                           0.067         0.124         0.059         0.116         0.118
 N                            2,806         2,777         2,806         2,777         2,531

 Beta controls                  N             Y             N             Y             Y

Notes : This table reports OLS estimation results from cross-sectional regressions of stock
returns from June 24 to June 28, 2016 on BrexitRiski and BrexitSentimenti , separately for
all firms (Panel A) and for US headquartered firms (Panel B). Stock returns are calculated
as t    =N
       t=0 log (Pi,t /Pi,t-1 ), where t is at a daily frequency, and [0,N] represents the period
of four trading days (including weekend days) following the Brexit referendum starting
on June 24 and ending on June 29, 2016. All other variables are as defined in table 5.
All specifications include one-digit-SIC and headquarters-country fixed effects (with the
exception of Panel B). Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively. These regressions
exclude non-UK firms with less than seven transcripts in the sample, and firms in the `Non
Classifiable' sector.




                                              42
               Figure 5: Alternative Event Windows around the Referendum




Notes : This figure shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of Pre-BrexitRiski for
three consecutive event windows before and after the June 23, 2016 Brexit referendum using
the specification in Column 5 of Table 6. Each event window consists of 4 consecutive trading
days.



            Figure 6: Effect of Brexit Risk on Stock Returns: June 24-28, 2016




Notes : These figures show binned scatter plots and a linear regression line for the relationship
between stock returns from June 24 to June 28, 2016 and BrexitRiski for firms headquartered in
the UK (left panel) and outside of the UK (right panel). The relationship is plotted after con-
trolling for BrexitSentimenti , log(assets), and one-digit-SIC and country fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. Each scatter plot has 16 bins: the first bin has all firm-year obser-
vations with zero BrexitRiski ; the other 15 bins are equally populated with non-zero firm-year
observations BrexitRiski .


                                             43
          Table 7: Voting in Brexit Referendum


                                 Pct. Vote for Leaved
                           (1)           (2)            (3)

 BrexitRiskd            ­0.838*                   ­0.929**
                         (0.456)                   (0.378)
 BrexitSentimentd                     0.358***    0.386***
                                       (0.133)     (0.114)
 Share UK bornd        50.481***      51.592***   52.395***
                         (7.296)       (7.484)     (7.380)
 Income per capitad    ­0.024***      ­0.022***   ­0.023***
                         (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.004)

 R2                       0.580         0.586       0.604

 N                         110           110            110

Notes : This table reports OLS estimates from cross-
sectional regressions of Pct Vote for Leaved on BrexitRiskd
and BrexitSentimentd , as defined in table 5. Share UK
bornd (the share of people born in the UK in a district
d), and Income per cepitad are controls in the regression
measured for district d as reported in the 2011 census. We
use 2,945 transcripts of the earnings calls of 407 unique
sample firms held between 2015- Q1 and 2019-Q1 to cal-
culate firm-level means. Standard errors are robust. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels, respectively.




                             44
               Figure 7: Voting in Brexit Referendum: Column 3 of Table 7

                                             20



                                             10
                     Pct Votes for Leavec




                                                                                 Central Bedfordshire
                                                                                 Watford        Tonbridge and Malling
                                                       Wokingham                         Bournemouth
                                                                                           St Edmundsbury
                                              0
                                                     East Devon
                                                           St Albans
                                            -10   Trafford

                                                           Liverpool                Lambeth

                                            -20
                                                     -20          -10        0            10        20
                                                                            BrexitSentimentc
                                                  Slope coeff.:    0.39, S.E.:     0.15


Notes : This figure presents an added variable plot for the specification in Column 3 of Table
7. We label the observations with a residual value larger than 1.6 standard deviations from
the sample mean.




                                                                             45
            Figure 8: BrexitRiski,t and Firm Investment




Notes : This figure shows the binned scatter plot and the linear re-
gression line for the regression of Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100 on BrexitRiski,t ,
separately for UK firms (red) and non-UK firms (blue) and control-
ling for log(assets), one-digit-SIC and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. The scatter plot has 29 bins for UK
and non-UK firms: The first nine bins are for all firm-year obser-
vations with zero BrexitRiski,t grouped by nine one-digit SIC codes;
the other 20 bins are equally populated by firm-year observations
with non-zero BrexitRiski,t .




                                   46
           Table 8: BrexitRiski,t , BrexitSentimenti,t and Firm Investment

                                                        Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100

                                   (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)        (5)
 Panel A                                                   All firms
 BrexitRiski,t                  ­0.843***    ­0.788***     ­0.663*** ­0.628***         ­0.640***
                                 (0.175)      (0.190)       (0.185)          (0.182)    (0.184)
 BrexitSentimenti,t               ­0.115      ­0.117         ­0.108          ­0.107     ­0.115
                                 (0.094)      (0.093)       (0.097)          (0.096)    (0.097)
 BrexitRiski,t × 1{UK HQ}                      0.093
                                              (0.331)
 Non-BrexitRiski,t                                                       ­0.024***     ­0.018***
                                                                             (0.006)    (0.006)
 Non-BrexitSentimenti,t                                                                0.002***
                                                                                        (0.001)

 R2                               0.034        0.035         0.068           0.069       0.070
 N                                22,225      22,225         22,204          22,204     22,204

 Year FE                            Y              Y           Y               Y          Y
 Industry FE                        Y              Y           Y               Y          Y
 Industry x year FE                 N              N           Y               Y          Y
 Country FE                         N              N           Y               Y          Y

 Panel B                                                   US firms
 BrexitRiski,t                  ­1.089***    ­1.089***     ­1.079*** ­0.994***         ­1.026***
                                 (0.344)      (0.344)       (0.343)          (0.342)    (0.344)

 R2                               0.042        0.042         0.070           0.071       0.072
 N                                14,219      14,219         14,198          14,198     14,198

 Year FE                            Y              Y           Y               Y          Y
 Industry FE                        Y              Y           Y               Y          Y
 Industry x year FE                 N              N           Y               Y          Y

Notes : This table reports results from regressions of Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100 on BrexitRiski,t and
BrexitSentimenti,t using yearly data, separately for the full sample (Panel A) and for sample
firms headquartered in the US (Panel B). BrexitRiski,t and BrexitSentimenti,t are calcu-
lated by taking the yearly average across a firm's quarterly earnings call transcripts. The
dependent variable is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile. The regressions include
controls for log(assets) and for year, two-digit-SIC, and country (with the exception of the
Panel B specifications) fixed effects. The regressions exclude non-UK firms with fewer than
10 transcripts in 2015-2018, and firms in the `Non Classifiable' sector. Standard errors are
clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
levels, respectively.

                                              47
       Table 9: Placebo Tests: BrexitRiski,t , BrexitSentimenti,t , and Firm Investment

                                                                   Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100

                                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)

 BrexitRiski,t                       ­0.640***    ­0.836***    ­0.513*** ­0.692***       ­0.686*** ­0.699***
                                      (0.184)       (0.283)      (0.180)       (0.186)     (0.206)      (0.218)
 Earnings surprisei,t                               ­0.037
                                                    (0.044)
 Stock returni,t                                                0.254***
                                                                 (0.028)
 PRiskTradei,t (std.)                                                         ­0.402*
                                                                               (0.209)
 Average UK salesi (pre-Brexit)                                                             1.476
                                                                                           (4.301)
 BrexitExposurei                                                                                         0.463
                                                                                                        (1.007)

 R2                                    0.070         0.081        0.084         0.075       0.097        0.070
 N                                     22,204       15,728       21,176        21,156      15,301       22,204

 Controls                                Y            Y             Y             Y           Y            Y
 Year FE                                 Y            Y             Y             Y           Y            Y
 Industry FE                             Y            Y             Y             Y           Y            Y
 Industry x Year FE                      Y            Y             Y             Y           Y            Y
 Country FE                              Y            Y             Y             Y           Y            Y

Notes : This table reports estimation results from regressions of Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100 on BrexitRiski,t and
BrexitSentimenti,t using yearly data for the full sample. BrexitRiski,t is defined as in Table 8. Earn-
ings surprisei,t is defined as (EPSi,t -EPSi,t-1 )/end-of-year stock pricei,t , where EPSi,t are earnings per share
of firm i during year t (Compustat item epspx). Stock returni,t is the annual average of quarter-on-quarter
stock return. PRiskTradei,t (std.) is the Political Risk: Trade Policy Index from Hassan et al. (2019),
standardized by its own standard deviation. All specifications control for log(assets) and for year, two-
digit-SIC, and country fixed effects. The dependent variable is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile.
The regressions exclude non-UK firms with fewer than 10 transcripts in 2015-2018, and firms in the `Non
Classifiable' sector. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                       48
                   Figure 9: Placebo Test: Counterfactual Brexit




Notes : This figure plots coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for
BrexitRiski,t from three separate panel regressions of Ii,t+1 /Ki,t · 100 on BrexitRiski,t
and the same control variables as in Column 5 of Table 8. For the 2011-13
and 2013-15 sample periods, we have reassigned each firm's time series of 2016-
2018 BrexitRiski,t to the sample period indicated; for the 2016-19 sample period,
BrexitRiski,t is the firm's actual BrexitRiski,t in that sample period.




                                           49
Table 10: BrexitRiski,t , BrexitSentimenti,t , and Other Firm Outcomes

 Panel A                              empi,t /empi,t-1 · 100
                                 All firms                 US firms

 BrexitRiski,t           ­0.495***     ­0.391**     ­1.211***     ­1.272***
                          (0.179)         (0.179)    (0.430)       (0.460)
 BrexitSentimenti,t       ­0.016          ­0.011     ­0.219        ­0.197
                          (0.084)         (0.082)    (0.201)       (0.207)

 R2                        0.024          0.052       0.027         0.057
 N                        27,156          27,141     18,117        18,099

 Panel B                             salesi,t /salesi,t-1 · 100
                                 All firms                 US firms

 BrexitRiski,t            ­0.396          ­0.135     ­0.091        ­0.096
                          (0.253)         (0.251)    (0.613)       (0.591)
 BrexitSentimenti,t        0.118          0.135*     0.305**       0.410**
                          (0.075)         (0.081)    (0.142)       (0.167)

 R2                        0.025          0.052       0.035         0.058
 N                        29,059          29,042     18,846        18,828

 Controls                    Y               Y         Y              Y
 Year FE                     Y               Y         Y              Y
 Industry FE                 Y               Y         Y              Y
 Industry × Year FE          N               Y         N              Y
 Country FE                  N               Y        n/a           n/a

Notes :    This table reports results from panel regressions of
empi,t /empi,t-1 · 100 (Panel A) and salesi,t /salesi,t-1 · 100 (Panel
B) on BrexitRiski,t and BrexitSentimenti,t .           BrexitRiski,t and
BrexitSentimenti,t are calculated as in Table 8. All specifications con-
trol for Non-BrexitRiski,t , Non-BrexitSentimenti,t , and log(assets) and
for year, two-digit-SIC and country fixed effects. The regressions ex-
clude non-UK firms with fewer than 10 transcripts in 2015-2018, and
firms in the `Non Classifiable' sectors. Standard errors are clustered by
firm. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels, respectively.




                                     50
      Table 11: Timing of the Effect of Brexit Risk

                   Ii,t /Ki,t-1 · 100   empi,t /empi,t-1 · 100
                          (1)                    (2)

 BrexitRiski,t          ­0.251                ­0.509**
                       (0.156)                 (0.210)
 BrexitRiski,t-1      ­0.471***                ­0.172
                       (0.150)                 (0.238)

 R2                     0.072                   0.047

 N                      21,449                 22,698

Notes : This table reports estimates from panel regressions
using yearly data. In all specifications, we control for
log(assets) and for two-digit-SIC×year and country fixed
effects. The regressions exclude non-UK firms with fewer
than 10 transcripts in 2015-2018, and firms in the `Non
Classifiable' sectors. Standard errors are clustered by firm.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                51
                     Online Appendix
                                         to
    "The Global Impact of Brexit Uncertainty"
                                         by
Tarek A. Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed
                                      Tahoun


     Appendix Table 1: Most Frequent Synonyms for Risk or Uncertainty

           Word            Frequency          Word               Frequency

           uncertainty        1,157           prospect              4
           uncertainties       260            unsure                3
           risk                205            bet                   3
           uncertain           96             insecurity            3
           risks               77             risky                 3
           unknown             33             danger                3
           possibility         26             faltering             2
           exposed             23             dilemma               2
           instability         20             probability           2
           threat              17             indecision            2
           pending             17             suspicion             2
           doubt               16             hesitant              2
           fear                16             unpredictability      2
           unclear             14             unstable              2
           unresolved          13             sticky                1
           chance              12             venture               1
           likelihood           7             fluctuating           1
           unsettled            6             hesitating            1
           unpredictable        6             reservation           1
           variable             5             speculative           1

          Notes : This table shows the frequency across all 85,468 earnings
         call transcripts between 2015q1 and 2019q1 of all single-word syn-
         onyms of "risk," "risky," "uncertain," and "uncertainty" as given
         in the Oxford Dictionary (excluding "question" and "questions")
         that appear within 10 words of "Brexit".



                                         1
 Appendix Table 2: Most Frequent Positive Tone Words

  Word            Frequency       Word            Frequency

  despite            250          improvement         23
  good               231          greater             23
  strong             170          profitability       23
  positive           162          benefited           23
  opportunities       99          improving           23
  great               98          stability           20
  opportunity         70          improve             19
  better              67          optimistic          19
  stable              65          advantage           16
  able                55          favorable           14
  benefit             49          stabilize           13
  leading             48          rebound             13
  confident           37          strengthening       12
  progress            35          gain                11
  pleased             33          successful          11
  improved            31          tremendous          11
  gains               29          excellent           11
  stronger            28          successfully        9
  strength            26          achieve             9
  best                24          stabilized          9

 Notes : This table shows the frequency across all 85,468 earn-
ings call transcripts between 2015q1 and 2019q1 of all positive
tone words from Loughran and McDonald (2011) (their list
contains 354 positive tone words) appearing within 10 words
of "Brexit."




                              2
Appendix Table 3: Most Frequent Negative Tone Words

  Word          Frequency       Word         Frequency

  volatility       297          negatively       40
  concerns         220          slowing          39
  negative         182          adverse          38
  difficult        102          aftermath        37
  challenges       99           unexpected       37
  slowdown         99           turmoil          35
  decline          85           slower           35
  concerned        85           slowed           32
  concern          84           shutdown         31
  against          74           challenge        31
  weakness         74           crisis           30
  disruption       72           fears            29
  weak             63           delays           26
  weaker           63           weakened         25
  slow             50           problems         25
  late             49           delay            24
  weakening        47           caution          23
  challenging      43           delayed          23
  volatile         43           exposed          23
  fallout          42           recall           22

 Notes : This table shows the frequency across all 85,468
earnings call transcripts between 2015q1 and 2019q1 of
all negative tone words (with the exception of "ques-
tion," "questions," and "ill") from Loughran and McDon-
ald (2011) (their list contains 2,352 negative tone words)
appearing within 10 words of "Brexit".




                            3
                     Appendix Figure 1: Placebo Tests




                      Rejection rate (< -1.96): 3.62%
Notes : As a placebo exercise, we repeat the regression specifications in Col-
umn 5 of Table 6 taking four consecutive trading days at a time from January
1, 2012 and December 31, 2015. This figure plots the distribution of the t-
statistic for the coefficient on Pre-BrexitRiski from each of those regression
specifications.




                                      4
Appendix Table 4: Brexit Risk and Estimated Average Effects by Country

     Country                        Mean              Max          N         Estimated effect (%) on
                              Brexit risk (s.e.)   Brexit risk            Ii,t+1 /Ki,t   empi,t /empi,t-1

     All firms                  0.196 (0.011)        12.387      7,674       -0.43            -0.71
     USA                        0.111 (0.010)        18.371      3,791       -0.37            -1.21
     Ireland                    1.681 (0.489)        18.312        53        -3.91            -4.21
     UK Channel Islands         1.174 (1.628)        10.564         8        -2.10            -3.30
     United Kingdom             1.000 (0.115)        18.911       396        -2.82            -4.25
     South Africa               0.579 (0.164)         7.926        74        -1.99            -8.10
     Netherlands                0.444 (0.118)         5.560        76        -1.18            -2.04
     Denmark                    0.434 (0.158)         5.299        50        -1.57            -1.84
     France                     0.386 (0.078)         4.617       130        -1.38            -2.59
     Belgium                    0.372 (0.188)         5.054        31        -1.49            -2.24
     Switzerland                0.326 (0.099)         7.673        98        -1.19            -2.79
     Sweden                     0.322 (0.109)        12.592       147        -0.75            -1.18
     Singapore                  0.314 (0.145)         5.565        41        -0.87            -1.82
     Germany                    0.304 (0.056)         3.658       150        -0.88            -1.71
     Spain                      0.287 (0.098)         3.696        61        -1.21            -2.48
     Australia                  0.208 (0.058)         9.910       321        -0.43            -0.72
     Norway                     0.205 (0.124)         7.506        68        -0.44            -0.65
     Monaco                     0.202 (0.202)         2.021        10        -0.45            -0.30
     Hong Kong                  0.189 (0.091)         4.437        77        -0.55            -0.98
     Austria                    0.152 (0.089)         2.523        31        -0.62            -1.10
     S. Korea                   0.151 (0.069)         1.658        34        -0.28            -2.56
     Bermuda                    0.131 (0.051)         2.291        63        -0.42            -0.44
     Canada                     0.125 (0.029)         6.469       546        -0.25            -0.33
     India                      0.118 (0.032)         5.104       270        -0.25            -0.61
     Finland                    0.116 (0.095)         4.245        45        -0.48            -2.06
     Japan                      0.115 (0.040)         4.382       153        -0.44            -0.77
     Luxembourg                 0.114 (0.059)         1.713        34        -0.28            -0.62
     Italy                      0.096 (0.052)         3.494        75        -0.37            -0.74
     Mexico                     0.084 (0.063)         4.151        68        -0.28            -0.50
     Turkey                     0.061 (0.043)         0.808        23        -0.49            -0.48
     Russia                     0.055 (0.055)         2.238        41        -0.09            -0.20
     Malaysia                   0.030 (0.030)         0.548        18        -0.09            -0.40
     New Zealand                0.030 (0.030)         1.183        39        -0.07            -0.06
     Chile                      0.027 (0.027)         0.681        25        -0.12            -0.57
     Greece                     0.025 (0.025)         0.498        20        -0.11            -0.55*
     Poland                     0.023 (0.023)         0.644        28        -0.07            -0.08
     Israel                     0.022 (0.022)         1.353        61        -0.05            -0.07
     China                      0.005 (0.005)         0.870       181        -0.00            -0.01
     Brazil                     0.004 (0.004)         0.561       139        -0.01            -0.03

    Notes : For the country indicated in the first column, this table shows the mean (standard
    error), max, number of firms, and the estimated effect on Ii,t+1 /Ki,t and empi,t /empi,t-1 . The
    mean and max of Brexit risk are calculated over        all firms headquartered in that country. The
    standard error on the mean is calculated as        ^ / N where  ^ is the standard deviation of Brexit
    Risk. N is the total number of our sample firms within a specific country. The estimated effect
    (%) is calculated as ^y × BrexitRiski,t c /yi,t c , where y  {Ii,t+1 /Ki,t .100, empi,t /empi,t-1 .100},
    and  ^y is the estimated coefficient from Tables 8 and 10. For Greece, the estimated effect on
    employment (marked by an *) is normalized by average employment in the panel instead of
    by average employment in the cross section (which is just below zero). We exclude countries
    for which we have fewer than five firms.
                                                       5
Appendix Table 5: Brexit Sentiment by Country

                                      Brexit Sentiment
   Country                  Mean (s.e.)      Min      Max      N

   Ireland                 -1.386 (1.056)   -44.593   8.898    53
   United Kingdom          -1.000 (0.211)   -37.778   10.806   396
   Germany                 -0.773 (0.224) -17.177     8.064    150
   Austria                 -0.604 (0.509)   -12.918   2.507    31
   Norway                  -0.561 (0.291)   -14.526   1.670    68
   Italy                   -0.544 (0.309)   -18.209   3.872    75
   Denmark                 -0.494 (0.299)   -9.236    5.241    50
   Sweden                  -0.441 (0.364)   -33.137   12.056   147
   France                  -0.404 (0.243)   -22.672   9.341    130
   Hong Kong               -0.403 (0.243)   -14.837   5.014    77
   New Zealand             -0.392 (0.264)   -9.267    0.000    39
   Singapore               -0.376 (0.181)   -6.424    0.887    41
   Monaco                  -0.338 (0.338)   -3.379    0.000    10
   Belgium                 -0.321 (0.151)   -3.250    1.352    31
   Chile                   -0.308 (0.265)   -6.565    0.000    25
   Greece                  -0.285 (0.193)   -3.712    0.000    20
   Luxembourg              -0.271 (0.129)   -3.461    0.000    34
   Malaysia                -0.258 (0.258)   -4.649    0.000    18
   Spain                   -0.241 (0.148)   -6.095    2.173    61
   India                   -0.210 (0.108)   -12.173   15.205   270
   Turkey                  -0.208 (0.124)   -2.433    0.000    23
   Russia                  -0.182 (0.182)   -7.481    0.000    41
   Finland                 -0.166 (0.150)   -4.368    3.816    45
   Mexico                  -0.150 (0.101)   -5.373    1.084    68
   Canada                  -0.140 (0.049)   -13.691   9.301    546
   Japan                   -0.131 (0.197)   -25.473   10.767   153
   South Africa            -0.130 (0.232)   -4.569    11.808   74
   Switzerland             -0.128 (0.217)   -6.600    6.718    98
   S. Korea                -0.089 (0.124)   -3.369    1.386    34
   Netherlands             -0.068 (0.231)   -6.199    10.260   76
   China                   -0.060 (0.045)   -7.817    0.000    181
   Bermuda                 -0.043 (0.151)   -4.750    4.579    63
   Brazil                  -0.032 (0.025)   -2.449    1.013    139
   Israel                  0.023 (0.023)     0.000    1.388    61
   Poland                  0.057 (0.057)     0.000    1.607    28
   Australia               0.062 (0.169)    -16.335   38.573   321
   UK Channel Islands      1.713 (2.233)    -2.341    15.728    8

   Notes : For the country indicated in the first column, this table
  shows the mean (standard error), min, max, and the number
  of firms. The mean, min, and max of Brexit Sentiment are
  calculated over all firms headquartered in a specific   country.
  The standard error on the mean is calculated as     ^ / N where
  ^ is the standard deviation of Brexit Sentiment. N is the total
  number of our sample firms in a specific country. We exclude
  countries for which we have fewer than five firms.




                                  6
     Appendix Table 6: BrexitRisk and BrexitSentiment and Other Firm Outcomes

                                                            empi,t /empi,t-1 · 100
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)

 Panel A                                                    All firms
 BrexitRiski,t                     ­0.487***   ­0.495***    ­0.391**     ­0.403**    ­0.589**    ­0.531***
                                    (0.176)      (0.179)     (0.179)      (0.187)     (0.289)      (0.190)
 BrexitSentimenti,t                  0.000       ­0.016       ­0.011      ­0.024       ­0.038       0.015
                                    (0.083)      (0.084)     (0.082)      (0.084)     (0.108)      (0.082)
 Non-BrexitRiski,t                               ­0.004     ­0.018***   ­0.026***    ­0.035***   ­0.017***
                                                 (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.008)      (0.005)
 Non-BrexitSentimenti,t                         0.003***    0.003***     0.003***    0.003***     0.003***
                                                 (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.000)
 PRiskTradei,t (std.)                                                     ­0.134
                                                                          (0.214)
 Average UK salesi (pre-Brexit)                                                        ­2.756
                                                                                      (3.198)
 BrexitExposurei                                                                                  1.158**
                                                                                                   (0.493)

 R2                                  0.020        0.024       0.052        0.055       0.064        0.052
 N                                   27,156      27,156       27,141      26,160       18,326      27,141

 Year FE                               Y            Y           Y            Y           Y           Y
 Industry FE                           Y            Y           Y            Y           Y           Y
 Industry x Year FE                    N            N           Y            Y           Y           Y
 Country FE                            N            N           Y            Y           Y           Y

 Panel B                                                    US firms
 BrexitRiski,t                     ­1.277***   ­1.211***    ­1.272*** ­1.238***      ­0.952*** ­1.423***
                                    (0.442)      (0.430)     (0.460)      (0.463)     (0.335)      (0.488)

 R2                                  0.022        0.027       0.057        0.059       0.060        0.057
 N                                   18,117      18,117       18,099      17,817       14,856      18,099

 Year FE                               Y            Y           Y            Y           Y           Y
 Industry FE                           Y            Y           Y            Y           Y           Y
 Industry x Year FE                    N            N           Y            Y           Y           Y

Notes : This table reports results from regressions of empi,t /empi,t-1 · 100 on BrexitRiski,t and
BrexitSentimenti,t using yearly data. Panel A uses the sample of all firms, while Panel B restricts the
analysis to firms headquartered in the US. The dependent variable is winsorized at the 1st and 99th per-
centile. All right-hand side variables are defined as in Table 9. All regressions control for log(assets) and
for and year, two-digit-SIC, and country fixed effects. The regressions exclude non-UK firms with fewer
than 10 transcripts in 2015-2018, and firms in the `Non Classifiable' sector. Standard errors are clustered
by firm. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                     7
Appendix Table 7: BrexitRisk and BrexitSentiment and Other Firm Outcomes

                                                         salesi,t /salesi,t-1 · 100
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)

 Panel A                                                   All firms
 BrexitRiski,t                      ­0.377     ­0.396      ­0.135       ­0.049        ­0.574     ­0.243
                                    (0.251)    (0.253)     (0.251)     (0.262)        (0.394)   (0.272)
 BrexitSentimenti,t                 0.136*     0.118       0.135*       0.130         0.135      0.153*
                                    (0.074)    (0.075)     (0.081)     (0.082)        (0.129)   (0.079)
 Non-BrexitRiski,t                             0.014       ­0.000       ­0.006        ­0.023     ­0.000
                                               (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.013)        (0.017)   (0.010)
 Non-BrexitSentimenti,t                       0.004***    0.004***     0.004***   0.005***      0.004***
                                               (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)
 PRiskTradei,t (std.)                                                  ­0.698**
                                                                       (0.324)
 Average UK salesi (pre-Brexit)                                                       ­3.111
                                                                                      (8.740)
 BrexitExposurei                                                                                 0.841
                                                                                                (0.824)

 R2                                  0.024     0.025        0.052       0.054         0.061      0.052
 N                                  29,059     29,059      29,042       27,890        18,967     29,042

 Year FE                              Y          Y            Y           Y             Y          Y
 Industry FE                          Y          Y            Y           Y             Y          Y
 Industry x Year FE                   N          N            Y           Y             Y          Y
 Country FE                           N          N            Y           Y             Y          Y

 Panel B                                                   US firms
 BrexitSentimenti,t                0.346**    0.305**      0.410**     0.383**        0.295*    0.422**
                                    (0.140)    (0.142)     (0.167)     (0.164)        (0.158)   (0.166)

 R2                                  0.034     0.035        0.058       0.060         0.061      0.058
 N                                  18,846     18,846      18,828       18,532        15,371     18,828

 Year FE                              Y          Y            Y           Y             Y          Y
 Industry FE                          Y          Y            Y           Y             Y          Y
 Industry x Year FE                   N          N            Y           Y             Y          Y

Notes : This table reports results from regressions of salesi,t /salesi,t-1 · 100 on BrexitRiski,t and
BrexitSentimenti,t using yearly data. The dependent variable is winsorized at the 1st and 99th
percentile. All right-hand side variables are defined as in Table 9. All regressions control for
log(assets) and for and year, two-digit-SIC, and country fixed effects. The regressions exclude non-
UK firms with fewer than 10 transcripts in 2015-2018, and firms in the `Non Classifiable' sector.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and
1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                  8
Appendix Table 8: Distribution of Sample Firms across Districts in UK

                Number of counties     Number of firms

                         54                   1
                         26                   2
                         14                   3
                         7                    4
                         5                    5
                         3                    6
                         3                    7
                         1                    8
                         1                    10
                         1                    54
                         1                    90

               Notes : This table shows the number of
               UK districts (left column) with the num-
               ber of UK firms in our sample that head-
               quartered in that district (right column).




                                   9
