                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                    CONSUMER PROTECTION IN AN ONLINE WORLD:
                     AN ANALYSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING

                                        Chiara Farronato
                                         Andrey Fradkin
                                         Bradley Larsen
                                        Erik Brynjolfsson

                                       Working Paper 26601
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26601


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020


We thank Stone Bailey, Felipe Kup, Ziao Ju, Rebecca Li, Jessica Liu, Ian Meeker, Hirotaka
Miura, Michael Pollmann, Nitish Vaidyanathan, and Chuan Yu for outstanding research
assistance. We thank the company employees for sharing data and insights and participants at
ASSA 2018, Boston University, Collegio Carlo Alberto, FTC Microeconomics Conference,
INFORMS Revenue Management and Pricing Conference, Institute for Industrial Research
Stockholm, Lehigh University, NBER PRIT 2019, Marketing Science Conference, Platform
Strategy Research Symposium, SITE 2019 Occupational Licensing Conference, SOLE 2019,
WISE 2018, and ZEW ICT for comments. We acknowledge support from grants through the
Hellman Foundation, the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation, and
the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy. The company from which we obtained proprietary
data reviewed the paper to make sure that confidential information was reported accurately. None
of the authors have any material financial relationship with entities related to this research. The
views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26601.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chiara Farronato, Andrey Fradkin, Bradley Larsen, and Erik Brynjolfsson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Protection in an Online World: An Analysis of Occupational Licensing
Chiara Farronato, Andrey Fradkin, Bradley Larsen, and Erik Brynjolfsson
NBER Working Paper No. 26601
January 2020
JEL No. J2,J44,K2,L15,L51,L88

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the effects of occupational licensing on consumer choices and market outcomes in a
large online platform for residential home services. We exploit exogenous variation in the time at
which licenses are displayed on the platform to identify the causal effects of licensing
information on consumer choices. We find that the platform-verified licensing status of a
professional is unimportant for consumer decisions relative to review ratings and prices. We
confirm this result in an independent consumer survey. We also use variation in regulation
stringency across states and occupations to measure the effects of licensing on aggregate market
outcomes on the platform. Our results show that more stringent licensing regulations are
associated with less competition and higher prices but not with any improvement in customer
satisfaction as measured by review ratings or the propensity to use the platform again.

Chiara Farronato                                Bradley Larsen
Harvard Business School                         Department of Economics
Morgan Hall 427                                 Stanford University
Soldiers Field                                  579 Serra Mall
Boston, MA 02163                                Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                        and NBER
cfarronato@hbs.edu                              bjlarsen@stanford.edu

Andrey Fradkin                                  Erik Brynjolfsson
Boston University                               MIT Sloan School of Management
Rafik B. Hariri Building 595                    100 Main Street, E62-414
Commonwealth Avenue                             Cambridge, MA 02142
Boston, MA 02215                                and NBER
fradkin@bu.edu                                  erikb@mit.edu
1        Introduction

Heated debates over the effects of occupational licensing date back hundreds of years, with
a long treatise on the subject contained in The Wealth of Nations (Smith (1776)), and
continue intensely today.1 An occupational license is a restriction placed on who is allowed
to perform certain types of services, requiring that practitioners meet licensing requirements
in order to legally practice. These laws apply to a growing share of the US labor force
and now affect nearly 30% of all workers. Over 1,100 occupations are licensed in at least
one state (Kleiner and Krueger 2010). These occupations include electricians, contractors,
interior designers, and even hair salon shampoo specialists. The stringency of the licensing
requirements--and the range of specific tasks within a service category requiring or not
requiring a license--varies widely from state to state.
        There is limited empirical evidence on the effects of licensing restrictions on professionals,
consumers, and market equilibrium. In the presence of information asymmetries, licensing
may protect consumers from poor service outcomes, guaranteeing at least some minimum
standards of quality and safety for consumers (as in the model of Leland 1979). On the other
hand, these laws may raise consumer prices and increase rents for licensed professionals by
restricting competition (as in the model of Pagliero 2011). The model of Shapiro (1986)
demonstrates that the benefits of occupational licensing for some consumers may come at
costs to other consumers who face higher prices due to licensing.
        We study the magnitude of these costs and benefits using new data from a large online
labor market where consumers can hire professionals for home improvement services. On the
benefit side, we first demonstrate, using choice data, that consumers care greatly about the
professional's price and online rating but care little about the professional's licensing status.
We validate these results in a nationwide survey of consumers who recently bought home
improvement services. We then combine data from the platform with data on occupational
licensing regulations to find that more stringent licensing regimes do not improve transaction
quality as measured by review ratings or the propensity of consumers to use the platform
again. Both of these results suggest that the benefits of licensing in terms of service quality
    1
    See, for example, discussions in the New York Times (Cohen 2016), Wall Street Journal (Zumbrun
2016), and Forbes (Millsap 2017).



                                                    2
may not be large. On the cost side, we find that more stringent licensing regimes result in
less competition and higher prices.
      The platform we study works as follows. A consumer can post a request for a particular
job. Professionals respond to this request with a quote. For each quote, the consumer
can see the proposed price, measures of the professional's online reputation (such as a 1­5
star average rating from past customers and the number of reviews), as well as a badge
indicating that the professional is licensed. This badge is only displayed if the professional
has uploaded proof of licensure to the platform and after the platform has independently
verified this information, which typically occurs with a lag. Depending on the specific
project needs or the required professional qualifications, a service provider may need a
license in some jurisdictions but not others.
      These features of the market--and our transaction-level data from the platform--provide
an unprecedented opportunity to study several features of occupational licensing. The data
consists of over one million requests by consumers in hundreds of distinct service categories
throughout the United States for over eight months.2 It comes directly from the company's
databases, and allows visibility into most dimensions of the search and exchange process
occurring through the platform. We discuss the data and institutional setting in section 2.
      In section 3 we analyze how consumers' decisions depend on the characteristics of pro-
fessionals (their verified licensing status and online reputation) and their bids (prices). We
begin with event studies that analyze a consumer's probability of hiring a professional sur-
rounding the exact date on which the professional's uploaded licensing status is verified by
the platform. We exploit a unique feature of our data that allows us to identify the causal
effect on consumers' decisions from displaying the professional's verified licensing status.
Professionals choose to upload proof of licensure, but this information is not displayed to
consumers until a few days later when the platform verifies the licensure. In the data, we
see the timestamp for the original uploading of licensure proof by the professional and the
timestamp for the platform's verification. We use this variation in timing for our event
studies and find no statistically significant change in the probability that a consumer hires
a professional before vs. after the verification is posted. In contrast, we find a discontin-
  2
    The exact number of requests, the actual time frame, and the name of the company are not revealed to
protect company's confidential information.


                                                   3
uous positive jump in the probability of hiring a professional following the first time that
a professional receives a review, suggesting that consumers respond to online reputation
characteristics of professionals and not to indicators of licensure. We also examine whether,
around the time of their license verification or first review, professionals themselves change
their behavior in terms of prices they charge or types of requests on which they bid, and
we mostly find no evidence of changes in bidding behavior.
   We then analyze consumer choices in a regression framework, where we regress con-
sumers' choices to hire a given professional on an indicator for whether the professional has
a verified licensing status, controlling for whether the professional has uploaded licensure
proof, again allowing us to obtain the causal effect of the verified licensing signal. We also
include price and online reputation measures in this regression (average star rating and
the number of previous reviews). These variables may be correlated with unobservable
characteristics of the job request and the professionals' quality. We address this concern
through a number of additional bid-level controls, request-level fixed effects, and a novel
instrumental variables strategy. In our regression framework, we find similar results to our
event studies: consumers appear to value professionals' reputation and prices but not their
licensing status.
   In section 4, we present the results of an original survey we conducted using a nationally
representative panel of individuals who purchased a home improvement service within the
past year. We find that the survey respondents typically list prices and reviews when they
are asked about the factors that influenced their decision to hire a particular professional.
In contrast, fewer than 1% of these respondents mentioned licensing status among the top 3
reasons for why they hired a given service professional. This provides further evidence that
consumers may care more about prices and online reputation than licensing status. This
finding may simply reflect consumers' beliefs that all professionals are licensed. We asked
survey respondents whether they knew the licensing status of the professional they ended
up hiring. Only 61% of consumers were sure that their service provider was licensed and, of
those, a majority only found out when they signed their contract rather than during their
search, suggesting that most consumers are not particularly knowledgeable of professionals'
licensing at the time of their hiring decision.


                                                  4
   These results--that consumers appear to pay little attention to licensing--do not neces-
sarily imply a null effect of licensing laws on equilibrium service quality or prices. In section 5
we consider these market level effects. We use the large heterogeneity in regulatory strin-
gency across occupations and states to measure the effect of licensing regulation--rather
than the effect of licensing signals--on market equilibrium. To do this, we combine infor-
mation from Carpenter et al. (2017) with additional data we collected to create a measure
of licensing stringency at the level of each state and occupation based on education, train-
ing, and other requirements of state licensing regulation. We regress a number of different
outcome measures on this stringency index and on detailed controls for the requested jobs.
The availability of such detailed information (such as the square footage of the house) is a
particular advantage of our setting and data, allowing us to control for differences in the
composition of requests across occupations and states with different licensing regimes that
may independently affect outcomes.
   We find that more stringent licensing laws are associated with less competition (fewer
professionals bidding) and higher prices, but have no detectable effect on two proxies of cus-
tomer satisfaction: a customer's online rating of the service provider and their propensity to
use the platform again. An important caveat is that our data may not provide a full picture
of the effect of licensing on quality. Our customer satisfaction metrics--online ratings and
return to the platform--are unlikely to take into account factors that are unobservable to
the consumer during the transaction, that may impact consumer safety in the long-run, or
that may cause externalities on other individuals. We may also lack statistical power to
detect extremely rare but costly mistakes made by service professionals.
   Our paper points to the importance of digital technologies for the design of regulation.
Online platforms allow many occasional providers to offer their services, with little scrutiny
of their licensing status. At the same time online markets make it easy to rate providers
through online reviews and provide other forms of feedback to the platform. Friedman
(1962) and Shapiro (1986) argued that a well-functioning feedback system can be an effective
substitute for licensing by reducing the need for upfront screening or quality certification.
The advent of online reputation mechanisms may be providing just such a system (Cowen
and Tabarrok 2015; Farronato and Zervas 2019). If low-quality service providers can be


                                                5
easily and quickly identified by consumers' past experiences, the cost and benefit trade-off
of occupational licensing might tip towards reducing licensing regulation. Our work suggests
that, at least for the setting of residential home improvement services, consumers pay much
more attention to reputation measures than licensing signals and more stringent licensing
laws impose costs on consumers in terms of higher prices, without corresponding benefits
in terms of customer satisfaction.
       Our paper is related to research studying whether occupational licensing laws protect
consumers from poor service outcomes. Leland (1979) proposes a model where licensing
restrictions aid in overcoming an Akerlof (1970) lemons problem faced by consumers of
professional services. Perhaps surprisingly, empirical work has largely found non-positive
effects of increased occupational licensing stringency. Previous studies find null or nega-
tive effects of more stringent licensing requirements on quality for electricians (Carroll and
Gaston 1981), contractors (Maurizi 1980), dentists (Kleiner and Kudrle 2000; Carroll and
Gaston 1981), accountants (Barrios 2019), physicians (Kugler and Sauer 2005), Uber drivers
(Hall et al. 2019), and others. Timmons (2017) and Traczynski and Udalova (2018) find
that expanding nurses' independence from physicians actually improves service quality.3 In
fact, findings that stricter licensing regulation improves quality are rare in the literature.
Some positive effects on quality are associated with increased stringency in the market for
teachers, with these effects accruing primarily to high-income areas (Larsen 2015). In our
study, we are unable to detect quality benefits of higher licensing stringency for a wide
variety of professions.
       In contrast to most of the previous literature, which focuses on the effects of licensing on
the labor market, our approach allows us to also measure how consumers respond to seeing a
signal indicating that a professional is licensed across a variety of professions. Demand-side
analysis related to licensing has received limited attention. Exceptions include the work of
Harrington and Krynski (2002) and Chevalier and Scott Morton (2008) on funeral homes,
and more recently Kleiner and Soltas (2019) who estimate negative welfare effects of occu-
pational licensing. We focus on consumer choices within the digital platform setting, which
   3
     In these studies the quality metric is consumers' access to service, and the decreased stringency comes
through an increase in the professionals' scope of practice (i.e., in what services the professionals are allowed
to legally perform).



                                                       6
is already an important channel for finding service professionals and is likely to become
more important over time. Our empirical strategies are enabled by the fact that digital
platforms collect transaction data, which allows us to control for detailed characteristics of
jobs and professionals in order to study individual effects of licensing signals on consumer
decisions and the effects of licensing stringency on market outcomes.
    Our work also relates to research on the effect of licensing laws on competition and
rents for professionals in the licensed occupation. A near-universal finding is that increased
stringency of licensing requirements raises wages and prices in the occupation (see, for
example, Kleiner 2006, Pagliero 2010, Timmons and Thornton 2010, Law and Marks 2017,
Timmons 2017, and Koumenta and Pagliero 2018, among others). Our study demonstrates
that this effect can be seen even at the individual job level, not just in aggregate wages.
Occupational licensing requirements have also been shown to reduce competition (Kleiner
2006) and harm professionals who are unable to meet licensing standards but whose services
are nonetheless desirable to consumers, such as Vietnamese manicurists (Federman et al.
2006) or the recent case of hair braiders in South Dakota (Sibilia 2017). The previous
literature has also documented additional potential costs as well as benefits of occupational
licensing. For example, state-level licensing requirements may impose limitations on labor
mobility (see, for example, Johnson and Kleiner 2017, Kleiner and Xu 2019, Buonanno and
Pagliero 2019) and decrease productivity growth as a result. DePasquale and Stange (2016)
provide some evidence against this hypothesis for nurses. Work by Law and Marks (2009),
Blair and Chung (2018), and Koumenta et al. (2019) suggests that licensing laws can aid
minority or immigrant workers in signaling quality to potential customers.


2    Institutional Details

The data comes from a large US-only online platform which operates in all 50 states and
offers consumers access to professional service providers in a variety of categories, such as
interior design, home renovation, and painting. The platform allows customers to submit
a project request. Several professionals are then allowed to submit quotes, consisting of a
price and textual details of the service. The quoted price is not binding, and the actual



                                              7
payment takes place off the platform.
       A nontrivial fraction of service providers bidding on the platform submit information on
their occupational license in at least one service category, and a large fraction of the services
require a license in at least some jurisdictions. All of these features together--the nature of
physical tasks often requiring occupational licenses, the prevalence of licensed professionals,
and the bidding process--make this platform an ideal market for studying whether and
how the knowledge of occupational licenses matter in markets where reputation and other
information about professionals are readily available to consumers.
       This marketplace is distinct from other websites, such as Yelp (Luca 2016), that pri-
marily provide a directory of businesses and professionals with crowd-sourced reviews. It
also differs from platforms matching consumers to professional freelancers providing digital
services, such as Freelancer and Upwork (Pallais 2014), since projects on this platform are
nearly all physical tasks. Finally, it differs from platforms such as Instacart or Amazon
Mechanical Turk, which match consumers to service providers for tasks that require less
professional training--typically physical tasks such as grocery pickup/delivery for Instacart,
and virtual tasks such as image identification for Mechanical Turk (Cullen and Farronato
2015; Chen and Horton 2016).4
       The platform works as follows. Interested professionals can join the platform and create
a profile containing information about themselves and their services. They can also submit
proof of a license to be verified by the platform. The platform then takes some time to verify
the license. This process typically takes a few days with some variation across professionals.
The median number of days between license submission and verification is 6 days, with a 5.5
mean and 3.3 standard deviation. According to conversations with platform employees, this
variation in time-to-verification is not dependent on the characteristics of the professionals
during our study period and is as good as random.5 Timestamps for both the initial license
submission and the subsequent verification are contained in our sample.
   4
     See Horton (2010) for further discussion of online labor markets.
   5
     Note that the verification process has changed over time within the platform. Our description reflects
this process during the period for which we have data. Furthermore, professionals on the platform who do
not display a license may still have a license but have just not reported it to the platform. The licensing
effect we will measure in section 3 will be specifically the signaling value of displaying the license verified
badge to consumers.




                                                      8
   An individual consumer requests a quote for a particular type of service, describing her
needs using pre-specified fields as well as some additional open-ended fields. Professional
service providers in the appropriate occupation who have profiles on the platform are then
notified of the job request and may then place bids for the contract. A limited number of
professionals are allowed to bid, and bids are passed on to the consumer on a first-come,
first-priority basis. The professionals pay a fee to submit bids. As bids are submitted, the
consumer can look up information about each of the bidders, and then may, if she chooses,
select a service provider from among those bidders.
   The information available to the consumer about each of the professionals submitting
quotes varies by bidder, and may contain photos or detailed descriptions of the kind of
work the professional has performed in the past. To some extent, the amount and type of
information available depend on what the professional decides to share on the platform. A
stylized depiction of a consumer's interface for choosing a professional is available in Figure
1. Importantly for our study, for each bidder, the consumer is able to see any licensing
information reported by the bidder. This licensing information is prominently visible if it
has been verified by the platform. The consumer is also able to see any reviews of the
professional's past work for other consumers, along with a 1­5 star average rating, the
number of the previous reviews, and the number of previous times the professional has been
hired through this platform.
   We define professionals as verified licensed professionals if they choose to upload proof
of license to the platform and the platform verifies the validity of the license. There is a high
degree of variation in the fraction of professionals who report a license to the platform, which
is key to our empirical strategy. It is important to make two remarks. First, a professional
who does not display the licensing badge might nonetheless have a professional license, and
would be able to disclose this to consumers via other means--e.g. through private messages
or by including it in the body of text on their profile. Second, depending on the profession,
an unlicensed professional may still legally provide services, but might be restricted in how
they refer to the services they offer. For example, in the case of interior designers in Florida,
a professional is legally not allowed to refer to themselves as an "interior designer" without
a license, and will often instead describe their work using terms like "interior decorator,"


                                               9
                          Figure 1: Stylized Representation of the Platform




Notes: Reproduction of the information about professionals displayed on the platform. The layout and identity of
the people displayed are products of the authors' imagination.



"interiors," or "organize your place." However, within the data, these professionals can
still be identified as providing services similar to interior design. Unlicensed professionals
may also provide services within a profession that typically requires a license if the project
satisfies certain characteristics. For example, some states require professionals to have a
license for commercial work--e.g., electrical work in a public building--but not for work
in a private home. For general contractors in California, a license is only required if the
payment for the services is over $500.6 Because of all these reasons, our results on the effect
of the licensing badge on consumer choices (section 3) should be interpreted as relating
to the signaling value of the licensing information rather than the entire value of licensing
regulation.
       The main sample that we use contains the following restrictions. We first limit the sam-
ple by dropping home-improvement categories that never contain licenses (such as "closet
organizing" or "IKEA furniture assembly"). We then drop any requests containing hourly
   6
       We provide an analysis of the California regulation for general contractors in Appendix B.



                                                        10
price quotes below $10 or above $250, or containing fixed price quotes below $20 or above
$3,500. We also drop a small number of requests in which more than one professional is
recorded as having been hired (which are likely misrecorded) or requests that have received
more than the maximum number of bids allowed by the platform.
        We separately add sample restrictions for section 3 and section 5. For section 3 we
further constrain the sample to an eight-month period in 2015 for which we can observe
both the timing of license submission by the professional and the license verification by
the platform. We also drop any requests containing hourly price quotes (as opposed to
fixed price quotes or bids with no price quote). For section 5 where we focus on the effect
of licensing regulation on market outcomes, we drop requests if we have no task details
provided by the consumer or data on occupational licensing regulation. Finally, we drop
requests if there are only a few requests in a particular geography and service category. We
discuss these sample restrictions in more detail in section 5.7


3        The Determinants of Consumer Choice

In this section we study how professionals' licensing status, prices, and online ratings affect
consumer choices of whom to hire. We offer two alternative approaches to analyze consumer
sensitivity to licensing and reputation information: an event study approach and a regression
analysis. Both approaches lead us to conclude that consumer choices are affected by online
reputation and prices much more than by occupational licensing information.
        We start with some descriptives. Table 1 displays summary statistics at the bid level
for requests in our selected sample. Beginning with the licensing related variables, we see
that 12% of bids are by professionals with a verified occupational license and 14% are by
professionals who have uploaded proof of license. In theory, it is possible for professionals
to signal their licensing status in ways other than the structured platform verification,
such as through the text of their profile or the text of their quote, both of which the
consumer can observe. We do not observe this information in our primary data sample; our
analysis of consumer response to the licensing status of professionals will only focus on the
formal licensing verification signal provided by the platform. In Appendix A we discuss an
    7
        Table G.1 presents summary statistics for all requests, and for the selected samples used in our analysis.


                                                         11
independent data sample that we constructed by web crawling the platform, in which we
do see professionals' profile text. There we find that about 10% of professionals mention a
license in their profile text and 6% have a license status verified by the platform.
    Table 1 demonstrates that the median bid comes from a professional with 4 reviews,
a rating of 4.9 stars, and a fixed price of $199. 7% of bids result in a recorded hire and
hired bids are made by professionals with more reviews and higher ratings, lower prices,
and similar licensing-related variables as the typical bid. The platform relies on either
customers or professionals to voluntarily mark a job as hired. This means that not all hires
resulting from the platform will be recorded in the data and that some hires may not be
accurately logged. We return to some of these issues in section 3 where we discuss our
empirical specification.

                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics: Bid Level


                                                All Bids                                 All Hired Bids
                           Min      Median        Max       Mean         SD      Median       Mean          SD
  License Verified          0          0             1       0.12        0.33      0            0.11        0.31
  License Submitted         0         0              1       0.13        0.34      0            0.12        0.33
  Number of Reviews         0         4            391       9.90       19.00      6           15.00       25.00
  Average Rating            1        4.90            5       4.70        0.49     4.90          4.80        0.35
  Price                    20        199          3, 500    402.00     572.00     125         259.00      396.00
  Hired                     0          0             1       0.07        0.26


Notes: Bid-level summary statistics for the sample used to study consumer choice of service providers. After cleaning
the data as described in section 2, we are left with 1,871,735 bids.




3.1     Event Study

Our first approach to analyzing consumer choices is an event study. The platform data
allows us to measure each opportunity that a professional has to get hired, as well as the
hiring outcome. We consider the probability that a professional is hired for a job to which
she submitted a bid around the time of license verification. If license verification positively
affects consumer choices, then bids submitted a few days before license verification should
have a lower chance of being chosen than bids submitted just after the license is verified
(and thus visible to consumers). More formally, we regress an indicator for whether a
professional was hired (hired) on dummy variables for the leads and lags relative to the


                                                           12
license verification day. We also include professional fixed effects to control for unobserved
heterogeneity across professionals, and request fixed effects to control for the particular
request and amount of competition.
       Our specification is the following:

                              4
                 hiredjr =          t  1{dif fjr = t} + submittedjr + j + µr +        jr ,           (1)
                             t=-4

where diff jr is the difference (in weeks) between the date of professional j 's bid on request r
and the date professional j 's license was verified by the platform. A bid is included in week
0 if it is submitted 0­6 days after the license is verified; it is included in week 1 if it is placed
7­13 days after the license is verified; and so on. We consider weeks within an eight-week
interval around platform verification, and include a dummy variable for whether a bid was
submitted more than four weeks after license verification. The variable submittedjr is an
indicator for whether professional j has uploaded a license at the time of request r. Request
fixed effects are denoted µr , and professional fixed effects are denoted j . The t coefficients
should be interpreted as hiring probabilities relative to the probability of being hired for a
bid submitted more than four weeks prior to license verification. We cluster standard errors
at the professional level.8
       Figure 2a displays the estimated coefficients t from Equation 1. We find no significant
differences in the probability of being hired as a function of when the bid was placed relative
to the time of license verification. The estimated coefficients also show no significant pre-
trend in the likelihood that a professional is hired prior to the license verification date,
consistent with our assumption that the timing of verification is exogenous. Overall, the
results suggest that consumers' decisions of whom to hire are not influenced by the visibility
of licensing information, although the 95% confidence interval does not exclude effects on the
order of a 1 percentage point change in hiring rates. In subsection 3.2 we use an alternative
identification strategy which yields more precise estimates and confirms that knowing about
a professional's licensing status does not substantially affect consumer decisions. We also
   8
    For each request in the data, we also add an additional observation to the dataset representing the
outside option ; if the consumer in a given request does not hire any bidder, the hired dummy is equal to
1 in the outside option observation corresponding to that request. We follow this same procedure in our
regression analysis in subsection 3.2.



                                                   13
                        Figure 2: Event Study Estimates--License Verification




                       (a) Hired                                                  (b) Log(Price)

Notes: Estimated coefficients from Equation 1. In the left panel the outcome variable is equal to 1 if the professional
is hired. In the right panel the outcome variable is the log of the bid amount. Lines display 95% confidence intervals
based on standard errors clustered at the professional level.



investigate whether there may be a positive effect of the license signal for professionals
without a prior hire. We find suggestive but imprecise evidence of such an effect (see
Appendix C).
       One potential threat to the identification of the effect of displaying licensing information
is that professionals may adjust their bidding behavior around the time of license verifica-
tion. We examine this by repeating the estimation of Equation 1 using the professional's
quoted price as the left-hand-side variable of interest (Figure 2b). We find no significant
differences in bid prices across these time periods, suggesting that professionals do not ap-
pear to be bidding differently in anticipation of or after license verification. We also find
no changes in the types of requests professionals bid on and the timing of these bids as a
result of the license verification (see Appendix C).
       To show that our empirical strategy would be able to pick up important determinants
of consumer choices, we repeat the above exercise using the first review received by a
professional as the relevant event. We use the first review because it is typically a 5-star
review, so we do not need to differentiate between good and bad ratings.9 To be more
precise, we estimate the same specification as in (1) but substitute the timing relative
   9
       We find similar results when we instead consider the first five-star review received by the professional.



                                                          14
to license verification with the timing relative to the submission of the first review. We
exclude bids that lead to the first review in the specification so that there is no mechanical
relationship between first review and hire.

                                Figure 3: Event Study Estimates--Reviews




                       (a) Hired                                                  (b) Log(Price)

Notes: Estimated coefficients from Equation 1, where the event is the time when a professional receives her first
review on the platform. In the left panel the outcome variable is equal to 1 if the professional is hired. In the right
panel the outcome variable is the log of the bid amount. Lines display 95% confidence intervals based on standard
errors clustered at the professional level.


    Figures 3a and 3b display the estimated coefficients t from the event study of the first
review on hires and bids. We can see that there is a jump in hiring rates of 2.8 percentage
points around the time of the first review and a smooth decline in prices around the focal
date. The change in prices is more gradual, and thus unlikely to explain the discrete increase
in hiring rates. It is worth noting that there seems to be a pre-trend in 3a with an increase
in the hiring rate in the seven days preceding the first review. Our hypothesis for this effect
is that customers may take some time to decide whom to hire, and their final decision for
a given request may occur after the first review is revealed; if this is true, consumers' hire
rates would appear to react to reviews several days before the arrival of the review.
    To investigate this hypothesis, we re-estimate the event study using a closer approxima-
tion to the time at which the customer made a choice: rather than comparing the arrival
time of the first review to the arrival time of the bid, we compare it instead to the time the
customer first messaged the professional about this request. We also limit the sample to



                                                         15
cases where the "hired" button was clicked by the customer rather than by the professional;
the professional might be strategic in timing when to click this button, and the customer's
timing might more accurately reflect the timing of the decision.10 Note that this sample
is substantially smaller and we consequently get wider confidence intervals. The results
are displayed in Figure 4a, where we find much less of a pre-trend, and we see a sharp, 10
percentage point increase in the hire probability following the display of the first review.
Note that the effect size is bigger in this sample because the baseline hiring rate is much
higher. There is no similar discontinuity in professionals' quoted prices around the time of
the first review (Figure 4b), suggesting that professionals are not discontinuously changing
their pricing behavior surrounding this event. Appendix D discusses additional event stud-
ies that suggest that the effect of reviews on hiring does not seem to be driven by supply
side responses and that the effect of the first review is driven by first reviews with high
ratings.

       Figure 4: Event Study Estimates--Reviews (Alternative Timing and Subsample )




                          (a) Hired                                              (b) Log(Price)

Notes: The figures plot results similar to Figure 3 except for two changes. First, we restrict the sample to requests
in which the customer (not the professional) clicked on the "hire" button. Second, the weeks are defined as the
time when the customer first messaged the professional (rather than the time when the professional submits her bid)
relative to the time of the first review. Lines display 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at
the professional level.


  10
       Either the professional or the customer is allowed to click the "hired" button.




                                                         16
3.2   Choice Regressions

We now present a regression framework for measuring the effects of displaying professionals'
reported licensing status and the effects of professionals' prices and online reputation on
consumer choices. For professional j 's bid on request r, we specify the indicator for whether
j gets hired as follows:


           hiredjr = 0 + submittedjr 1 + verif iedjr 2 + log (pricejr + 1)3 +
                                                                                            (2)
                  log (reviewsjr + 1)4 + avg ratingjr 5 + Xjr 7 + Wjr 8 + jr ,

As in the event study, we control for the license submission decision (submittedjr ). This
indicator is visible to us in the data, but the professional's reported license status is not
visible to the consumer until verified (verif iedjr = 1). We can then interpret the coefficient
2 on the verified variable as the causal effect on the hiring probability of the consumer
knowing that a professional is licensed . The variable pricejr is professional j 's quoted price
for request r; reviewsjr represents the number of reviews the professional has received before
submitting a quote on request r; and avg ratingjr is j 's average star rating (1­5) at the time
of submitting the bid on request r. The vector Xjr includes an indicator for whether the
quote is missing a price (in which case pricejr is also set to zero), an indicator for whether
reviewsjr = 0, an indicator for whether an observation corresponds to the outside option
bid (see subsection 3.1), and a flexible set of controls for the time of a request relative to
the license submission time.
   The vector Wjr differs depending on our specification. In our simplest specification
(Column 1 of Table 2), Wjr is omitted. In columns 2, 4, and 6, we include in Wjr a quadratic
term for the time the professional has been registered on the platform; the character length
of the text of the professional's quote (and a dummy for whether this text length is missing);
indicators for whether the professional has a business license submitted and whether this
business license is validated (a business license is distinct from an occupational license);
indicators for whether the professional's profile has pictures, has a website link, lists the
number of employees, and provides a date of establishment of the business; indicators for
the arrival order of the bids for the request; and fixed effects for the month, state, and



                                              17
                      Table 2: Consumer Choice Regressions: Outcome = Hired

                               (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)
                               OLS            OLS          OLS       Price IVs   Price IVs     All IVs      All IVs
  License Submitted          0.00121        0.00458      0.00756      0.00292     0.00511      0.00621      0.00830
                            (0.00401)      (0.00392)    (0.00495)    (0.00602)   (0.00889)    (0.00558)    (0.00807)

  License Verified           0.00127       0.000906      0.00325      0.00235      0.0147      0.00289      0.0147
                            (0.00399)      (0.00377)    (0.00530)    (0.00801)   (0.00937)    (0.00696)    (0.00861)

  Average Rating           0.0205          0.0200       0.0283       0.0236      0.0333       0.175        0.254
                           (0.000930)      (0.00106)    (0.00429)    (0.00316)   (0.00692)    (0.0564)     (0.0846)

  Log(Reviews + 1)         0.0144          0.0220       0.0311       0.00591      0.00458      0.00401     -0.000908
                           (0.000892)      (0.00411)    (0.00648)    (0.00287)   (0.00380)    (0.00420)    (0.00590)

  Log(Price + 1)           -0.0287         -0.0369      -0.0543      -0.433      -0.695       -0.366       -0.617
                            (0.00103)       (0.00846)     (0.0111)    (0.0392)    (0.0557)     (0.0336)     (0.0482)
  N                         2,669,083       2,669,083    2,669,083   2,669,083   2,669,083    2,669,083    2,669,083
  Other Controls               No              Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
  State and Month FE           No              Yes           No         Yes          No          Yes           No
  Category FE                  No              Yes           No         Yes          No          Yes           No
  Request FE                   No              No           Yes          No         Yes           No          Yes


Notes: Regression results from Equation 2. The first three columns use OLS and progressively add controls. The next
two columns instrument for price, and the final columns instrument for having any rating, for the number of reviews,
for the average rating, as well as for price. Table G.4 through Table G.6 show first stage results. Standard errors are
clustered at the professional level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




category of the request. In our most flexible specifications (columns 3, 5 and 7), Wjr
includes request-level fixed effects.
    Consistent with our event study analysis, in column 1 we find no effect of the licensing
signal on the hiring choice (the coefficient on verif iedjr is a precise zero). We do find
significant positive impacts for each of the reputation measures (average rating and number
of reviews) and significant negative effects of prices. Each of these variables is potentially
correlated with characteristics of the professional or the request. In columns 2 and 3, we
account for this possibility by including the additional controls described in the previous
paragraph. Even with request-level fixed effects--which account flexibility for unobservable
difficulty of the job requested by the consumer-- we find very similar results.
    Prices are likely also correlated with unobservables at the bid level not accounted for
with our additional controls, such as time-varying dimensions of professional quality. To
address this concern, in columns 4 and 5, we instrument for price in (2) using the geographic
distance between the consumer's zip code and the professional's zip code. The majority of
the services on the platform require working in the home of the consumer. This location


                                                           18
requirement implies that the professional's costs should be increasing in this distance, but
this distance is unlikely to directly affect the consumer's willingness to pay for the service.11
Column 4 displays the results with state, month, and category fixed effects and column 5
with request fixed effects.12 In each case we find a much larger magnitude for the price
coefficient than in the OLS specifications, consistent with price endogeneity. We continue
to find no significant effects of the licensing signal. We find significant positive effects for
the professional's average rating in both columns 4 and 5, but in column 5 we are no longer
able to detect a positive effect for the number of reviews separately from the average rating
effect.13
    Similar to prices, the reputation measures in Equation 2 may be correlated with time-
varying unobservables that relate to the quality of the professional. This could hinder a
comparison of the license-verified effect and the online ratings effect. We therefore propose,
as an additional specification, an instrumental variables strategy based on the work of Chen
(2018). Specifically, we instrument for a professional's current rating using the ratings that
the focal professional's raters (i.e. those who have rated the focal professional until now)
assigned to other professionals. Similarly, we instrument for the professional's current
number of reviews using the propensity of the focal professional's previous hirers (i.e. those
who have hired the focal professional) to leave reviews on others whom they hired. We
describe the construction of these instruments in Appendix E. Columns 6 and 7 display
the results using these instruments in addition to the price instruments. We again see a
large negative effect of price, and a significant and positive effect of average ratings (and no
separate effect of the number of reviews). The IV estimate of the effect of average ratings
increases by an order of magnitude. We continue to find no significant effect, or at best
  11
     More precisely, we instrument for price with this distance measure, along with a dummy for whether the
professional and consumer are in the same location and a dummy for whether the professional and consumer
are more than 100 miles apart. One may be concerned that customers prefer professionals located very close
to them, and indeed the survey evidence presented in section 4 suggests that customers care about whether
the professional is "local". Adding to the second stage a dummy variable for whether the professional is
located in the same zip code as the consumer and a dummy variable for whether they are located more than
100 miles away does not change our results.
  12
     First stage estimates corresponding to columns 4 and 5 are found in Table G.4 and first stage estimates
for columns 6 and 7 are found in Table G.5 and Table G.6 respectively.
  13
     In all of our specifications, we do not separately control for the professional's number of previous hires
and number of reviews, as these two variables move closely with one another and identifying a separate effect
of these two signals is challenging.



                                                      19
only marginally significant effect of license verification.
    The bulk of the evidence from Table 2 suggests that there is no significant impact
of displaying the verified license signal. On the other hand, in all our specification, we
find positive effects of average ratings and negative effects for prices (and, in our first four
specifications, a positive, significant effect for the number of reviews). However, for the sake
of comparison, taking the 1.47 point estimate of the license verified effect (from column 7)
at face value and comparing it to the price effect (-0.617) suggests that the licensing signal is
worth a drop in price from $200 (the median in our sample) to about $197. And comparing
to the average rating coefficient (0.254) suggests that the licensing signal is worth about
0.06 of a star.
    In Table G.3 we offer alternative versions of specification 7 from Table 2 in which we
interact the license variables with a number of other variables. We find no evidence that a
consumer values a professional's license status more if the consumer lives in a state with a
more stringent licensing regime for the job in question; if the consumer has never previously
posted a request or hired on the platform before; if the professional has no previous ratings;
of if the job is one that tends to be more expensive. We do find that consumers value a
license more for requests that receive bids by at least one licensed and one non-licensed
professional. Figure G.1 displays estimates of the license effect, price effect, and reputation
effects from estimating specification 7 separately by job category, where we find similar
results to those in Table 2.14 We interpret our overall findings thus far as suggesting
that knowledge of a professional's licensing status does not substantially impact consumer
choices. In contrast, we find that reputation measures and quoted prices have important
effects on hiring probabilities.15
   14
      In Figure G.1 we focus on aggregated meta-categories, as defined in the notes to the figure. We find that
the estimated coefficients differ by meta-category. We find multiple meta-categories with significant negative
effects of prices or significant positive effects of ratings and the number of reviews (and no meta-categories
with the reverse), and we find no meta-categories with significant positive effects of the license verified signal.
   15
      We find very similar effects to those shown in Table 2 when we use a conditional logit model instead
of a linear probability model. Marginal effects from this model are shown in Table G.2, where we estimate
regressions corresponding to columns 3, 5, and 7 of Table 2. Table G.2 also displays results from a linear
probability model as in Table 2 but with fixed effects for each professional; we do not prefer these regressions
because there is little variation within a given professional over time with which to identify our effects of
interest, and our first stage estimates for our average rating IV are not significant after controlling for
professional fixed effects.




                                                        20
4         Survey Evidence

To dive deeper into how consumers think about (or don't think about) licensing when
making choices, we conducted a survey of a nationally representative sample of customers
about their choices regarding home improvement professionals. Our survey panel was cre-
ated by the service ProdegeMR and consists of 12,760 respondents, of whom 5,859 hired
a home services professional within the past year and 5,219 of those fulfilled additional
validation criteria to be considered a reliable response. The survey questions are available
in Appendix F.
         We first asked respondents about the service they purchased. The most common word
stems include "paint" (10.1%), "replac" (8.4%),"plumb" (8.3%), "repair" (7.6%), "instal"
(7.5%), and "roof" (6.5%). Broadly, the services purchased by the survey respondents
mirror the services purchased on the platform. When we categorize the responses according
to occupations, we find that the most common occupations include HVAC contractors
(20%), plumbers (19%), and painting contractors (10%).
         Many consumers find their service providers online, validating the importance of study-
ing consumer choices in online platforms. The modal way through which consumers find
service providers is still word of mouth through a friend (53%), but Google and Yelp are
used by 25% of the respondents, and 16% say they used a platform like the one we study.
Note that for those consumers who say they used Google, the exchange may in fact have
been intermediated by digital platforms like the one we study. Overall, the shares suggest
that the internet is an important way to find home improvement professionals.16
         Survey respondents also care more about prices and reputation--online or word-of-
mouth--than knowing about whether a professional is licensed. When asked to list up
to 3 reasons for why consumers selected a particular professional, respondents' answers
included the word stems "price" (50%), "cost" (14%),17 "quality" (14%), "review" (13%),
"recommend" (13%), and "friend" (12%).18 Fewer than 40 respondents (less than 1%) listed
    16
     15% of the respondents selected the `Other' category, but then mentioned family and friends, Face-
book, neighborhood, and professionals they hired previously as the way in which they found the current
professional.
  17
     An additional 6% of the responses included the words "cheap" and "afford".
  18
     An additional 13% of the responses included "refer", and an additional 9% of the responses included
"reput".



                                                  21
licensing in their top 3 reasons for hiring a professional.
         Respondents do not seem very knowledgeable about the occupational licensing status
of their providers, at least during the search process. Indeed, 61% of the respondents knew
that their chosen providers were licensed for the service requested, but 52% of those only
found out only when they signed the contract, and 33% found out from the professionals
telling them. More people found out about a professional's licensing status on a platform
like the one we study (9%) than on an official government website (6%).
         It may be the case that the customers who hire non-licensed professionals or do not
know about the licensing status of the professional do so because they know that a license
is not required for the service. To examine this possibility, we asked respondents whether
a license was required by law for the service requested. 37% of the respondents said they
were unsure whether a license was required, 14% thought a license was not required, and
the rest thought a license was required. This suggests that a large share of customers choose
professionals without knowing about the relevant regulations.19 One reason for this may be
that customers simply trust that the existing regulations and their enforcement are enough
to guarantee acceptable quality standards. We do find some support for this, with 53% of
the respondents in favor of licensing regulation, and 16% against it. In the next section
we quantify how these regulations affect aggregate demand, competition, and equilibrium
prices.


5         Effect of Occupational Licensing Regulation on Market
          Outcomes

In this section we study the aggregate effects of licensing stringency on competition, prices,
and customer satisfaction. Aggregate effects from licensing--for both supply and demand--
may arise even if, as our above results suggest, consumers do not consider the licensing
status of individual providers in their choices. On the supply side, licensing laws may affect
the decisions of individuals to become professionals in an occupation, and their bidding
    19
     We were not able to confirm whether customers' beliefs in answering this question corresponded to
reality; i.e. if a customer said that a license was required for the service requested, we could not always
verify whether that was indeed the case.



                                                    22
strategies. Non-licensed professionals may also change their quality due to competition
from licensed professionals. Overall, to the extent that licensing regulation increases entry
barriers, we should expect a negative effect of increased licensing stringency on the number
of competing professionals. It is also possible that consumers do not take into account
licensing information when choosing a service provider but rely instead on the existing
regulatory framework to prevent unqualified individuals from operating. This seems in line
with our survey evidence. If regulation increases consumer trust in service providers, it may
also increase aggregate demand for the services covered by occupational licensing.
      The advantage of studying how occupational licensing affects market outcomes in our
context is twofold. First, the platform facilitates matching across a wide range of service
categories and US states. To our knowledge, this level of breadth is unique in the literature
on occupational licensing. Second, since the platform tracks requests, quotes, and, to some
extent, hiring decisions and consumer evaluation of service quality, we can measure the
effect of occupational licensing regulation on multiple stages of the consumer-professional
exchange funnel : search, hiring, and ex-post satisfaction. We also observe many details
about the job requests not available in prior studies on occupational licensing.
      To evaluate the extent to which licensing regulation affects demand and supply, we
exploit variation in the stringency of licensing requirements across states and service cat-
egories. Within each state-by-occupation cell, we form a measure of licensing stringency
by combining data on occupational licensing regulation from the Institute for Justice with
our own manually collected data. The Institute for Justice "License to Work" database
(Carpenter et al. 2017) contains several dimensions of licensing requirements across all 50
states and the District of Columbia for 102 lower-income occupations.20 For occupations not
covered by this study, such as plumbers and electricians, we collect analogous information
online and by phone from state government agencies.
      The dimensions of licensing recorded in this data are fees, number of required exams,
minimum grade for passing an exam, minimum age required before practicing, education
requirements (expressed in years or credit hours), and experience requirements (in years).
We reduce these dimensions to a one-dimensional stringency score for each state-occupation
 20
      http://ij.org/report/license-work-2/.



                                              23
pair by taking the first element of a principal component on the full set of requirements. A
higher score corresponds to more stringent regulation. We will refer to this score as licensing
stringency. Table 3 displays the correlation between our measure of licensing stringency and
each regulatory dimension included in the principal component analysis. The table shows
that our measure of licensing stringency is indeed positively correlated with all dimensions of
regulation, but especially with the number of required exams and fees.21 The first principal
component explains 47% of the variation in the dimensions of licensing regulation.22

                   Table 3: Licensing Regulation and Dimensionality Reduction.


                                       Licensing Stringency     Correlation
                                           Days Lost               0.852
                                       Education (Credits)         0.072
                                        Education (Years)          0.080
                                             Exams                 0.813
                                       Experience (Years)          0.559
                                              Fees                 0.844
                                            Min Age                0.741
                                           Min Grade               0.290

Notes: Correlations between the first principal component and the dimensions of occupational licensing regulation
used in the principal component analysis. "Days Lost" is an estimate of how many days of work a professional loses
to satisfy the occupational licensing requirements. This variable is computed by the Institute for Justice, so we do
not have it for all occupations.


    Before describing our estimation strategy and results, we discuss how our proxy for strin-
gency regulation affects data selection. There are almost 400 home improvement categories
defined by the platform, ranging from gutter cleaning and maintenance to pest control.
    We associate each service category to a corresponding occupation. For example, "toilet
installation" and "shower/bathtub repair" are categories associated with plumbers. Because
our estimation relies on cross-state variation in licensing regulation for a single occupation
   21
      "Days Lost" is an estimate of how many days of work a professional loses to satisfy the occupational
licensing requirements. It is included in the Institute for Justice database but not in the additional oc-
cupations for which we collected data. Adding it or removing it from the analysis does not change our
results.
   22
      Figure G.2 shows that our measure of licensing stringency is positively correlated with the share of bids
from professionals with a verified license on the site. In the figure, we divide meta-category-zip code pairs
into 20 quantiles according to the distribution of the licensing stringency variable. The y-axis shows the
share of bids from professionals with a verified license. As licensing stringency increases, the share of bids
from licensed professionals also increases. The correlation is relatively modest, implying that there are other
factors influencing whether professionals choose to inform online consumers about their licensing status.



                                                        24
we remove all categories that are not covered by occupational licensing regulation in any
state, such as "gardening". Since a few occupations without state licensing regulation
have local regulation (e.g. at a county or city level), which is hard to collect data on,
we remove all state-occupation pairs without any state regulation.23 We further limit the
sample to service groupings with at least 100 posted tasks in at least 10 states.24 At the
state-occupation level, we have 375 groups, covering 44 states and 18 separate occupations.
       To illustrate our licensing stringency measure, we highlight some examples. Pest control
applicators in Oregon have a licensing stringency measure close to the average value of 0.18.
The regulation requires professionals to be at least 18 years old, pay $206 in licensing fees,
and pass two exams. One standard deviation above the mean of the stringency measure
yields a level of regulation corresponding to plumbers in Rhode Island. They have to be at
least 22 years old, pay $737, pass 2 exams, attend 5 hours of class instruction,25 and have
five years of experience. Subtracting one standard deviation means reducing the level of
regulation to the laws covering cement finishing or painting contractors in Massachusetts,
who only need to pay $250 to be able to work.
       Licensing stringency is defined at the state-occupation level, but we consider narrower
markets given that additional regulatory requirements may be added at the county or city
level. We define a market at the level of a service category and zip code. For example, we
consider services within "air conditioning" in zip code 02139 and services within "duct/vent"
in zip code 02163 as separate, even if they are subject to the same regulation for HVAC
contractors in Massachusetts. With this definition we have 269,084 markets in our data.
       Table 4 shows task-level descriptive statistics for the market equilibrium variables at
the search, hiring, and post-transaction phase. They include the number of quotes received
by each task and the average quoted price for those tasks with fixed price bids, the hiring
rate and the transaction price, the probability that the buyer gives the provider a 5-star
  23
     For example, the states of Colorado, New York, Texas, and Wyoming do not have state-level licensing
requirements for many occupations, but instead allow cities and counties to set their own standards.
  24
     For this selection criterion, we first combine categories for similar services. For example, "solar panel
installation" and "solar panel repair" are combined into a single "meta-category". With this definition,
we limit the sample to meta-categories with at least 100 posted tasks in at least 10 states. We use this
meta-category classification in Figure G.1 and Figures G.3-G.5.
  25
     37.5 clock hours are equivalent to one semester credit, so 5 clock hours are equivalent to 0.13 semester
credits (https://ifap.ed.gov/fregisters/FR102910Final.html, accessed in November 2019).




                                                     25
review after hiring, and the buyer's probability to post another request on the platform. We
observe a large degree of heterogeneity across service categories. With an average licensing
stringency variable equal to 0.39, requests tend to be posted in states and occupations with
more stringent requirements than the average state-occupation level (0.18).

    Table 4: Descriptive Statistics on Licensing Stringency and Equilibrium Outcomes.


   Variable                     Observations     Mean     Standard Deviation      10th Pctl.    Median     90th Pctl.
   Licensing Stringency            923,735       0.39             1.78               -1.85       0.41         2.39
   Nr. Quotes                      923,735         1.9             1.51                0           2            4
   Avg. Fixed Quote ($)            353,449       410.7            581.5               65         175         1,050
   Hire Probability                740,734       0.17             0.37                 0           0           1
   Fixed Sale Price ($)             58,129       239.2             382                50         125          500
   5-Star Review                   122,530       0.48              0.5                 0           0           1
   Request Again                   122,530       0.23             0.42                 0           0           1
   Request Again Diff. Cat.        122,530        0.22            0.42                 0          0            1


Notes: Task-level descriptives. Row 1 and 2 include all tasks submitted in categories and states with some level
of occupational licensing regulation. The following rows focus on a subset of these observations. Row 3 restricts
attention to tasks with at least one fixed price quote. Row 4 focuses on any task with at least one offer. Row 5
focuses on the successful tasks whose winning bid includes a fixed price quote. Row 6, 7, and 8 focus on all successful
tasks. "Request again" is equal to 1 if a customer posts another request at least one week after posting the current
(successful) job. "Request again diff. cat." is equal to 1 if a customer posts another request in a service category that
is different from the current job at least one week after posting the current job.


    We first run regressions to evaluate the effect of licensing stringency on aggregate de-
mand. Here we examine the possibility that, if regulation increases consumer trust in service
providers by raising service quality, it may increase demand for the services provided by
professionals covered by more stringent licensing regulation. We let z denote a zip code, c
denote a category, and t denote a month-year. We aggregate the number of requests at the
category-zip code-year month level, and estimate the following equation:


               log (posted requestsczt ) = licensing stringencystate(z )occupation(c) +
                                                                                                                     (3)
                                               µ z + µc + µt +     czt .


We cluster standard errors at the state-occupation level. Results are presented in Table 5.
The estimated effect is a relatively precise zero, suggesting that consumers do not post
more requests on the platform for services that are covered by more stringent licensing
regulation. This finding that aggregate demand on the platform does not appear to change


                                                          26
with licensing stringency suggests that we can examine request-level outcomes as we study
the equilibrium effects of licensing stringency driven by supply shifts.

                  Table 5: Cross-State Regression Estimates--Aggregate Demand



                                                               Log(Number of Requests)
                                                    (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
                Licensing Stringency              -0.001         0.001       -0.0002       -0.0002
                                                  (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)

                Mean of Dependent Variable:        0.065          0.065       0.065         0.065
                Category FE                         No             Yes         Yes           Yes
                Zip Code FE                         No             No          Yes           Yes
                Month-Year FE                       No             No          No            Yes
                Observations                     8,879,772      8,879,772   8,879,772     8,879,772
                R2                                 0.000          0.022       0.058         0.103


Notes: Regression results for aggregate demand (Equation 3). An observation is a category-zip code-year month,
and the outcome of interest is the number of posted requests. We augment the data to include all observations with
no posted requests, although the results would not change if we only considered non-zero observations. Columns 2
through 4 increasingly add controls (category, zip code, and month-year fixed effects). Standard errors are clustered
at the occupation-state level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




       To study the equilibrium effects from supply -side factors, we run regressions of the
following form:


       yr = µz (r) + µc(r) + µt(r) + licensing stringencystate(r)occupation(c(r)) + Xr +                  r,     (4)


where r denotes a request, and each request has a corresponding category c, year-month t,
and zip code z . In this regression, Xr includes controls for how the customer was acquired
(e.g. organic search or online advertising) and a small number of request characteristics
(e.g. text length of the request). The variable yr is one of many possible outcome measures:
at the search stage, our outcome variables include the number of quotes received and the
average (log) quoted price for quotes with a fixed price bid; at the hiring stage, we use a
dummy for whether a hire was recorded on the platform and the (log) transacted price for
hires where the winning quote had a fixed price bid; at the post-transaction stage, we use
a dummy for whether the consumer leaves a five-star review and a dummy for whether the
consumer posts another request at least one week after the current request.26 Using data
  26
       The one-week delay is to avoid confounding buyer's choice to post again on the platform with buyer's


                                                          27
                                  Table 6: Cross-State Regression Estimates


                         Number       Avg. Fixed       Hire        Fixed Sale       5-Star       Request      Request
                        of Quotes     Quote (log)                  Price (log)      Review        Again        Again
                                                                                                              Diff. Cat.
                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)
 Licensing               -0.024        0.022          -0.002        0.018            0.001       -0.002        -0.002
 Stringency              (0.013)        (0.006)       (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.001)
 Mean of Dep. Var.          1.9          5.34           0.17          4.95           0.48         0.23          0.22
 Included Tasks             All       With Fixed       With         Hired a          Hired        Hired         Hired
                                       Quotes         Quotes      Fixed Quote
 Observations            923,735       353,449        740,734        58,129         122,530      122,530       122,530
 R2                       0.525         0.505          0.081         0.581           0.128        0.148         0.148


Notes: Regression results of equation 4. Zip code, month-year, and category fixed effects are included as controls.
Column (1) includes all requests posted in categories and states with some level of occupational licensing regulation.
The following columns focus on a subset of these observations. Column (2) restricts attention to requests with at
least one fixed price quote. Column (3) focuses on any request with at least one offer. Column (4) focuses on the
successful requests whose winning bid includes a fixed price quote. Column (5) through (7) focus on all successful
requests. Standard errors are clustered at the state-occupation level. For category-specific estimates, see Figures G.3
through G.5.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




from eBay, Nosko and Tadelis (2015) showed that consumers draw conclusions about the
quality of a platform from individual transactions, so we take the propensity to post again
on the platform as a signal of consumer satisfaction about the service received by the hired
professional.
    Baseline regression results are in Table 6. On average, across all services, increases in
occupational licensing stringency are associated with increases in quoted and transaction
prices. The coefficient estimates imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in licensing
stringency (1.78) decreases the number of quotes by 0.04 (or 2.2%), increases quoted prices
by 3.9%, and increases transacted prices by 3.2%. Licensing stringency does not signif-
icantly affect the hiring probability. More stringent licensing is also not associated with
higher customer satisfaction, as measured by ratings or customer returns. If anything the
coefficients are negative, although the point estimates are not economically significant.
    The above analysis does not rule out possible compositional differences in the nature
of jobs requested across states and occupations. For example, it might be the case that
painting jobs in Arizona are for bigger houses than in Massachusetts, and so some of the
decision to re-post an identical request. We can also restrict attention to posting again, but in a different
service category. Results do not change.


                                                         28
              Table 7: Cross-State Regression Estimates - Double Machine Learning


                        Number of      Avg. Fixed          Hire      Fixed Sale     5-Star       Request      Request
                         Quotes        Quote (log)                   Price (log)    Review        Again        Again
                                                                                                              Diff. Cat.
                            (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)            (7)
 Licensing              -0.0221***     0.0204***      -0.0013***     0.0177***      0.0004       -0.0018*     -0.0018*
 Stringency              (0.0012)       (0.0012)       (0.0004)       (0.0025)     (0.0013)      (0.0011)     (0.0011)
 Mean of Dep. Var.          1.9           5.34              0.17        4.95          0.48        0.23          0.22
 Included Tasks             All        With Fixed           With      Hired a         Hired       Hired         Hired
                                        Quotes            Quotes    Fixed Quote
 Observations             923,735       353,449           740,734      58,129       122,530      122,530       122,530
 R2                        0.0004       0.0008             0.0000      0.0009       0.0000       0.0000         0.0000


Notes: Double Machine Learning estimates of equation 4 (Chernozhukov et al. (2018)), where we use lasso to predict
both treatment and outcome variable as a function of our explanatory variables. Point estimates, standard errors,
and corresponding significance levels are based on the median across all splits. Standard errors are clustered at the
state-occupation level. R2 and adjusted R2 are also based on the median across all splits. The observations included
in each column are the same as in Table 6. Zip code, month-year, and category fixed effects are subject to lasso
penalization just like the other explanatory variables.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




price differences that we capture with licensing stringency might in fact be a function of
different task requests. To control for this possibility, we make use of the large set of
questions that customers answer before posting a job, and flexibly control for their answers
using the double machine learning estimator developed by Chernozhukov et al. (2018).
This estimator predicts both the licensing stringency variable and the outcome variables
as a function of all our observables constructed from geography, time, category, and task
request details. For this prediction, we use Lasso regressions, and set the penalty parameter
using 10-fold cross validation. For this prediction we split the data in two groups, training
the model on one group to predict on the other. Then we use the predictions to regress the
residual of our outcome variables on the residual of our licensing stringency variable. We
do this 100 times ("splits"), and use the distribution of the resulting coefficients to get at
our final estimate and standard errors.
    The results displayed in Table 7 show the median estimated coefficients, and confirm
the main conclusions drawn from Table 6. Furthermore, because these regressions use
additional information from requests, they result in lower standard errors. The estimates
from the double-ML procedure are nearly identical to our estimates from the fixed effects
regressions. Even with the additional precision, we are not able to detect a statistically


                                                            29
significant effect on measures of customer satisfaction.27
       Before concluding this section, we explore heterogeneity of the effects of licensing reg-
ulation for different degrees of job complexity. Some states only regulate professionals if
they perform jobs above a certain price threshold, and a natural dimension along which to
measure heterogeneity in how licensing stringency affects outcomes is the expected price of
a job.28 We construct a proxy for the expected price of a given request by using a machine
learning approach to predict whether the average quote submitted would be above a certain
dollar threshold. We use price thresholds of $200, $500, and $1,000. For each threshold, we
construct the expected price as follows. First, we restrict the observations to requests that
have at least one fixed price quote and we split this sample into five groups. For each group,
we train a model to predict the average quoted price on the remaining 80% of the sample,
and we use the prediction generated from this exercise as our predicted price for the focal
group of observations. The right-hand-side variables used in this prediction exercise are
request-level features, including a large vector of question-answer combinations about the
nature of the task that the customer submits in response to a platform questionnaire when
posting the request. Appendix Table G.8 demonstrates that our prediction performance is
very high.29
       We now use the predicted price for each job to see whether the effect of regulation on
competition and prices is driven by larger and more complex jobs--defined as those jobs
whose predicted price is above the $200, $500, or $1,000 thresholds.30 Table 8 presents
estimates of Equation 4 with licensing stringency interacted with a dummy variable for
whether the job has a predicted price that is higher than a given threshold ($200 for the top
panel, $500 for the middle panel, and $1,000 for the bottom panel). The reduction in the
number of quotes seems similar across low- and high-priced jobs, but the price increase is
mostly driven by the more complex jobs. Looking at column (4), we see that the interaction
  27
     Figure G.3 through Figure G.5 contain results on the effect of licensing stringency by service type.
  28
     As stated earlier, in California, painters are required to have an occupational license only if they perform
jobs above $500.
  29
     For requests that have no fixed price quotes, we obtain a predicted price following a similar approach.
We use the entire sample of requests with at least one fixed quote to train the model, and then use that
trained model to predict prices from the request-level features of observations in the sample with no fixed
price quotes.
  30
     We do not see any effect of regulation stringency on aggregate demand for jobs whose price is higher
than $200, $500, or $1,000.


                                                       30
                                   Table 8: Heterogeneity by Price Point


                               Number      Avg. Fixed        Hire         Fixed        5-Star       Request      Request
                              of Quotes    Quote (log)                  Sale Price     Review        Again        Again
                                                                          (log)                                  Diff. Cat.
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)
 Licensing Stringency          -0.016         0.013         0.0001         0.010       -0.0002      -0.002        -0.003
                               (0.015)       (0.008)        (0.002)       (0.006)      (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)
 Licensing Str.*> $200         -0.015        0.024         -0.003        0.035          0.003         0.001        0.001
                               (0.014)       (0.013)        (0.002)       (0.012)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 R2                             0.525         0.506          0.081         0.582        0.128         0.148        0.148
 Licensing Stringency         -0.023         0.018          -0.001       0.014         0.0003       -0.003       -0.003
                              (0.014)        (0.007)        (0.001)      (0.006)       (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Licensing Str.*> $500        -0.004          0.030         -0.001       0.052          0.005        0.004        0.004
                              (0.017)        (0.025)        (0.002)      (0.028)       (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 R2                            0.525          0.506          0.081        0.582         0.128         0.148        0.148
 Licensing Stringency         -0.025         0.020          -0.001       0.016          0.001       -0.002        -0.002
                              (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.001)       (0.005)      (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.001)
 Licensing Str.*> $1, 000      0.014           0.056        -0.003       0.120         0.008         0.006         0.006
                              (0.024)         (0.044)       (0.002)       (0.058)      (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.003)
 R2                            0.525           0.506         0.081         0.582        0.128        0.148         0.148
 Observations                  923,735       353,449        740,734       58,129       122,530       122,530      122,530


Notes: Three sets of regressions where the licensing stringency variable is interacted with a dummy variable for whether
the predicted job price is above $200 (top panel), $500 (middle panel), or $1,000 (bottom panel). Zip code, month-
year, and category fixed effects are included as controls. Everything else is identical to Table 6. Price predictions are
done via machine learning using demand-side characteristics. Prediction performance metrics are shown in Table G.8.
 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




coefficient increases (and stays significant) as the price threshold increases. A one standard
deviation increase in licensing stringency raises the price of jobs above $200 by 6.2%, it
raises the price of jobs above $500 by 9.3%, and it raises the price of jobs above $1,000 by
21.4%. Thus, increases in licensing stringency are associated with higher prices especially
for expensive jobs.


6     Conclusion

In this paper, we use new data collected by a digital platform to study the role of occupa-
tional licensing laws on individual choices and market outcomes. We first examine whether
information about the professional's licensing status has an effect on consumer's choice of
whom to hire. We find that consumers care about online reviews and prices more than
about occupational licensing signals available on the platform. This result has several inter-


                                                          31
pretations. The first interpretation is that occupational licensing may not be important for
consumer decision making. The second interpretation is that consumers do not distinguish
between licensed and unlicensed professionals because they believe that all professionals
comply with relevant state regulation when bidding for a particular service, either by being
licensed or by providing services of comparable quality to licensed professionals.
   The previous result raises the question of whether licensing regulations actually improve
service quality. If regulations do not improve quality, then consumers should rationally not
care about licensing signals. If regulations do improve service quality, they may do so for
even non-licensed providers due to competitive pressure. We exploit variation in licensing
regulation across home improvement categories and across US states to study the market-
level effects of licensing stringency. We find that licensing stringency is associated with fewer
quotes and higher transaction prices but not better service, at least as measured through
online reviews and propensity to use the platform again.
   The paper has a number of limitations. In particular, services differ in the degree to
which consumers have visibility into the dimensions of quality relevant for their safety. We
proxy customer satisfaction with the propensity to use the platform again, and to positively
rate the service providers. Both are likely to be noisy measures of provider quality. In
addition, some consumer safety or professional quality issues may take time to manifest.
For example, a consumer might not realize that a roofing contractor ignores basic safety
measures when repairing a roof until much later--and potentially when it is too late to
submit a review.
   Another limitation of the study is that we address the population of primarily resi-
dential consumers who purchase online. If online consumers are less sensitive to licensing
credentials, and service providers sort between online and offline customers accordingly, the
effects measured in this paper do not necessarily extend to offline transactions. Our survey
evidence suggests that licensing information is not important even for consumers who pur-
chase home improvement services offline. We cannot say anything about the importance of
licensing for commercial tasks relating to construction and home improvement since those
are not in our data.
   Both regulators and platforms have an interest in protecting consumers and ensuring


                                               32
service quality. Our results have implications for the design of licensing regulation and of
digital platforms for services. In particular, the increased availability of alternative signals of
quality, such as online reviews, has probably reduced the level of regulatory scrutiny needed
for service providers. Furthermore, these signals may be useful in designing a more data-
driven set of licensing regulations and enforcement mechanisms. Occupational licensing
laws have also come into scrutiny from the Federal Trade Commission and the Department
of Justice due to antitrust concerns (NC State Board of Dental Examiners v. FTC ) and due
to the role licensing laws may play in protecting consumers or in restricting competition.
Our results suggest that, at least for the case of home improvement, more stringent licensing
laws restrict competition but do not lead to noticeable improvements in quality.
   For the platform, the lack of attention paid to verified licensing status by consumers
suggests that the disclosure of status may be important. The broader ramifications of our
findings for platform design hinge on whether the lack of consumer attention to licensing
is caused by misinformed consumers, by the redundancy of licensing with reputational
signals, or by the inability of licensing to ensure quality. Measuring the importance of these
explanations requires more targeted research designs. We leave these questions for future
investigation.




                                                33
References

Akerlof, G. A. (1970): "The Market for" Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market
  Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 488­500.

Barrios, J. M. (2019): "Occupational Licensing and Accountant Quality: Evidence from
  the 150-Hour Rule," Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics Working Paper
  2018-32.

Blair, P. Q. and B. W. Chung (2018): "Job Market Signaling through Occupational
  Licensing," NBER Working Paper 24791.

Buonanno, P. and M. Pagliero (2019): "Occupational Licensing, Labor Mobility, and
  the Unfairness of Entry Standards," Working Paper, Collegio Carlo Alberto.

Carpenter, D. M., L. Knepper, A. C. Erickson, and J. K. Ross (2017): License to
  Work: A National Study of Burdens from Occupational Licensing, Institute for Justice.

Carroll, S. and R. Gaston (1981): "Occupational Restrictions and the Quality of
  Service Received: Some Evidence," Southern Economic Journal, 959­976.

Chen, D. L. and J. J. Horton (2016): "Research Note--Are Online Labor Markets Spot
  Markets for Tasks? A Field Experiment on the Behavioral Response to Wage Cuts,"
  Information Systems Research, 27, 403­423.

Chen, Y. (2018): "User-Generated Physician Ratings: Evidence from Yelp," Working
  Paper, Stanford University.

Chernozhukov, V., D. Chetverikov, M. Demirer, E. Duflo, C. Hansen,
  W. Newey, and J. Robins (2018): "Double/Debiased Machine Learning for Treat-
  ment and Structural Parameters," The Econometrics Journal, 21, C1­C68.

Chevalier, J. A. and F. Scott Morton (2008): "State Casket Sales Restrictions: A
  Pointless Undertaking?" Journal of Law and Economics, 51, 1­23.

Cohen, P. (2016): "Moving to Arizona Soon? You Might Need a License," New York
  Times.

                                          34
Cowen, T. and A. Tabarrok (2015): "The End of Asymmetric Information," Cato
  Unbound, 6.

Cullen, Z. and C. Farronato (2015): "Outsourcing Tasks Online: Matching Supply
  and Demand on Peer-to-Peer Internet Platforms," Working Paper, Harvard University.

DePasquale, C. and K. Stange (2016): "Labor Supply Effects of Occupational Regu-
  lation: Evidence from the Nurse Licensure Compact," NBER Working Paper 22344.

Farronato, C. and G. Zervas (2019): "Consumer Reviews and Regulation: Evidence
  from NYC Restaurants," Working Paper.

Federman, M. N., D. E. Harrington, and K. J. Krynski (2006): "The Impact
  of State Licensing Regulations on Low-Skilled Immigrants: The Case of Vietnamese
  Manicurists," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96, 237­241.

Frandsen, B. R., L. J. Lefgren, and E. C. Leslie (2019): "Judging Judge Fixed
  Effects," NBER Working Paper 25528.

Friedman, M. (1962): Capitalism and Freedom, University of Chicago Press Chicago.

Hall, J., J. Hicks, M. M. Kleiner, and R. Solomon (2019): "Occupational Licensing
  of Uber Drivers," Working paper, University of Minnesota.

Harrington, D. E. and K. J. Krynski (2002): "The Effect of State Funeral Regulations
  on Cremation Rates: Testing for Demand Inducement in Funeral Markets," Journal of
  Law and Economics, 45, 199­225.

Horton, J. J. (2010): "Online Labor Markets," in International Workshop on Internet
  and Network Economics, Springer, 515­522.

Johnson, J. E. and M. M. Kleiner (2017): "Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to
  Interstate Migration?" NBER Working Paper 24107.

Kleiner, M. and E. Soltas (2019): "A Welfare Analysis of Occupational Licensing in
  U.S. States," Working Paper, MIT.



                                          35
Kleiner, M. and M. Xu (2019): "Occupational Licensing and Labor Market Fluidity,"
  Working Paper, Queens University.

Kleiner, M. M. (2006): Licensing Occupations: Ensuring Quality or Restricting Compe-
  tition?, Kalamazoo, MI: WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Kleiner, M. M. and A. B. Krueger (2010): "The Prevalence and Effects of Occupa-
  tional Licensing," British Journal of Industrial Relations, 48, 676­687.

Kleiner, M. M. and R. T. Kudrle (2000): "Does Regulation Affect Economic Out-
  comes? The Case of Dentistry," Journal of Law and Economics, 43, pp. 547­582.

Koumenta, M. and M. Pagliero (2018): "Occupational Regulation in the European
  Union: Coverage and Wage Effects," British Journal of Industrial Relations.

Koumenta, M., M. Pagliero, and L. Dai (2019): "Occupational Regulation and Immi-
  grant Wages: Evidence from the EU," Working paper, Queen Mary University of London.

Kugler, A. and R. M. Sauer (2005): "Doctors without Borders? Relicensing Require-
  ments and Negative Selection in the Market for Physicians," Journal of Labor Economics,
  23, 437­465.

Larsen, B. (2015): "Occupational Licensing and Quality: Distributional and Heteroge-
  neous Effects in the Teaching Profession," Working Paper, Stanford University.

Law, M. T. and M. S. Marks (2009): "Effects of Occupational Licensing Laws on
  Minorities: Evidence from the Progressive Era," Journal of Law and Economics, 52, pp.
  351­366.

------ (2017): "The Labor-Market Effects of Occupational Licensing Laws in Nursing,"
  Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 56, 640­661.

Leland, H. (1979): "Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality
  Standards," Journal of Political Economy, 1328­1346.

Luca, M. (2016): "Reviews, Reputation, and Revenue: The Case of Yelp.Com," Working
  Paper, Harvard University.

                                            36
Maurizi, A. (1980): "The Impact of Regulation on Quality: The Case of California Con-
  tractors," in Occupational Licensure and Regulation, ed. by S. Rottenberg, Washington,
  DC: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 299­333.

Millsap, A. (2017): "Some Progress On Occupational Licensing But Much More Needed,"
  Forbes, available at https://perma.cc/MA97-Z34X.

Nosko, C. and S. Tadelis (2015): "The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets: An
  Empirical Analysis and Field Experiment," NBER Working Paper 20830.

Pagliero, M. (2010): "Licensing Exam Difficulty and Entry Salaries in the US Market
  forLawyers," British Journal of Industrial Relations, 48, 726­739.

------ (2011): "What is the Objective of Professional Licensing? Evidence from the US
  Market for Lawyers," International Journal of Industrial Organization, 29, 473­483.

Pallais, A. (2014): "Inefficient Hiring in Entry-Level Labor Markets," American Economic
  Review, 104, 3565­3599.

Shapiro, C. (1986): "Investment, Moral Hazard, and Occupational Licensing," Review of
  Economic Studies, 53, 843.

Sibilia, N. (2017): "South Dakota Just Legalized Braiding Hair Without A License,"
  Forbes.

Smith, A. (1776): An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.

Timmons, E. J. (2017): "The Effects of Expanded Nurse Practitioner and Physician As-
  sistant Scope of Practice on the Cost of Medicaid Patient Care," Health policy, 121,
  189­196.

Timmons, E. J. and R. J. Thornton (2010): "The Licensing of Barbers in the USA,"
  British Journal of Industrial Relations, 48, 740­757.

Traczynski, J. and V. Udalova (2018): "Nurse Practitioner Independence, Health Care
  Utilization, and Health Outcomes," Journal of Health Economics, 58, 90­109.



                                            37
Zumbrun, J. (2016): "Occupational Licenses May Be Bad for the Economy, But Good
 for Workers Who Have Them," Wall Street Journal, available at https://perma.cc/
 X7QD-WPT9.




                                      38
APPENDIX

A     Additional Data and Analysis from Crawling Platform

Our primary dataset analyzed in the body of the paper comes directly from the platform's
internal databases, and several dimensions of professionals' profiles are omitted from this
dataset, such as the actual text of these profiles. In 2018, we performed a web-crawling
exercise to measure attributes that are unobserved in our primary sample. We identified
the largest three cities for each state in terms of unique professionals in categories subject
to licensing, and joined that list with the top 100 cities in terms of overall platform activity
as measured by the number of requests. We excluded cities with fewer than 10 profes-
sionals in the city. For each category and city, we found the corresponding landing page
for the platform. We then obtained information about all professionals displayed on the
landing page and their reviews. This information included the professional's license status,
ranking, name, number of hires, years in business, an indicator for whether he/she passed
the platform's background checks without any negative information, photos, zip code, city,
and an indicator of high engagement with the platform (similar to the "Superhost" badge
on Airbnb). We also obtained the text that the professional added to his/her profile, and
the professional's answers to commonly asked questions. Lastly, for each professional, we
obtained all review text, dates, and ratings. In this Appendix we distinguish between on-
and off-platform reviews because reviews can come from services exchanged on or off the
platform. If the review is submitted by a consumer who hired the professional through the
platform it is denoted an on-platform review. Otherwise, it is an off-platform review.
    In total, the crawl found 79,111 professionals whose profiles were displayed on at least one
of the URLs corresponding to the landing page for an occupation in a given city. Table A.1
displays summary statistics for these professionals. The median professional in the sample
has no hires, and one off-platform review. More detailed information is available if the
customer clicks on the professional's profile. Conditional on being in the top five results
for at least one URL, the median professional has 19 hires, 14 reviews, of which 12 are
on-platform reviews, and a median average rating of 4.9. 10% of professionals mention a



                                              39
license in their profile and 6% have a verified license.31 Overall, 14% of professionals mention
an occupational license in their profile, have a license verified by the platform, or both.32
Many professionals who mention a license in their online profile do not have it verified by
the platform. This could be due to professionals intentionally not submitting their licenses
for verification; some licenses being issued at a local level (the platform only verifies state-
issued licenses); or some licenses being submitted but not yet verified.33 Professionals also
mention certifications (7% of the time) and insurance (12% of the time).

           Table A.1: Summary Statistics Across Professionals in Web-Crawl Sample


                                      Min     25th Pct    Median      75th Pct     Max        Mean      SD
               License Text           0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        1.00      0.10      0.30
               License Verified       0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00       1.00        0.06     0.24
               Either License         0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        1.00       0.14     0.35
               Certification Text     0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        1.00      0.07      0.25
               Insurance Text         0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        1.00       0.12     0.32
               Background Check       0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00       1.00        0.17     0.37
               Avg. Rating            0.00      0.00       3.00         4.90       5.00        2.42    2.39
               Num. Reviews           0.00      0.00       1.00         9.00      1327.00     10.77    31.75
               Total Hires            0.00      0.00       0.00         9.00      2912.00     15.94    56.22

Notes: This table displays summary statistics at a professional level from the web crawl sample. "License Text" refers
to whether the word `license' was mentioned in the profile text of a professional. "License Verified" refers to whether
the pro has a license verified by the platform. "Either License" takes the value of 1 if the profile has license text or the
license is verified. "Certification Text" and "Insurance Text" refer to whether the profile text mentions certifications
or insurance. "Background Check" takes the value of 1 if the pro has passed a background check by the platform.


       Table A.2 and Table A.3 display breakdowns of these statistics for the top 20 categories
in terms of the number of professionals and in terms of the share of licensed professionals.
18% of professionals in the top category, "General Contracting", mention a license in their
online profile, and 12% have a verified license. Categories that are more technical such
as plumbing, home inspection, electrical wiring, and pest extermination top the list of the
categories with the highest share of professionals with any licensing information. However,
  31
     In particular, reviews can come from services exchanged on or off the platform. If the review is sub-
mitted by a consumer who hired the professional through the platform it is denoted an on-platform review.
Otherwise, it is an off-platform review. Our main analysis in the body of the paper uses only on-platform
reviews. See also Appendix D.
  32
     Note that differences in the rates of verification between the crawl and platform sample can occur for
many reasons including the fact that professionals differ in their propensity to bid and that the crawl was
conducted during a different time period from the platform sample.
  33
     In a manual investigation using websites of state licensing boards, we found it difficult to verify the
validity of licenses of professionals who mentioned them in their profile. This could happen because the
registered name of the professional differed from the name on the platform, because the license had expired,
or because the professional held a different type of license than the one we were searching for.


                                                            40
even in these categories, fewer than 50% of professionals disclose any credential and fewer
than 28% mention a license.




                                            41
                                      Table A.2: Top Categories by Number of Professionals in Web-Crawl Sample


              Category                          Text Lic.     Verified Lic.    Either Lic.     Cert.     Insurance      Credential      Background       Num. Pros
              General Contracting                 0.180           0.120           0.250        0.055        0.170          0.330           0.140           3, 242
              Handyman                            0.084           0.045           0.110        0.038        0.100          0.180           0.170           2, 285
              Electrical and Wiring Issues        0.230           0.120           0.290        0.068        0.160          0.350           0.170           2, 211
              Roof                                0.160           0.120           0.240        0.110        0.250          0.400           0.160           1, 952
              Carpet Cleaning                     0.058           0.005           0.061        0.120        0.100          0.200           0.140           1, 892
              Home Inspection                     0.230           0.180           0.340        0.240        0.160          0.500           0.190           1, 802
              Interior Design                     0.044           0.039           0.073        0.058        0.022          0.120           0.180           1, 801
              Property Management                 0.140           0.180           0.260        0.038        0.063          0.300           0.140           1, 766
              Interior Painting,Painting          0.090           0.069           0.140        0.048        0.150          0.240           0.210           1, 615
              Commercial Cleaning                 0.076           0.006           0.079        0.039        0.150          0.190           0.170           1, 445
              Welding                             0.031           0.010           0.038        0.140        0.037          0.170           0.064           1, 411
              Home Staging                        0.052           0.025           0.069        0.072        0.036          0.150           0.160           1, 398
              Pressure Washing                    0.093           0.025           0.110        0.042        0.180          0.240           0.220           1, 394
              General Carpentry                   0.074           0.045           0.110        0.028        0.091          0.170           0.100           1, 347
              Architectural Services              0.140           0.120           0.230        0.035        0.029          0.250           0.100           1, 345
              Fence Related                       0.091           0.051           0.130        0.043        0.110          0.210           0.180           1, 317
              Central AC                          0.170           0.120           0.240        0.110        0.130          0.330           0.200           1, 288




42
              Flooring                            0.095           0.059           0.130        0.057        0.120          0.230           0.160           1, 276
              Concrete Installation               0.100           0.066           0.150        0.044        0.130          0.230           0.160           1, 249
              Window Cleaning                     0.081           0.010           0.089        0.035        0.180          0.210           0.210           1, 242


     Notes: This table displays summary statistics at a professional level from the web crawl sample. "Text Lic." refers to whether the word `license' was mentioned in
     the profile text of a professional. "Verified Lic." refers to whether the pro has a license verified by the platform. "Either Lic." takes the value of 1 if the profile has
     license text or the license is verified. "Cert." and "Insurance" refer to whether the profile text mentions certifications or insurance. "Credential" takes the value of 1
     if the pro has any credential mentioned in the profile. "Num. Pros" is the number of unique professionals we found in this category during our web crawl.
                            Table A.3: Top Categories by % Mentioning Licensing in Profile Text in Web-Crawl Sample


     Category                                               Text Lic.     Verified Lic.    Either Lic.     Cert.     Insurance      Credential     Background       Num. Pros
     Plumbing                                                 0.280          0.190            0.380        0.087       0.150          0.440            0.290            576
     Home Inspection                                          0.230          0.180            0.340        0.240       0.160          0.500            0.190           1, 802
     Electrical and Wiring Issues                             0.230          0.120            0.290        0.068       0.160          0.350            0.170           2, 211
     Bed Bug Extermination                                    0.220          0.150            0.310        0.120       0.120          0.380            0.220           1, 139
     Animal and Rodent Removal                                0.210          0.100            0.270        0.110       0.110          0.340            0.200            424
     Fixtures                                                 0.190          0.110            0.250        0.056       0.120          0.310            0.190            681
     Ceiling Fan,Fan Installation                             0.180          0.120            0.240        0.065       0.120          0.300            0.330            493
     General Contracting                                      0.180          0.120            0.250        0.055       0.170          0.330            0.140           3, 242
     Central Air Conditioning Repair or Maintenance           0.170          0.120            0.240        0.110       0.130          0.330            0.200           1, 288
     Land Surveying                                           0.160          0.140            0.260        0.210       0.074          0.410            0.066            470
     Central Air Conditioning Installation                    0.160          0.083            0.210        0.110       0.120          0.280            0.110            942
     Roof Installation or Replacement                         0.160          0.120            0.240        0.110       0.250          0.400            0.160           1, 952
     Lighting Installation                                    0.160          0.110            0.210        0.063       0.140          0.290            0.260            494
     Mold Inspection and Removal                              0.150          0.085            0.200        0.310       0.250          0.470            0.180           1, 091
     Local Moving                                             0.150          0.120            0.220        0.029       0.180          0.280            0.240            445
     Property Management                                      0.140          0.180            0.260        0.038       0.063          0.300            0.140           1, 766
     Architectural Services                                   0.140          0.120            0.230        0.035       0.029          0.250            0.100           1, 345




43
     Long Distance Moving                                     0.140          0.120            0.220        0.038       0.160          0.290            0.190            818
     Switch and Outlet Installation,Tile Installation         0.140          0.054            0.170        0.041       0.077          0.210            0.110            607
     Tree Planting                                            0.130          0.029            0.150        0.088       0.220          0.300            0.150            907


     Notes: This table displays summary statistics at a professional level from the web crawl sample. "Text Lic." refers to whether the word `license' was mentioned in
     the profile text of a professional. "Verified Lic." refers to whether the pro has a license verified by the platform. "Either Lic." takes the value of 1 if the profile has
     license text or the license is verified. "Cert." and "Insurance" refer to whether the profile text mentions certifications or insurance. "Credential" takes the value of 1
     if the pro has any credential mentioned in the profile. "Num. Pros" is the number of unique professionals we found in this category during our web crawl.
B      Analysis of California General Contractors

One reason why professionals may not submit proof of their license for platform verification
is that they are bidding on just the projects for which a license is not required. We examine
this possibility here by studying general contractors in California. By California law, such
professionals are allowed to perform general contractor jobs without a license as long as those
jobs are below $500. Figure B.1 displays the distribution of bids separately for professionals
who had the platform verify their license, and for professionals who did not. The majority
of bids for both types of professionals are below $500. However, both platform-verified
and never-verified professionals also bid above the $500 threshold. This is consistent either
with those professionals having a license that is not observable to us, or those professionals
skirting some occupational licensing laws. Given our data, we cannot distinguish between
these two alternatives.
         Figure B.1: General Contractor Bids By Verified License Status (California)




Notes: This figure presents the distribution of fixed prices bid for General Contractor requests in California. "Ever
license verified" is a binary variable taking the value of 1 if we ever observe the professional having a platform verified
license in the data. Prices are censored at 1000 to improve readability.




                                                           44
C      Additional Event Studies Related to License Verification

In this section we discuss additional results regarding the event study design for license ver-
ification. We first investigate the possibility of heterogeneous treatment effects by whether
the professional has a previous hire at the time of license verification. Professionals with
a hire may find other ways to signal quality, reducing the need for the licensing signal,
or the presence of a prior hire may serve as a substitute for licensing information. Figure
C.1 displays the event study results where the time since license verification is interacted
with whether the professional has a hire prior to the time of the bid. The point estimates
suggest that, for professionals with no previous hires, hiring rates may increase after license
verification, although the results are imprecise. We see no such result for professionals with
a prior hire.

                          Figure C.1: Licensing Event Study - Heterogeneity




    (a) Interaction: License * No Prior Hire                      (b) Interaction: License * Has Prior Hire

Notes: The figure is similar to Figure 2a, except that we plot the coefficients on the interaction between license
verification timing and either having no prior hire on the platform (left panel) or having a prior hire (right panel).



    One reason why we may not detect an effect of licensing on hiring in our primary event
study analysis is that professionals may adjust their bidding behavior around the time of
the license verification. We show in subsection 3.1 that there is no evidence of this for
the price that professionals bid. Below, we consider other margins of adjustment using the
specification in Equation 1.
    Figure C.2a displays the number of quotes received on the requests that the professional


                                                          45
bid on and C.2b displays the average log prices of competitors faced by the professional.
Both of these outcomes, which relate to the types of requests professionals bid on, don't
vary with verified license status. Figure C.2c displays an event study where the outcome
is the order (relative to other bidders) in which a professional's bid arrives for a given
request. There is no detectable effect of license verification status in the speed with which
professionals bid on a request.
   Lastly, we consider the number of bids submitted by professionals. Figure C.2d displays
the number of bids sent by a professional in the weeks around license verification, where we
include a control for whether the license was submitted to the platform, as in our main event
studies. We find that professionals decrease platform participation by 0.6 bids relative to a
mean of 3.7 bids around the time of license verification. This is consistent with professionals
increasing use of the platform, conducting many types of actions, and then reverting back
to a baseline.




                                              46
                   Figure C.2: Licensing Event Study - Supply Side Responses




     (a) Number of Other Bids on Request                     (b) Average Log Price of Other Bidders on Re-
                                                             quest




       (c) Order of Bid Timing on a Request                      (d) Number of Bids by Professional

Notes: The figures plot estimates of Equation 1, where the outcome variable is one of the following: the number of
competing quotes submitted to the request of the focal bid (top left panel); the average competing bid amount (top
right panel); the order in which the focal bid was submitted to the request (bottom left); and the number of bids
submitted in a given week by the focal professional (bottom right).




                                                        47
D       Additional Event Studies Related to First Reviews

In this section we discuss additional results regarding the event study design for the first
review. We first investigate the possibility of heterogeneous treatment effects by whether the
review had a high rating and by whether the review was on-platform (see Appendix A for a
description of on- vs. off-platform reviews). As a prior, we expect that the positive effect of
first reviews on hiring comes from first reviews associated with high ratings. Furthermore,
we would expect on-platform reviews to be more credible to consumers than off-platform
reviews, and thus to have larger effects.
    Figure D.1 displays the event study results for high- and low-rated first reviews. We
find a large positive effect for high-rated reviews and no effect on hiring rates for low-rated
reviews. We hypothesize that the lack of a negative effect of low-rated reviews is due to the
fact that the baseline hiring rate of pros without reviews is already close to 0. Figure D.2
displays a similar contrast for on-platform reviews. There is a bigger and sharper jump in
hiring rates for on-platform reviews, although the differences across the two review types
are not statistically significant.

                 Figure D.1: First Review Event Study By Low vs. High Rating




  (a) Effect of First Review With Rating  4                      (b) Effect of First Review With Rating < 4

Notes: The figure is similar to Figure 3a, except that we divide the sample in two groups: professionals with a first
review with 4 or 5 stars (left panel), and professionals with a first review below 4 stars (right panel).



    We now investigate whether the positive effect of the first review is driven by supply or
demand side responses. Section 3.1 showed that there is no evidence of this for the price that


                                                           48
             Figure D.2: First Review Event Study - On-platform vs Off-platform




    (a) Effect of On-platform First Reviews                      (b) Effect of Off-platform First Reviews

Notes: The figure is similar to Figure 3a, except that we divide the sample in two groups: professionals whose first
review was submitted by a consumer who hired the professional through the platform (left panel), and professionals
whose first review was not submitted after a hire on the platform (right panel).



professionals bid. Below, we consider other margins of adjustment using the specification
in Equation 1.
    Figure D.3a displays the number of quotes received on the requests that the professional
bid on and D.3b displays the average log prices of competitors faced by the professional.
Both of these outcomes, which relate to the types of requests professionals bid on, do not
change discontinously surrounding the arrival of the first review. Figure D.3c displays an
event study where the outcome is the order (relative to other bidders) in which a profes-
sionals bid arrived for a given request. There is no detectable change on the speed with
which professionals bid on requests immediately after the first review.
    Lastly, we consider the number of bids submitted by professionals. Figure D.3d displays
the number of bids sent by a professional in the weeks around the arrival of the first review.
We find that professionals greatly increase bidding activity after obtaining the first review.
This is, in principle, not a problem for our interpretation of the review effect on hiring being
due to consumer demand. The reason is that although professionals increase their bidding
frequency, the types of requests that are bid on and the prices of their bids do not greatly
change due to the first review.




                                                         49
                     Figure D.3: Review Event Study - Supply Side Responses




     (a) Number of Other Bids on Request                      (b) Average Log Price of Other Bidders on Re-
                                                              quest




       (c) Order of Bid Timing on a Request                      (d) Number of Bids by Professional

Notes: The figures plot estimates of Equation 1, where the event is the time when a professional receives their first
review on the platform, and where the outcome variable is one of the following: the number of competing quotes
submitted to the request of the focal bid (top left panel); the average competing bid amount (top right panel); the
order in which the focal bid was submitted to the request (bottom left); and the number of bids submitted in a given
week by the focal professional (bottom right).




                                                         50
E        Construction of Ratings/Reviews Instruments

Following Chen (2018), we instrument for a professional's rating using a measure of how
lenient that professional's previous reviewers tend to be when rating other professionals (in
any service category on the platform).34 The exclusion restriction this instrument must
satisfy is that the leniency of a professional's previous reviewers does not directly affect
the current customer's decision to hire the professional except through its effect on the
professional's current rating. This argument appears to be quite reasonable in this context.
For example, customers are unlikely to directly take such leniency into account, as it would
require a great deal of searching on the platform for an individual user to learn how a given
previous user rates other professionals. A violation of the exclusion restriction might occur
if more lenient reviewers are attracted to professionals who are of higher (unobservable to
the econometrician) quality, and hence are more likely to be hired by the current customer,
but this seems unlikely in this context.
       The leniency measure is constructed as follows. Let Rjr represent the set of requests in
                                                                              ~  Rjr , let i(~
which users rated professional j before request r is listed. For each request r              r)
(or simply "i" for short) represent the identity of the consumer who rated j on request r
                                                                                        ~,
and let Ri(~
           r),-j represent the set of requests on which user i rated some professional other

than j . We compute the average rating that consumer i gives to professionals other than j
as

                                                      1
                 other pro ratingi(~
                                   r),-j =                                   indiv ratingi(~
                                                                                           r),s
                                               #{Ri(~
                                                    r),-j }     sRi(~
                                                                    r ),-j



where, in the summand, indiv ratingi(~
                                     r),s is the actual integer rating i left on some request

s, and the notation #{·} represents the count of the elements in a set. We then construct
the leniency instrument by averaging over all of these individual consumers' average ratings
given to other professionals:

                                   1
          leniencyjr =                                                        other pro ratingi(~
                                                                                                r),-j
                         #{r
                           ~  Rjr : Ri(~
                                       r),-j = }
                                                          ~Rjr :Ri(~
                                                          r        r ),-j =

  34
     This instrumentation strategy is related to but distinct from judge fixed effects leniency measures; see,
for example, Frandsen et al. (2019) and references therein.


                                                     51
In the case where a professional j has no previous raters who are observed rating some other
professional -j at some point, we set leniencyjr = 0. Our instruments for avg ratingjr
are leniencyjr and a dummy for whether professional j has any previous raters who have
also rated other professionals (that is, a dummy for whether the leniency measure can be
constructed).
       We form an instrument for the number of previous reviews using a similar approach to
that of the leniency instrument: we construct the propensity to review of consumers who
have previously hired professional j . Let Hjr represent the set of requests on which some
user hired professional j before request r is listed. We wish to construct an instrument that
captures the expected number of previous reviews we would predict for professional j on
request r from knowing who j 's previous hirers have been--and how likely they have been
to review others whom they have hired. In constructing this instrument, we will take into
account that some previous hirers may be slower than others in leaving reviews; that is,
even if a previous hirer has not yet left a review, she may do so at some point.35
                                                               ~  Hjr , let i(~
       Similar to the instrument for average ratings, for each r              r) represent the
identity of the consumer who hired j on request r
                                                ~, and let Hi(~
                                                              r),-j represent the set of

requests on which user i hired some professional other than j . Also, let tr,r
                                                                             ~ represent the

amount of time (in days) between when the hired bid was posted for request r
                                                                           ~ and when
j 's bid on request r was posted. Let

                                 1
             Pir
               (~   ~,-j =
                 r),r                                    1{i(~                          ~ days}
                                                             r) leaves review within tr,r
                             #{Hi(~
                                  r),-j }   sHi(~
                                                r ),-j



       We then construct the propensity-to-review instrument by averaging over all of these
individual consumers' propensity to review other professionals they have hired:

                                                      1
          propensity to reviewjr =                                                            Pir
                                                                                                (~   ~,-j
                                                                                                  r),r
                                            #{r
                                              ~  Hjr : Hi(~
                                                          r),-j = }
                                                                          ~Hjr :Hi(~
                                                                          r        r ,-j )=



In the case where a professional j has no previous hirers who are observed hiring some
  35
     A related point is that some consumers who hire a professional may not have time to leave a review
before our main sample period ends. Fortunately, we observe data on ratings and reviews (but not bids and
hiring decisions) for a full year following the ending of our main sample period, so this is not a concern.



                                                         52
other professional at some point, we set propensity to reviewjr = 0. Our instruments for
log (reviewsjr + 1) (and for the dummy indicating that reviewsjr = 0) and are then given
by log (propensity to reviewjr + 1), a dummy for propensity to reviewjr being equal to
0, and a dummy for whether professional j has any previous hirers who have also hired
other professionals. The argument for the validity of this instrument is similar to that
of the leniency measure: propensity will be a valid instrument unless consumers with a
higher propensity to review are attracted to professionals who are of higher or lower quality
(in a way that cannot be observed to the econometrician). We argue that this exclusion
restriction is plausible in our context.




                                             53
F    Survey Questions

Below is the set of questions asked in the survey of customers. The order of the answers
was randomized at the respondent level. The order of the licensing questions was also
randomized by block. Sometimes questions 9-10 appeared before questions 11-13, while
other times questions 11-13 appeared first.

Q0 Have you hired someone to do home improvement services on your home in the past
     year? (For example painting, plumbing, electric services, interior design, heating or
     AC services, etc.)
        Yes
        No
     Note: if "No", STOP survey.

Q1 When was the improvement done during the past year? Please select year and month:
         Drop-down menu with year-month options

Q2 What type of home improvement service did you need help with? Describe in a few
     words:
                          Insert text

Q3 Where was the home needing improvement located?
      Drop-down menu with US states and territories

Q4 Did you own or jointly own the home where you needed the home improvement service?
        Yes
        No
        Other. Please Specify:

Q5 How did you find the service provider? Select ALL that apply:
        Referral from a friend
        Search engine like Google
        Yelp
        Angie's List


                                              54
        Yellow Pages
        HomeAdvisor
        Thumbtack
        Other. Please specify:

Q6 What are two or three reasons why you chose this service provider over other providers?
     List the reasons from most important to least important.
     Most important:
     Second most important:
     Third most important:

Q7 Approximately how much in total did you pay for this service?
                       Insert $ amount

Q8 Approximately how many hours did the job take?
                     Insert numeric value

Q9 Did the service provider you hired have an occupational license?
        Yes
        No
        Not sure

Q10 How did you know whether the service provider you hired had an occupational license?
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "Yes" to preceding
     question Q9].
        It was in the contract I signed.
        He/She told me.
        I saw it on Yelp, or a similar website.
        I verified it on a government website.

Q11 Does the service provider you hired work in a profession for which occupational li-
     censing is required by law in your geographic area?
        Yes



                                             55
        No
        Not sure

Q12 Do you think obtaining an occupational license in your geographic area for the service
     you requested is:
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "Yes" or "Not sure"
     to preceding question Q11].
        Easy, requiring little training beyond high-school.
        Moderately difficult, requiring some training and post-secondary education.
        Difficult, requiring a lot of training and post-secondary education.
        Not sure.

Q13a Suppose laws were to change so that an occupational license is no longer required
     for the home improvement services you requested. What would be your opinion of
     this change?
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "Yes" to earlier
     question Q11].
        In favor
        Opposed
        Indifferent

Q13b Suppose laws were to change so that an occupational license is required for the home
     improvement services you requested. What would be your opinion of this change?
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "No" to earlier ques-
     tion Q11].
        In favor
        Opposed
        Indifferent

Q13c What would be your opinion of a law requiring occupational licensing for the home
     improvement services you requested?
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "Not sure" to earlier
     question Q11].

                                            56
       In favor
       Opposed
       Indifferent

Q14 Do you work in the home improvement or construction industries?
       Yes
       No

Q15 What zip code do you currently live in?
                      Insert 5-digit code

Q16 What is your relationship status?
       Married
       Never Married
       Divorced
       Widowed
       Separated

Q17 How many children do you have that live at home with you or who you have regular
     responsibility for?
                     Insert integer number

Q18 What is your age?
                     Insert integer number

Q19 What is your gender?
       Female
       Male

Q20 Choose one or more races that you consider yourself to be:
       Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino
       Black or African American
       Asian
       White


                                             57
       American Indian or Alaska Native
       Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
       Other. Please Specify:

Q21 Which statement best describes your current employment status?
       Working (paid employee)
       Working (self-employed)
       Not working (retired)
       Not working (looking for work)
       Not working (disabled)
       Not working (temporary layoff from a job)
       Other. Please specify:

Q22 Which of the following industries most closely matches the one in which you are em-
     ployed?
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "Working (paid em-
     ployee)" or "Working (self-employed)" to preceding question Q21].
       Educational Services
       Health Care and Social Assistance
       Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
       Retail Trade
       Finance and Insurance
       Manufacturing
       Construction
       Information
       Transportation and Warehousing
       Other Services (except Public Administration)
       Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
       Public Administration
       Accommodation and Food Services
       Real Estate and Rental and Leasing



                                             58
        Utilities
        Management of Companies and Enterprises
        Wholesale Trade
        Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
        Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
        Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
        Other. Please specify:

Q23 Please describe your occupation:
     [Note: Question only made available to respondents who selected "Working (paid em-
     ployee)" or "Working (self-employed)" to earlier question Q21].
                          Insert text

Q24 Which category represents the total combined income of all members of your family
     in 2018? This includes money from jobs, net income from business, farm or rent,
     pensions, dividends, interest, social security payments and any other money income
     received.
           Drop-down menu with income options

Q25 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have
     received?
           Drop-down menu with education levels




                                           59
G      Additional Figures and Tables

                                      Table G.1: Sample Selection


                                         All       Choice    Cross-State   E(Quoted   E(Quoted   E(Quoted
                                       Requests    Regres-    Regres-      Price) >   Price) >   Price) >
                                                    sions       sions        $200       $500      $1,000
  N                                    4,073,310   797,348    923,735      523,583    195,063     52,798
  Number of bids                          2.17       2.35       1.90         1.96       2.22       2.48
  Share with  1 fixed quote               0.53       0.40       0.38         0.29       0.27       0.27
  Average fixed quote                   645.13      436.86     410.73       735.36    1,198.76   1,716.17
  Hire probability                        0.19       0.17       0.17         0.13       0.11       0.13
  Fixed sale price                      308.35     259.43      239.24       541.84     965.63    1,457.47
  5-star review                           0.42       0.49       0.48         0.46       0.43       0.43
  Request again                           0.22       0.19       0.23         0.22       0.23       0.22
  Share by occupation:
    Architect                            0.00       0.01        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Asbestos Contractor                  0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Awning Contractor                    0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Carpenter                            0.03       0.05        0.07         0.10       0.01       0.00
    Cement Finishing Contractor          0.01       0.03        0.02         0.04       0.11       0.27
    Door Repair Contractor               0.01       0.02        0.02         0.01       0.00       0.00
    Drywall Installation Contractor      0.01       0.02        0.02         0.03       0.02       0.00
    Electrician                          0.04       0.07        0.12         0.01       0.00       0.00
    Flooring Contractor                  0.04       0.07        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Foundation Repair                    0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    General Contractor                   0.04       0.08        0.11         0.11       0.07       0.00
    Glazier Contractor (Commercial)      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Glazier Contractor                   0.01       0.01        0.02         0.01       0.00       0.00
    Handyman                             0.01       0.01        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Home Entertainment Installer         0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Home Inspector                       0.01       0.02        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Household Goods Carrier              0.01       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    HVAC Contractor                      0.01       0.03        0.03         0.02       0.02       0.05
    Insulation Contractor                0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Interior Designer                    0.02       0.00        0.01         0.01       0.00       0.00
    Iron/Steel Contractor                0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
    Land Surveyor                        0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00


Notes: The table continues on the next page.




                                                     60
                                           All        Choice      Cross-State    E(Quoted    E(Quoted    E(Quoted
                                         Requests     Regres-      Regres-       Price) >    Price) >    Price) >
                                                       sions         sions         $200        $500       $1,000
 Share by occupation (continued):
  Landscape Architect                      0.01        0.01            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Landscape Contractor                     0.08        0.16            0.27        0.35         0.30        0.00
  Lathing and Plastering Contractor        0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Lead Inspector                           0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Locksmith                                0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Mason Contractor                         0.02        0.04            0.04        0.07         0.10        0.00
  Mold Assessor                            0.01        0.01            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  None                                     0.47        0.08            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Painting Contractor                      0.05        0.09            0.07        0.12         0.25        0.48
  Paving Contractor                        0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.01        0.00
  Pest Control Applicator                  0.03        0.06            0.11        0.06         0.00        0.00
  Plumber                                  0.02        0.04            0.06        0.03         0.07        0.20
  Radon Contractor                         0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Real Estate Appraiser                    0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Roofing Contractor                       0.02        0.06            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Sanitation System Contractor             0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Security Alarm Installer                 0.00        0.01            0.01        0.02         0.03        0.00
  Sheet Metal Contractor, Other            0.00        0.01            0.01        0.01         0.01        0.00
  Siding Contractor                        0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Solar Contractor                         0.00        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
  Upholsterer                              0.01        0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
 Share by US region:
  Northeast Region                         0.13         0.13           0.12        0.15         0.16        0.12
  Midwest Region                           0.18         0.19           0.12        0.13         0.13        0.12
  South Region                             0.44         0.44           0.44        0.39         0.36        0.32
  West Region                              0.25         0.24           0.32        0.33         0.36        0.45


Notes: The table shows descriptive statistics for requests in the various datasets used throughout the paper. The
first column includes all Home Improvement requests. The second column includes the requests used in section 3 to
study the role of occupational licensing information on consumer choices. The third through sixth column include
the requests used in section 5 to study the market effects of more stringent licensing regulation. The data selection
is described in section 2.  denotes differences that are not significant from column 1 at standard confidence levels.
The last three columns denote subsamples from the cross-state regression data (column 3) where Pr(Average Fixed
Quote > X) > 0.5 for thresholds $200, $500, and $1,000 respectively.




                                                         61
     Table G.2: Alternative Choice Regressions ­ Pro FE and Logit: Outcome = Hired

                                Linear Probability Model, Pro FE                 Conditional Logit Model
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)
                                  OLS      Price IVs       All IVs         No IVs      Price IVs      All IVs
       License Submitted        0.00214     0.00121      -0.0306           0.00820      0.00418       0.00995
                               (0.00586)    (0.0107)      (0.0145)        (0.00795)    (0.00637)     (0.00664)

       License Verified         0.00389        0.0120         0.0116       0.00697      0.0169         0.0182
                               (0.00437)      (0.0106)       (0.0119)     (0.00618)     (0.00496)      (0.00515)

       Average Rating          0.0112        0.00917        -0.649        0.0552        0.0492          0.280
                               (0.00162)      (0.00316)      (0.201)      (0.00130)     (0.00106)       (0.0150)

       Log(Reviews + 1)       -0.0184        -0.0261       -0.0865        0.0316         -0.000747    -0.00894
                               (0.00455)      (0.00592)     (0.0204)      (0.000418)    (0.000642)     (0.000903)

       Log(Price + 1)         -0.0515        -1.162         -1.092        -0.0421        -0.666         -0.607
                               (0.00800)      (0.0783)       (0.0726)     (0.000595)     (0.00913)      (0.00931)
       N                        2669083       2669083        2669083       2669083        2669083        2669083
       Other Controls             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
       Request FE                 Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
       Pro FE                     Yes           Yes            Yes            No             No             No


Notes: Columns 1­3 display results from estimating OLS regressions corresponding to columns 3, 5, and 7 from Table
2 but with professional fixed effect included. Standard errors are clustered at the professoinal level. First stage results
for columns 2 and 3 are found in Table G.4 and Table G.7. Columns 4­6 display marginal effects from a conditional
logit version of columns 3, 5, and 7 from Table 2, where the grouping for the conditional logit model is done at the
request level. The IV columns in the conditional logit model are estimated by first performing a first-stage regression
of the endogenous variable(s) on the instruments and then controlling for the corresponding residuals from the first
stage in the second stage. Note that conditional logit standard errors do not account for any clustering.            p<0.1;

 p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                           62
         Table G.3: Choice Regressions ­ Interactions and Subsamples: Outcome = Hired

                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)
  License Submitted                         -0.0499     0.00192       -0.0222      0.00616     0.00507      0.00310
                                            (1.116)     (0.0121)     (0.0363)     (0.00904)   (0.00794)     (0.0115)

  License Verified                            0.282     0.0232        0.0143        0.0107     0.0130      0.0293
                                             (7.208)    (0.0133)     (0.0210)     (0.00928)   (0.00856)     (0.0106)

  Has Rating                                -1.209      -1.245       -1.135       -1.079       -1.041       -1.470
                                             (0.537)     (0.516)      (0.377)      (0.386)      (0.362)      (0.559)

  Average Rating                              0.245      0.270       0.250        0.238        0.230        0.320
                                             (0.237)     (0.112)     (0.0824)     (0.0840)     (0.0791)      (0.121)

  Log(Reviews + 1)                          0.00684     -0.000157    -0.000459     -0.00357    -0.00308    0.0000183
                                            (0.0558)    (0.00929)    (0.00568)    (0.00646)   (0.00595)    (0.00942)

  Log(Price + 1)                            -0.632      -0.643       -0.614       -0.583       -0.569       -0.521
                                             (0.260)     (0.0814)     (0.0469)     (0.0466)     (0.0447)     (0.0762)

  License Submitted * Has Rating             0.0726
                                             (1.780)

  License Verified * Has Rating               -0.305
                                             (11.40)

  License Submitted * Stringency                         0.00517
                                                        (0.00717)

  License Verified * Stringency                          -0.00214
                                                        (0.00560)

  License Submitted * Price Tier > 200                                0.0454
                                                                     (0.0498)

  License Verified * Price Tier > 200                                -0.00348
                                                                     (0.0242)
  N                                         2669083     1368182      2650809      1706570      2250370       580568
  Other Controls                              Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
  Request FE                                  Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
  Consumer Never Posted Before                                                      Yes
  Consumer Never Hired Before                                                       Yes          Yes
  Request with  1 Licensed                                                                                     Yes
     and  1 Non-licensed Pro


Notes: Table displays alternative versions of specification 7 from Table 2; thus all columns show IV regressions using
both price and reputation instruments. Regression in column 1 includes, as additional controls, the dummy for "Has
Ratings" interacted with controls for the length of time since license submission and, as additional instruments, the
interaction of these license submission timing controls with the dummy for the review propensity IV (see Appendix
E) being equal to zero. Stringency measure and predicted price measure used in columns 2 and 3, respectively, are
described in Section 5. We omit first stage results to conserve space. Standard errors are clustered at the professional
level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                          63
                              Table G.4: First Stage Results of log(Price + 1)

                                                         (1)          (2)           (3)
                                Far Pro Distance     -0.0589      -0.0595         0.00288
                                                      (0.0154)     (0.0151)      (0.00812)

                                Same Location        0.0494        0.0517       0.0317
                                                      (0.0101)      (0.0141)    (0.00574)

                                Log(Distance + 1)    0.0297        0.0291       0.0203
                                                     (0.00403)     (0.00617)    (0.00308)
                                N                     2669083       2669083      2669083


Notes: Columns 1­2 displays first stage results corresponding to the IV regression from column 4­5 of Table 2. Column
3 displays the first stage regression corresponding to the IV regression in column 2 of Table G.2. Standard errors are
clustered at the professional level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




         Table G.5: First Stage Results For IV Regression from Column 6 of Table 2

                                                       (1)                 (2)              (3)                 (4)
                                              Log(Fixed Price + 1)     Has Rating     Average Rating     Log(Reviews + 1)
 Far Pro Distance                                  -0.0609               0.0146           0.0887              0.0205
                                                    (0.0154)            (0.0101)         (0.0529)            (0.0350)
 Same Location                                      0.0488             -0.0247           -0.121               -0.00647
                                                    (0.00982)           (0.00410)         (0.0204)            (0.0123)

 Log(Distance + 1)                                  0.0299            -0.00636          -0.0363                0.00150
                                                    (0.00404)          (0.00143)         (0.00715)            (0.00468)
 Leniency                                            -0.00277            0.00117          0.0342              0.00602
                                                    (0.00647)           (0.00273)         (0.0147)            (0.0133)
 Leniency Calculable                                 0.0226             0.109            0.442                0.244
                                                    (0.0311)            (0.0153)         (0.0795)             (0.0658)

 Log(Predicted Reviews + 1)                         -0.0594              -0.00195          -0.0253            0.905
                                                     (0.0164)           (0.00262)         (0.0191)            (0.0257)
 Review Propensity Calculable                       -0.00368            0.346            1.575                0.137
                                                    (0.0117)            (0.0110)         (0.0546)             (0.0290)
 Review Propensity Calculable But = 0               -0.0378            -0.0713           -0.290               0.323
                                                     (0.0121)           (0.00741)         (0.0389)            (0.0271)
 N                                                   2669083             2669083          2669083             2669083

Notes: The table displays first stage results for the IV regression in Column 6 of Table 2. Standard errors are clustered
at the professional level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                          64
         Table G.6: First Stage Results For IV Regression from Column 7 of Table 2

                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                              Log(Fixed Price + 1)    Has Rating      Average Rating     Log(Reviews + 1)
 Far Pro Distance                                  -0.0621             0.00993            0.0648              0.0284
                                                    (0.0153)           (0.0100)          (0.0525)            (0.0346)
 Same Location                                     0.0515              -0.0177           -0.0854              0.00330
                                                    (0.0136)           (0.00599)          (0.0278)            (0.0135)

 Log(Distance + 1)                                 0.0294              -0.00444          -0.0256               0.00513
                                                   (0.00620)           (0.00201)         (0.00945)            (0.00502)
 Leniency                                           -0.00239             0.00269         0.0397               0.00811
                                                   (0.00605)            (0.00289)        (0.0144)             (0.0125)
 Leniency Calculable                                 0.0169             0.102            0.412                0.237
                                                    (0.0297)            (0.0162)         (0.0795)             (0.0617)

 Log(Predicted Reviews + 1)                        -0.0586               -0.00174         -0.0230             0.904
                                                    (0.0212)            (0.00300)        (0.0193)             (0.0247)
 Review Propensity Calculable                       -0.00921            0.338            1.535                0.125
                                                    (0.0127)            (0.0105)         (0.0507)             (0.0262)
 Review Propensity Calculable But = 0               -0.0319            -0.0697           -0.283               0.324
                                                    (0.0152)            (0.00677)         (0.0352)            (0.0251)
 N                                                  2669083              2669083          2669083             2669083

Notes: The table displays first stage results for the IV regression in Column 7 of Table 2. Standard errors are clustered
at the professional level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




        Table G.7: First Stage Results For IV Regression from Column 3 of Table G.2

                                                      (1)                  (2)              (3)                 (4)
                                              Log(Fixed Price + 1)     Has Rating     Average Rating     Log(Reviews + 1)
 Far Pro Distance                                   0.00268              0.0122          0.0700              0.00552
                                                   (0.00813)            (0.00501)        (0.0239)            (0.0116)
 Same Location                                     0.0318             -0.00583          -0.0267                -0.00223
                                                   (0.00574)           (0.00150)         (0.00715)            (0.00292)

 Log(Distance + 1)                                 0.0203              -0.00163         -0.00647              0.000811
                                                   (0.00307)           (0.000497)        (0.00239)            (0.00115)
 Leniency                                           -0.00106             -0.00348         0.00364              -0.0170
                                                   (0.00320)            (0.00424)         (0.0207)            (0.00707)
 Leniency Calculable                                0.00438            0.0813             0.293               0.237
                                                    (0.0155)            (0.0203)          (0.0978)            (0.0342)

 Log(Predicted Reviews + 1)                         0.00107            -0.0416           -0.235               0.662
                                                   (0.00451)            (0.00872)         (0.0374)            (0.0321)
 Review Propensity Calculable                      -0.0214              0.324            1.530                0.201
                                                    (0.00452)           (0.00814)        (0.0383)             (0.0120)
 Review Propensity Calculable But = 0               0.00563             -0.127           -0.589               0.0769
                                                   (0.00389)            (0.00551)         (0.0260)             (0.0133)
 N                                                  2669083              2669083          2669083              2669083

Notes: The table displays first stage results for the IV regression in Column 3 of Table G.2. Standard errors are
clustered at the professional level.    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                          65
    Figure G.1: Choice Regression (column 7 of Table 2) Separately by Meta-Category

                                                Log(Price + 1)                                                             License Verified
                           fence                                                        appliance repair
                          siding                                                              tile cleaning
         bathroom remodel                                                                           masonry
             air conditioning                                                                      carpentry
            kitchen remodel                                                                           drywall
               home staging                                                                     handyman
           exterior painting                                                              gutter cleaning
                    contractor                                                                      sprinkler
          deck_patio_porch                                                                   switch_outlet
                      electrical                                                                            fan
                            mold                                                                         mold
                    duct_vent                                                                               sod
                          carpet                                                             window work
                land leveling                                                         bathroom remodel
                 tile cleaning                                                          exterior painting
     property management                                                                   home security
                  pest control                                                                   contractor
                               sod                                                               duct_vent
              home security                                                                        plumbing
            interior painting                                                              home remodel
                 garage door                                                            home inspection
                           doors                                                                       siding
                window work                                                                                roof
                               fan                                                                         tiles
           appliance repair                                                                        electrical
               home theater                                                              kitchen remodel
                water heater                                                      property management
                      spa_pool                                                           interior painting
                   handyman                                                            deck_patio_porch
                switch_outlet                                                                 landscaping
                       architect                                                            home theater
                       masonry                                                               water heater
                              tiles                                                                  flooring
                         cabinet                                                                        fence
                      plumbing                                                               land leveling
             gutter cleaning                                                                         painting
                        painting                                                                        doors
                        flooring                                                                   spa_pool
                       sprinkler                                                                         trees
                         drywall                                                                      cabinet
                     lawn care                                                                      concrete
                            trees                                                              pest control
                       concrete                                                                     architect
           home inspection                                                                air conditioning
        furniture refinishing                                                        furniture refinishing
                 landscaping                                                                           carpet
                      carpentry                                                               garage door
              home remodel                                                                  home staging
                              roof                                                                lawn care
                                      -10       -5         0         5                                               -1   -.5      0          .5        1



                                                Average Rating                                                            Log(Reviews + 1)
             air conditioning                                                             air conditioning
           appliance repair                                                                             fence
                               fan                                                          home staging
                               sod                                                                 spa_pool
             gutter cleaning                                                            appliance repair
                switch_outlet                                                                          carpet
                         cabinet                                                                            sod
                           fence                                                                           tiles
         bathroom remodel                                                             bathroom remodel
                  pest control                                                                      masonry
                      electrical                                                                 duct_vent
                   handyman                                                                  window work
                        painting                                                                         trees
                 landscaping                                                                       electrical
                     lawn care                                                             home security
                land leveling                                                             gutter cleaning
                          carpet                                                       deck_patio_porch
               home theater                                                                                 fan
                       sprinkler                                                              landscaping
                        flooring                                                                           roof
                water heater                                                                        concrete
                              roof                                                         home remodel
                           doors                                                             switch_outlet
                              tiles                                                         home theater
                            trees                                                             tile cleaning
                    contractor                                                                           mold
              home remodel                                                                      handyman
           exterior painting                                                                 land leveling
                    duct_vent                                                                        flooring
            kitchen remodel                                                                       lawn care
     property management                                                                exterior painting
                       concrete                                                      furniture refinishing
                      carpentry                                                                pest control
                         drywall                                                                     painting
            interior painting                                                            kitchen remodel
          deck_patio_porch                                                                            drywall
                       architect                                                                       siding
           home inspection                                                                       contractor
        furniture refinishing                                                                           doors
                 tile cleaning                                                           interior painting
                      plumbing                                                                     carpentry
                window work                                                                           cabinet
                       masonry                                                                garage door
              home security                                                                        plumbing
                            mold                                                                    sprinkler
                          siding                                                                    architect
                 garage door                                                                 water heater
               home staging                                                       property management
                      spa_pool                                                          home inspection
                                       -1   0         1          2       3                                         -.2     0           .2          .4




Notes: Key coefficients from estimating specification 7 from Table 2 separately by service meta-category. We manually
define meta-categories by combining categories for similar services. For example, "solar panel installation" and "solar
panel repair" are combined into a single "meta-category". The figure plots coefficient estimates for meta-categories
with more than 10,000 bids. Standard errors are clustered at the professional level. 95% confidence intervals are
shown in grey.                                                               66
              Figure G.2: Licensing Stringency and Share of Licensed Professionals




Notes: The figure plots how the share of professionals with a verified license on the platform varies with the stringency
of occupational licensing regulation across states and occupations. We first manually define meta-categories by
combining categories for similar services. For example, "solar panel installation" and "solar panel repair" are combined
into a single "meta-category". For each zipcode-meta-category in our data we then compute the share of bids submitted
by professionals with a verified license. We divide zipcode-meta-category level observations into the 20 quantiles of
our licensing stringency measure (See section 5 for details on the construction of the licensing stringency variable).
The figure is a binscatter plotting the average share of verified bids on the y-axis and the average licensing stringency
variable on the x-axis for each of the 20 bins.




                                                          67
              Figure G.3: Meta-Category-Specific Effects of Licensing Stringency--Bidding Stage
                                                    Nr. Quotes                                                                          Avg. Fixed Quote (log)
                          locksmith                                                                        asphalt
                   interior design                                                                  landscaping
                   home security                                                                      metalwork
                       pest control                                                                 stairs/railing
                      garage door                                                                       locksmith
                           concrete                                                                              sod
                             fixtures                                                                    concrete
                     water heater                                                                    pest control
                        demolition                                                               home remodel
                   water damage                                                                     garage door
                  air conditioning                                                              gutter cleaning
                 kitchen remodel                                                                          painting
                             asphalt                                                                        weeds
                             heating                                                                     masonry
                   home remodel                                                                kitchen remodel
                           sprinkler                                                           interior painting
                                   sod                                                                       gutter
                     switch/outlet                                                            exterior painting
                         contractor                                                                window work
                 shower/bathtub                                                             bathroom remodel
                          plumbing                                                                            fence
                        countertop                                                                         drywall
                           electrical                                                                  contractor
                                    fan                                                               sink/faucet
  category




                                                                                category




                               wiring                                                         deck/patio/porch
                        sink/faucet                                                                               fan
                           spa/pool                                                                        heating
                           duct/vent                                                            air conditioning
                                 toilet                                                                  plumbing
                             cabinet                                                                         doors
              bathroom remodel                                                                                 toilet
                            painting                                                                     spa/pool
                               doors                                                           shower/bathtub
                            chimney                                                                            trees
                                 trees                                                             water heater
                        metalwork                                                                        sprinkler
                      stairs/railing                                                                     electrical
                                fence                                                      furniture refinishing
             furniture refinishing                                                                 switch/outlet
                             drywall                                                                       fixtures
                              weeds                                                                          wiring
                      landscaping                                                                      carpentry
                     land leveling                                                                         cabinet
                     window work                                                                         duct/vent
                           masonry                                                                    demolition
                  gutter cleaning                                                                         chimney
                exterior painting                                                                  land leveling
                deck/patio/porch                                                                 interior design
                         carpentry                                                               home security
                               gutter                                                            water damage
                 interior painting                                                                    countertop
                                     -0.25   0.00                0.25   0.50                                            -0.50   -0.25                  0.00      0.25
                                                       est                                                                                       est



                                (a) Outcome: Number of Quotes                                     (b) Outcome: Log Average Fixed Quote

Notes: The figures plot the effects of licensing stringency from Equation 4 separately for each service meta-category.
The dependent variable is the number of quotes received by a request (in the left panel) and the average log price
of fixed price quotes (in the right panel). We manually define meta-categories by combining categories for similar
services. For example, "solar panel installation" and "solar panel repair" are combined into a single "meta-category".
95% confidence intervals are plotted in grey.




                                                                               68
                 Figure G.4: Meta-Category-Specific Effects of Licensing Stringency--Hiring Stage
                                                                     Hire                                                                           Fixed Sale Price (log)
                          locksmith                                                                                             asphalt
                            chimney                                                                                         contractor
                               wiring                                                                                 interior design
                   interior design                                                                                    home remodel
                        sink/faucet                                                                                        metalwork
                           electrical                                                                                        locksmith
                             heating                                                                                kitchen remodel
                        demolition                                                                                         demolition
                                 toilet                                                                                          weeds
                              weeds                                                                                      garage door
                                   sod                                                                             exterior painting
                     land leveling                                                                                  interior painting
                     window work                                                                                     gutter cleaning
                                    fan                                                                                            fence
                                fence                                                                                    landscaping
                           duct/vent                                                                                    window work
                           sprinkler                                                                                          concrete
                                 trees                                                                                                sod
                  air conditioning                                                                                             chimney
                        countertop
                                                                                                                     air conditioning
                          plumbing
                                                                                                                                  gutter
                             drywall
                                                                                                                               painting
                 shower/bathtub
                                                                                                                                       fan
                             cabinet
                                                                                                                            carpentry
  category




                                                                                                     category




                             asphalt
                                                                                                                                heating
                             fixtures
                                                                                                                          pest control
                      landscaping
                                                                                                                         stairs/railing
                   home security
                                                                                                                              masonry
                     switch/outlet
                                                                                                                                    toilet
                      stairs/railing
                                                                                                                              spa/pool
             furniture refinishing
                                                                                                                   deck/patio/porch
                               doors
                           concrete                                                                                               doors
                           spa/pool                                                                                             fixtures
                            painting                                                                                                trees
              bathroom remodel                                                                                          water heater
                   home remodel                                                                                              plumbing
                         carpentry                                                                                  shower/bathtub
                        metalwork                                                                                bathroom remodel
                exterior painting                                                                                               drywall
                   water damage                                                                                                 cabinet
                 interior painting                                                                                      switch/outlet
                      garage door                                                                                             electrical
                         contractor                                                                                        sink/faucet
                 kitchen remodel                                                                                furniture refinishing
                deck/patio/porch                                                                                      home security
                     water heater                                                                                             sprinkler
                  gutter cleaning                                                                                                 wiring
                           masonry                                                                                            duct/vent
                       pest control                                                                                     land leveling
                               gutter                                                                                      countertop
                                          -0.050    -0.025   0.000          0.025   0.050   0.075                                            -0.4         0.0                0.4   0.8
                                                                     est                                                                                        est



                                                   (a) Outcome: Hire                                                           (b) Outcome: Log Fixed Sale Price

Notes: The figures plot the effects of licensing stringency from Equation 4 separately for each service meta-category.
The dependent variable in the left panel is a dummy for whether a professional was hired for request r, conditional on
receiving at least one quote, and in the right panel it is the (log) price of the winning quote for request r, when this
quote was submitted with a fixed price bid. We manually define meta-categories by combining categories for similar
services. For example, "solar panel installation" and "solar panel repair" are combined into a single "meta-category".
95% confidence intervals are plotted in grey.




                                                                                                    69
Figure G.5: Meta-Category-Specific Effects of Licensing Stringency--Post-Transaction
Stage
                                                           5-Star Review                                                                     Request Again
                        demolition                                                                         interior design
                   water damage                                                                                      heating
                             asphalt                                                                                     toilet
                               gutter                                                                      water damage
                              weeds                                                                                 chimney
                            chimney                                                                                        sod
                           concrete                                                                                    wiring
                             drywall                                                                                   gutter
                        metalwork                                                                             garage door
                      stairs/railing                                                                          stairs/railing
                             cabinet                                                                  bathroom remodel
                            painting                                                                              plumbing
                               wiring                                                                              concrete
                     switch/outlet                                                                                   fixtures
                 shower/bathtub                                                                            home security
                                   sod                                                                       window work
                           masonry                                                                           water heater
                                 trees                                                                  exterior painting
                                fence                                                                               painting
                exterior painting                                                                                 locksmith
                             heating                                                                             carpentry
                  air conditioning                                                                      deck/patio/porch
                 interior painting                                                                                 sprinkler
                          locksmith                                                                      interior painting
  category




                                                                                          category




                          plumbing                                                                                 electrical
                   home remodel                                                                                 countertop
                               doors                                                                               spa/pool
                           sprinkler                                                                         switch/outlet
                           spa/pool                                                                             sink/faucet
                         contractor                                                                                  drywall
                        sink/faucet                                                                                  asphalt
                                    fan                                                              furniture refinishing
                     window work                                                                                 contractor
              bathroom remodel                                                                            gutter cleaning
             furniture refinishing                                                                                       trees
                         carpentry                                                                        air conditioning
                        countertop                                                                           land leveling
                      landscaping                                                                          home remodel
                       pest control                                                                                     fence
                deck/patio/porch                                                                                       doors
                             fixtures                                                                   kitchen remodel
                           electrical                                                                                 weeds
                   home security                                                                                demolition
                  gutter cleaning                                                                              pest control
                     land leveling                                                                                 masonry
                                 toilet                                                                                    fan
                      garage door                                                                                  duct/vent
                           duct/vent                                                                          landscaping
                     water heater                                                                                    cabinet
                 kitchen remodel                                                                                metalwork
                   interior design                                                                       shower/bathtub
                                           -0.10   -0.05      0.00         0.05   0.10                                            -0.05   0.00          0.05   0.10
                                                                est                                                                               est



                                          (a) Outcome: 5-Star Review                                       (b) Outcome: Customer Requests Again

Notes: The figures plot the effects of licensing stringency from Equation 4 separately for each service meta-category.
In the left panel, the dependent variable is a dummy for whether a consumer left a five star review for the professional
hired for request r. In the right panel, the dependent variable is a dummy for whether a consumer posted another
request at least one week after posting the matched request r. We manually define meta-categories by combining
categories for similar services. For example, "solar panel installation" and "solar panel repair" are combined into a
single "meta-category". 95% confidence intervals are plotted in grey.




                                                                                         70
                         Table G.8: Confusion Matrices for Price Predictions

                                                      $200 threshold

                                  Actual/Predicted         0           1        Total
                                  0                     293, 555     68, 841   362, 396
                                  1                      75, 814    294, 493   370, 307
                                  Total                 369, 369    363, 334   732, 703

                                                      $500 threshold

                                  Actual/Predicted         0           1        Total
                                  0                     537, 388     29, 897   567, 285
                                  1                      74, 730     90, 688   165, 418
                                  Total                 612, 118    120, 585   732, 703

                                                  $1,000 threshold

                                   Actual/Predicted         0          1        Total
                                   0                     638, 056    9, 280    647, 336
                                   1                      57, 862   27, 505     85, 367
                                   Total                 695, 918   36, 785    732, 703

Notes: Confusion matrices for price predictions. The top panel shows the number of requests with at least one fixed
price quote, and divide them based on whether the actual fixed price quote is above $200, and whether the predicted
fixed price quote is above $200. On the diagonal we have jobs for which the prediction matches reality. The middle
panel does the same for a $500 threshold, and the bottom panel for a $1,000 threshold. AUC (area under the curve)
performance measures are 0.880 (95% C.I. 0.879-0.881), 0.902 (95% C.I. 0.901-0.902), and 0.897 (95% C.I. 0.896-0.898)
for the three thresholds respectively.




                                                           71
