                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CONTRACT WORK AT OLDER AGES

                                     Katharine G. Abraham
                                        Brad Hershbein
                                       Susan Houseman

                                      Working Paper 26612
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26612


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020

The research reported herein was performed pursuant to grant RDR18000003 from the US Social
Security Administration (SSA) funded as part of the Retirement and Disability Research
Consortium. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not
represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof,
nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal
liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of the contents of this
report. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process or service by trade name,
trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply endorsement,
recommendation or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation, the Kellogg Foundation, and the
Sloan Foundation provided additional support for this project. We thank Joanna Lahey for helpful
comments on an earlier draft and Joe Daly, Jeff Jones, Stephanie Marken, and Jonathan Rothwell
at Gallup for assistance with implementing the survey module on which many of the results we
report are based and with understanding details of the underlying Education Consumer Pulse
Survey. We also thank Lillian Petrovic for outstanding research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Katharine G. Abraham, Brad Hershbein, and Susan Houseman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Contract Work at Older Ages
Katharine G. Abraham, Brad Hershbein, and Susan Houseman
NBER Working Paper No. 26612
January 2020
JEL No. J26,J41,J46

                                         ABSTRACT

The share of workers who are self-employed rises markedly with age. Given policy concerns
about inadequate retirement savings, especially among those with lower education, and the
resulting interest in encouraging employment at older ages, it is important to understand the role
that self-employment arrangements play in facilitating work among seniors. New data from a
survey module fielded on a Gallup telephone survey distinguish independent contractor work
from other self-employment and provide information on informal and online platform work. The
Gallup data show that, especially after accounting for individuals who are miscoded as
employees, self-employment is even more prevalent at older ages than suggested by existing data.
Work as an independent contractor is the most common type of self-employment. Roughly one-
quarter of independent contractors age 50 and older work for a former employer. At older ages,
self-employment generally--and work as an independent contractor specifically--is more
common among the highly educated, accounting for much of the difference in employment rates
across education groups. We provide suggestive evidence that differences in opportunities for
independent contractor work play an important role in the lower employment rates of less-
educated older adults.

Katharine G. Abraham                            Susan Houseman
Department of Economics and                     W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Joint Program in Survey Methodology             Employment Research
University of Maryland                          300 S. Westnedge Ave.
1218 LeFrak Hall                                Kalamazoo, MI 49007
College Park, MD 20742                          houseman@upjohn.org
and NBER
kabraham@umd.edu

Brad Hershbein
W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research
300 S. Westnedge Ave.
Kalamazoo, MI 49007
hershbein@upjohn.org
        The self-employment rate--the share of employed persons who are self-employed--rises

markedly with age. Americans are living longer but many lack sufficient savings for retirement,

raising interest in policies to facilitate work at older ages. In considering such policies, it is

important to understand the role that self-employment may play in enabling continued

attachment to the labor market. Although individuals may have financial or personal reasons for

wanting to continue to work past the traditional age of retirement, they may need or wish to

reduce their work hours or change their type of work. For a variety of reasons, older workers

may have difficulty finding a suitable wage and salary job. The greater flexibility afforded by

self-employment has been advanced as an important part of the explanation for the high rate of

self-employment at older ages. Research suggests that employer reluctance to hire older workers

also may play a role.

        Owing to data limitations, research and policy discussions typically have treated self-

employment as a homogeneous category or made only the crude distinction between

incorporated and unincorporated self-employment. Yet, self-employment may take a variety of

forms, including owning a business that involves a significant capital investment and managing a

payroll; working as an independent contractor, independent consultant, or freelancer for one or

more clients; and doing occasional informal tasks or work through a mobile app or online

platform for businesses or consumers.

        These diverse types of self-employment, in turn, may vary in the flexibility in hours

worked, the type of work performed, and the ease of transitioning into the arrangement. For

example, for someone who has been working in a wage and salary job, work as an independent

consultant, independent contractor, or freelancer (possibly including work via a mobile app or

online platform) may offer a way to control work hours or the types of tasks performed. In some


                                                   1
 
cases, this may involve working for a former employer as part of a gradual, or phased,

retirement. Someone who already has an established business may find it easier than other

workers to reduce work hours. In contrast, starting a new business may well require a significant

upfront investment and involve an increase, not a decrease, in work effort.

       In addition, although policy has focused on older Americans' financial need for

continued employment, the reasons individuals choose to work at older ages are diverse. In some

cases, financial necessity is the primary driver; in other cases, motivations such as the desire to

stay active, connect with others, or pursue a hobby are more important. Understanding why

seniors work, and why the majority who do work are self-employed, requires more detailed

information than typically is available in standard data sets such as the Current Population

Survey (CPS).

       This study uses data from a module we developed for inclusion on the Gallup Education

Consumer Pulse Survey to examine self-employment arrangements among older Americans.

The module, designed to capture all work for pay, comprises 14 questions on respondents'

employment and the nature of their work arrangements, including contract and informal work.

For independent contractors age 50 and older, we asked additional questions about that work,

including whether respondents were working for a former employer and their primary

motivations for being in an independent contractor arrangement. The survey module was fielded

during four month-long periods, spaced at three-month intervals, during 2018 and early 2019. It

yielded responses from approximately 61,000 adults, of whom approximately 40,000 were age

50 and older.

       The paper begins with a brief overview of the existing literature on self-employment at

older ages. Next, we describe the Gallup module on contract work. Our analysis of the Gallup



                                                  2
 
data provides new evidence on the prevalence of different types of self-employment at older

ages, the characteristics of those working under different arrangements, and, for independent

contractors, their motivations for engaging in this work. Our analysis points to the importance of

independent contractor work at older ages and suggests that differences in opportunities for such

work help to explain the lower employment rates of the less educated at older ages.



BACKGROUND

           Self-employment historically has offered some workers an attractive alternative to wage

    and salary employment. Many entrepreneurs appear to value being their own boss and prefer

    self-employment to a wage and salary job, even if that means sacrificing some earnings

    (Hamilton 2000, Hurst and Pugsley 2011). Similarly, data from the 2017 Contingent Worker

    Supplement (CWS) to the CPS show that nearly 80 percent of those categorized as independent

    contractors preferred that arrangement to a conventional wage-and-salary job (Bureau of Labor

    Statistics 2018a).

           In other cases, however, poor opportunities in the wage and salary market may drive the

    decision to become self-employed. Studies using individual-level data have found that

    individuals who earned low wages, changed jobs frequently, were unemployed, or had been

    unemployed for a longer period were more likely to become self-employed (Evans and

    Leighton 1989, Alba-Ramirez 1994). Whereas incorporated self-employment is pro-cyclical,

    unincorporated self-employment is counter-cyclical, with larger numbers of people entering

    into unincorporated self-employment when the labor market is weak (Levine and Rubinstein

    2018). For many, then, self-employment may be a fallback option rather than a preferred work

    arrangement.


                                                  3
 
       These findings point to the importance of recognizing the considerable heterogeneity

among the self-employed. They include not only business owners who may employ others to

work for them, but also independent contractors operating as sole proprietors as well as day

laborers, online platform workers, and others who do informal work for pay (see, e.g., Abraham

et al. 2018a). In some of these cases, self-employment is a full-time job; in other cases, it is part-

time, casual, or intermittent. Evidence based on surveys designed specifically to capture informal

work suggests that a significant share of the population engages in such activity (see, e.g., Robles

and McGee 2016, Bracha and Burke 2019, Abraham and Houseman 2019). Other research shows

that self-employment often supplements income from a primary wage and salary job (see, e.g.,

Koustas 2018; Farrell, Greig, and Hamoudi 2018; Abraham et al. 2018a, 2018b; and Collins et

al. 2019).

       Life-cycle considerations would lead one to expect that the motivations for employment

and the forms of employment chosen might vary with age. Based on a finding that many older

workers earn comparatively low wages, Haider and Loughran (2010) suggest that making money

is not the only motivation for continuing to work at older ages. There is also ample evidence,

however, that many older adults lack adequate savings for retirement, so that income from

continuing to work is important for their financial security. The exact numbers vary depending

on researchers' specific modeling assumptions, but a reasonable estimate is that 40 to 50 percent

of those in their early 60s have not saved enough to maintain their standard of living in

retirement without running out of money (see, e.g., Pang and Warshawsky 2013; Munnell, Hou,

and Sanzenbacher 2018; and VanDerhei 2019). Further, the share in this situation is higher

among those with lower levels of education (Pang and Warshawsky 2013) and lower pre-

retirement incomes (Munnell, Hou, and Sanzenbacher 2018; VanDerhei 2019). Working even a



                                                  4
 
few extra years could go a long ways towards closing the identified retirement savings gaps, but

even after controlling for health and other factors that might affect work behavior, those with less

education are significantly less likely to anticipate working long enough to reach the necessary

target savings level (Munnell, Webb, and Chen 2016).

          An extensive literature on "partial retirement" or "bridge jobs" has found that it is

common for older adults to transition from full-time work to part-time work before retiring fully

(e.g., Gustman and Steinmeier 1984; Ruhm 1990; and Giandrea, Cahill, and Quinn 2009).

Similarly, a significant share of retirees later "unretire" and move back into the labor force,

frequently taking part-time rather than full-time jobs (Maestas 2010).

           Many employers do not offer employees nearing retirement age the option to reduce

    their hours on their current job. Citing data from the first five waves of the Health and

    Retirement Study (HRS), Abraham and Houseman (2005) report that few older employees

    believed their employer would allow them to reduce their hours on their current job. Matos,

    Galinsky, and Bond (2017) summarize responses to a 2016 survey of human resource directors

    from a nationally representative sample of firms with 50 or more employees. Although 59

    percent said that the organization would allow some employees to phase into retirement by

    working reduced hours for some period prior to full retirement, only 21 percent said that the

    organization would allow all or most employees to do so.

          When phased retirement on an older worker's current job is not an option, it also may be

difficult for her to find another suitable job that offers part-time hours. Many employers appear

to be generally reluctant to hire older workers, whether because of concerns about high health

insurance costs, unwarranted stereotyping, or more legitimate concerns related to these workers'

skills and low perceived returns to training (Abraham and Houseman 2005, 2008). In audit



                                                    5
 
studies that involved sending pairs of résumés to employers recruiting for entry-level positions,

Bendick, Jackson, and Romero (1996) and Lahey (2008) find that, all else the same, older

applicants were less likely to receive favorable responses from employers; using a similar

strategy, Neumark, Burn, and Button (2019) find that older female applicants were particularly

disadvantaged. In another study, Maestas and Li (2006) find that fewer than half of non-working

HRS respondents who reported that they were searching for work were employed two years

later. Interestingly, those searching for part-time work were more than 15 percentage points less

likely to be working two years later than those seeking or willing to accept full-time work.

       Self-employment at older ages is of particular interest because it may provide a viable

path for older workers to keep working but cut back on their hours rather than continue with full-

time work or withdraw entirely from the labor force (see, e.g., Fuchs 1982 and Quinn 1980).

Using HRS data, Zissimopoulos and Karoly (2007) find far higher rates of transition from full-

time work to part-time work among individuals who were initially self-employed than among

those who initially held a wage and salary job. Ameriks et al. (2018) report that, among those in

their sample who took a bridge job at the end of their careers, self-employment was substantially

more common on the bridge job than on the career job. Consistent with the idea that older

workers use self-employment as a way to keep working but cut back on their hours, Ramnath,

Shoven, and Slavov (2017) find that late-career transitions to self-employment observed in tax

data are associated with significantly larger earnings reductions than mid-career transitions.

        Recent years have seen growing discussion of the so-called gig economy, including the

emergence of mobile apps and online platforms, such as Uber, Lyft, TaskRabbit, and Upwork,

that match workers to customers with a need to have a specific task performed (see, e.g.,

Abraham, et al. 2018a, 2018b, 2019; Farrell, Greig, and Hamoudi 2018; and Collins et al. 2019).



                                                 6
 
Prior research has found that older adults are less likely to participate in work mediated through

mobile apps and online platforms (Farrell, Greig, and Hamoudi 2018; Collins et al. 2019). At

least in principle, however, such employment could be particularly attractive to older workers

who do not require employer-provided health insurance or other employee benefits and who

place a high value on flexibility in their hours of work. If so, their participation in online

platform work may grow over time, potentially increasing employment at older ages.




GALLUP CONTRACT WORK MODULE

       To learn more about self-employment among older Americans, we have collected new

data on a module fielded as part of the Gallup Education Consumer Pulse Survey, a large,

nationally representative telephone survey. The target population for the Gallup Education

Consumer Pulse survey is adults age 18 to 64, but during the periods that our survey module was

in the field, Gallup also administered the employment and core demographic questions to

individuals ages 65 to 80.

       Similar to the CPS, the Gallup Education Consumer Pulse Survey collects employment

information for a specified week (the seven days preceding the interview). It includes a standard

battery of questions on respondents' employment status used in other Gallup surveys. This battery

begins by asking about work for an employer during the reference week. If the respondent reports

having done such work, she is asked the number of hours worked for an employer during a typical

week (across all employers if more than one). The respondent then is asked about self-employment

work activities and, if applicable, usual hours worked per week in self-employment.

       Our Contract Work module consists of 14 questions about respondents' employment and

work arrangements that were interspersed, as appropriate, among the standard employment questions


                                                   7
 
in the Gallup survey. We randomly varied the wording for selected questions in order to test how

alternative phrasings affected responses; Abraham, Hershbein, and Houseman (2019) discuss the

process of developing the survey questionnaire and the effects of question wording. The text of

questions relevant for this paper can be found in Online Appendix A. In most cases, the responses to

the two question versions we tested were similar and the estimates reported here are pooled responses.

       The standard question about work for an employer on the Gallup survey reads as follows:

       Thinking about your WORK SITUATION over the past 7 days, have you been employed
       by an employer--even minimally like for an hour or more--from whom you receive
       money or goods? (This could be for one or more employers.)

Someone doing work for a company on contract basis might reasonably answer "yes" to this

question. To learn whether miscoding of workers as employees is a significant problem in the

Gallup survey, we asked everyone answering "yes" one of two follow-up questions that further

probed whether the person was in fact an independent contractor, independent consultant or

freelance worker rather than an employee. The first version asked about this directly; the other

identified independent contractors by asking whether the employer took any taxes out of the

respondent's pay.

       The standard Gallup question about self-employment asks:

       Again, thinking about the last 7 days, were you self-employed, even minimally like for an
       hour or more? This means working for yourself, freelancing, or doing contract work, OR
       working for your own or your family's business.
       Self-employment also includes fishing, doing farm work, or raising livestock for either
       your own or your family's ranch.

Although this question normally is not asked of respondents who report working for an employer

30 or more hours per week, we asked it of all respondents in our module sample. The emphasis

on reporting work of as little as an hour during the reference week and explicit mention of

freelance and contract work likely mean this question captures self-employment work more fully


                                                  8
 
than, for example, the standard CPS employment questions. We also asked everyone reporting

self-employment activity whether any of that work was done as an independent contractor,

independent consultant, or freelance worker. This allowed us to distinguish those workers from

other self-employed workers. To avoid possible double counting of contract work done by those

who initially said they had worked for an employer, we asked relevant respondents whether any

of the self-employment work they had done in the last seven days was work they had already

reported and analyzed the data accordingly.

              The questions about both work for an employer and self-employment were followed by

questions about hours devoted to that work. Then, to ensure that we had not missed informal

work that might not have been captured by the standard employment questions, we asked all

respondents whether there was anything else they had done in the last seven days for which they

had received or expected to receive payment. The two versions of this question differed with

regard to whether the basic question was augmented with specific examples.1 If respondents

reported doing additional work for pay, they were asked the number of hours spent on such

activities in a typical week.

              The last general questions about work activity on the survey module pertained to work

obtained through online intermediaries, intended to capture the use of mobile apps and websites

such as Uber, Lyft, TaskRabbit, and Upwork. These questions were asked of everyone reporting

any type of non-employee work, including miscoded employees. In the first two waves of the

Gallup survey, we asked whether the person had connected directly with new customers or

clients through a mobile app or online platform, with examples of the types of work someone


                                                            
1
  Findings in the survey methodology literature suggest that adding examples to questions encourages more accurate
reporting, possibly because the examples clarify for respondents what they should be reporting or because the
examples remind them of things they might otherwise have forgotten (see, e.g., Tourangeau et al. 2014). 

                                                               9
 
might have obtained through these channels provided to half of respondents. In reviewing the

data from these first two waves, we noticed that positive responses to this question were much

higher than existing estimates of such work (Farrell, Greig, and Hamoudi 2018; Bureau of Labor

Statistics 2018b)--indeed, too high to be plausible. This raised a question about whether

respondents had understood what we were asking.2 To reduce possible confusion, for the third

and fourth waves we added a question that asked anyone who reported connecting with new

customers or clients directly through a mobile app or online platform whether they also were

paid through the app or platform. For this paper, we measure app or platform work based on

respondents in the third and fourth waves who said both that they connected with new customers

or clients through a mobile app or online platform and that they were paid through the app or

platform.

              All questions just described, together with some questions designed to identify

individuals whose employers contracted their services out to other companies, were asked of

respondents of all ages. The module also included questions designed to provide a more

comprehensive picture of independent contractor work at older ages. These questions were asked

of workers age 50 and older identified as independent contractors, independent consultants, or

freelancers, whether they originally reported themselves as employed by an employer or as self-

employed. First, we asked (through one of two question versions) whether that work was being

done for a business or organization for which the person had previously been an employee.

Second, we asked about the respondent's main reason for doing independent contractor work.

Possible reasons were that the work was a main source of income, was a supplement to

retirement income, was a supplement to income from another job, was the only type of work the

                                                            
2
  Staff at the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported similar concerns in their report on the responses to questions about
the use of online intermediaries added to the 2017 CWS (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2018b).

                                                               10
 
person could get, allowed the person to stay active and connect with others, or allowed the

person to pursue an interest or hobby.

              Gallup administered the Contract Work module in four waves spread evenly across the year.

The first wave was administered from mid-May through mid-June 2018, the second wave from mid-

August through mid-September 2018, the third wave from mid-November through mid-December

2018, and the fourth and final wave from late February through late March 2019. The survey

response rates varied from about 8 percent to about 10 percent, depending on the wave.3

Altogether, Gallup collected approximately 500 completed responses per day, about 15,000 in

each wave, and about 61,000 in total.

              The core Gallup survey also collects detailed demographic information (including age,

gender, race, ethnicity, and education) and data on the respondent's annual income and

geography down to the ZIP code.4 Gallup supplied survey weights constructed to match the

demographic characteristics of the adult population in the relevant age range, as recorded in the

most recent Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the CPS. We use the survey weights for

all reported tabulations, but not for the reported regression results.



FINDINGS FROM THE GALLUP SURVEY MODULE

            As just discussed, the Gallup survey module was designed to capture all work activities

done by respondents during the preceding seven days and to provide more detail on various types


                                                            
3
  Because it was fielded on a survey that interviewed continuously throughout the year, it is not possible to calculate
a precise response rate for the Contract Work module. The reported response rates were computed by isolating the
days on which the module was in the field and calculating a response rate for those days. Sample records that were
first dialed on days prior to when a new Contract Work Module wave started, or that were first dialed during the
Contract Work field period but not fully resolved until after it finished, are not included in the computations.
4
  Because the item non-response rate was high for income, we do not use this variable in the analysis presented
below; rather we make use of income-related neighborhood measures based on American Community Survey (ACS)
data for the respondent's ZIP code.

                                                               11
 
of self-employment than is found in the CPS and other widely-used surveys. We are able to

identify not only self-employed people who report themselves as such but also people who report

themselves as employees but indicate when probed that they in fact are self-employed (as an

independent contractor) as well as people doing other work that they did not think to report in

response to the standard Gallup employment questions. In addition, among the self-employed,

we are able to distinguish independent contractors, independent consultants, and freelancers from

other self-employed individuals. We also discuss non-employee work obtained through a mobile

app or online platform.



Prevalence of Self-Employment Arrangements by Age

              Table 1 provides a summary of the prevalence of various work activities among Gallup

respondents by age group. The first column shows the percent of people who engaged in any

work activity (including work for an employer, in self-employment, or informal work) during the

preceding week.5 In these data, the employment rate is close to 80 percent for age groups 1829

and 3049, but then begins to drop with age, falling to 55.8 percent among those age 6064.

Although the employment rate declines further at older ages, even among the oldest respondents,

a significant fraction did some work for pay in the preceding week--37.1 percent of those age

6569, 26.0 percent of those age 7074 and 18.6 percent of those age 7579.

              The next two columns show the shares of workers whose main work activity is as an

employee or through self-employment, respectively. For those with more than one job, the main

job is defined based on hours worked. Conditional on working, the share whose main job is self-

                                                            
5
 We define informal work as work that was not reported in answering the questions about work for an employer or
self-employment, but mentioned only when we asked "Did you do anything else in the last 7 days that you have not
already mentioned for which you received (or expect to receive) payment?" We assume that informal work is self-
employment rather than employee work.

                                                               12
 
employment rises sharply with age, especially after age 65. The self-employment share is just

under 20 percent for those age 1829 and 3049; it rises to 29.6 percent for those age 6064,

45.5 percent for those age 6569, 59.7 percent for those age 7074 and 67.5 percent for those

age 7579.

       The employment arrangements shown in the final four columns are different types of

self-employment--people who said they were self-employed but not independent contractors,

people who said they were self-employed independent contractors, independent contractors who

initially were miscoded as employees, and people who did only informal work. These breakouts

provide a more detailed picture of the variety of self-employment arrangements than is available

from other sources. The share of workers in each type of self-employment arrangement generally

rises with age. Among workers age 30 to 59, some 510 percent report themselves as self-

employed but not an independent contractor, independent consultant, or freelancer. Similar

shares report themselves to be self-employed independent contractors. The prevalence of both

types of self-employment grows from age 60 onwards. Among workers in their 70s, the share

reporting that they are self-employed but not an independent contractor, independent consultant,

or freelancer ranges between 2530 percent, and the share reporting that they are a self-

employed independent contractor exceeds 20 percent. Between the ages of 30 and 64,

independent contractors miscoded as employees make up an estimated 56 percent of employed

persons. That share rises to about 9 percent for those age 6574 and to 11 percent for those age

7579. Few workers between the ages of 30 and 64--under one percent--report that their only

employment is other informal activities. Perhaps not surprisingly, starting at the traditional

retirement age of 65, that share begins to rise, to 1.9 percent for those age 6569, 3.6 percent for

those age 7074 and 5.8 percent for those age 7579.

                                                 13
 
              The first three columns of Table 2 display the share of workers who are part-time,

defined as working less than 30 hours per week on all jobs during a usual week. This is reported

for all workers and then separately by whether, on her main job, the worker is an employee or

self-employed. As expected, the share working part-time rises with age, particularly after age 64.

At every age, part-time work is considerably more common among the self-employed, though

the gap is smaller for workers in the two oldest age groups.6

              The next two columns of Table 2 show the share of workers who hold multiple jobs,

defined as having more than one employer; combining work for an employer with self-

employment; or combining work for an employer, self-employment or both with informal work

activities. Multiple job holding declines with age, but is quite prevalent in the Gallup data, even

among older workers. More than 10 percent of those still working in their 60s and 70s report

combining work for one or more employers with self-employment. These rates are notably

higher than the multiple-job-holding rates in the CPS.7 Although the high rates in the Gallup data

may partly reflect unobserved differences between those who responded to the Gallup survey

and those responding to the CPS, other factors also likely contribute to this result. First, we asked

even those who reported work as an employee explicitly about self-employment, and second, the

wording of the Gallup employment questions encourages people to report even small amounts of

work activity.

              The growth of mobile apps and online platforms such as Uber, Lyft, and Upwork has

garnered much attention in recent years. Some have speculated that these platforms may help


                                                            
6
  The information on hours used to categorize whether workers are part-time or full-time is categorical, creating
ambiguity about the status of 457 respondents (1.3 percent of workers) who reported hours for more than one type of
work. The percentages shown in Table 2 assume that all of these workers were part-time; the numbers are little
affected if we assume that all of them were full-time.
7
  The overall multiple-job-holding rate in the CPS is roughly 5 percent and it declines only slightly with age. See
https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat36.htm.

                                                               14
 
older individuals connect with employment and remain in the workforce longer. The final

column in Table 2 shows the share of workers obtaining self-employment work through mobile

apps or online platforms and being paid through those apps or platforms. The share of workers

reporting work through a platform or mobile app averages 3.1 percent; it is highest, at 3.8

percent, among workers under age 30, and falls somewhat with age, to between 2.0 and 2.6

percent for workers age 65 to 79.8 Although we have defined participation in platform work

similarly to the 2017 CWS, our estimates are higher than those estimates. The CWS found that

1.0 percent of all workers participated in electronically mediated work, with estimated

participation rates of 0.9 percent for workers age 16 to 24 and 0.8 percent for workers age 65 and

older. The prevalence of platform work may have grown between the fielding of the CWS in

May 2017 and the fielding of the relevant waves of the Gallup survey in late 2018 and early

2019. Another factor contributing to the differences between the two sets of estimates, however,

may be that the CWS questions about platform work were asked only of those identified as

employed in the basic monthly CPS. To the extent that the Gallup employment questions identify

more low-hours and casual workers than the basic monthly CPS, they may have better captured

platform workers.

              To put our Gallup estimates into context more broadly, we have compared them to

estimates based on CPS data for the months that the Gallup survey was in the field.9 These

estimates are available in Online Appendix B. Employment rates in the Gallup data are very

similar to those in the CPS among individuals age 3064, but they are about 10 percentage


                                                            
8
  The share of workers answering yes to the initial question about connecting directly with new customers or clients
through a mobile app or online platform was substantially higher, especially among older workers, with 10.0 percent
of workers age 6569, 11.8 percent of workers age 7074, and 13.5 percent of workers age 7579 giving an
affirmative answer. This may suggest high rates of internet usage to engage with customers and clients.
9
  More specifically, the CPS estimates were calculated using data for May and June 2018, August and September
2018, November and December 2018, and February and March 2019.

                                                               15
 
points higher for those age 1829 and 47 percentage points higher for those age 6579. The

Gallup questions about work for an employer and self-employment ask specifically whether the

respondent worked "even minimally like for an hour or more" and thus seem likely to have

captured casual work activity more fully than the corresponding CPS questions. In addition, our

Gallup module asks explicitly about any informal work that the respondent may not have

reported in response to the standard employment questions. The Gallup and CPS employment

rates for the youngest and oldest age groups are more similar when we exclude those who report

working less than 15 hours per week.10

              Another difference between the Gallup and CPS estimates is the higher prevalence of

self-employment in the Gallup data. This difference arises in part because the Gallup data

include as self-employed both miscoded employees and individuals doing only informal work.

As shown in Online Appendix B, when we exclude these groups, the Gallup self-employment

estimates become closer to the CPS estimates. When we further restrict our sample to individuals

working 15 or more hours per week, the self-employment prevalence rates in the two surveys are

even more similar--the 9.3 percentage point difference in the self-employment rate among those

1879 falls to 2.2 percentage points when both the low-hours and miscoded groups are

excluded.11



 




                                                            
10
   Another contributing factor to the differences between the Gallup and the CPS estimates may be that Gallup
survey respondents answer only for themselves whereas CPS respondents may give proxy responses (Abraham and
Amaya 2019).
11
   The CPS data distinguish between the unincorporated and the incorporated self-employed (Hipple and Hammond
2016). Given the wording of the Gallup self-employment question, we would expect both groups to be counted in
the Gallup data and therefore include both in the CPS estimates used for these comparisons.  

                                                               16
 
Age Patterns of Work under Various Alternative Arrangements

              To explore the age patterns of working for pay under various employment arrangements,

we next estimate linear probability models of these outcomes, looking first at models fit for the

population as a whole and then at models restricted to the employed. We are particularly

interested in the role that education plays in the age gradient for the different types of self-

employment, as well as in the prevalence of informal or online platform work. In each model we

estimate, the dependent variable takes the value of one if the person belongs to the indicated

employment arrangement group and zero otherwise. We regress these outcomes on interactions

of the same age group indicators as in the previous tables (1829, 3049, and subsequent five-

year ranges) with education indicators (high school or less, some college, bachelor's, and

graduate degree), as well as controls for race, gender, quintiles of ZIP-code level household

poverty rates, and wave.12 To create age profiles for the different education groups, we plot fitted

values from these regressions.13

              The four panels of Figure 1 show, among those in a given age group with a given level of

education, the estimated shares of the population who are in each of four mutually exclusive

employment groups. The four employment groups are defined based on the arrangement on the

respondent's main job (if any)--employee, excluding those who subsequently report being an

independent contractor (top left); self-employed but not an independent contractor (top right);

independent contractor, whether self-reported as self-employed or a miscoded employee (bottom



                                                            
12
   We obtain poverty rate estimates by ZIP Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) from the 20122017 ACS and merge
these via the ZIP code in the Gallup data. We have matches for about 95 percent of individual observations and
include an indicator variable for the remaining 5 percent of observations that could not be matched.
13
   To do this, we use the Stata -margins- command. For each sample member, this command calculates the value of
the outcome variable that would have been predicted had the sample member been in the given age-education
category but with their actual gender, race, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave, then averages across all of the
individuals in the sample. The full set of model coefficients is available from the authors upon request.

                                                               17
 
left); and doing only informal work (bottom right). Each panel shows four age profiles, one for

each of the four education categories. Online Appendix C shows these same four age profiles for

the outcome of any employment at all--the vertical sum of the values from the other four

outcomes.

       The profiles shown in the panel for "true" employees are unsurprising--in every

education group, the share of the population working as an employee declines with age, most

sharply in the late 60s, and, until the oldest ages, more-educated individuals are more likely to be

working as employees. The more interesting trends are those shown in the next three panels,

which examine different types of self-employment. Note that these three panels use a different

scale than that used for the employee panel in the upper left. The panel for non-independent-

contractor self-employment (upper right) shows that the share of people in this type of

arrangement grows slightly until middle age and then is relatively flat at 58 percent of the

population through age 75-79. Those with higher education are less likely at younger ages to be

in this arrangement but more likely in their 60s and 70s. The panel for independent contractors

(lower left) displays a qualitatively similar pattern, but the differences across age and education

groups are more pronounced. Among those with a graduate degree, the share of people working

as independent contractors rises from 6 percent at age 1829 to 11 percent at age 7579. In

contrast, among those with no more than a high school diploma the share of people working as

independent contractors declines monotonically with age from about 11 percent at age 1829 to

about 4 percent at age 7579. The last panel in Figure 1 shows the trends in the share of

individuals engaged only in informal work. These rates are consistently low, on the order of 1

percent, but slightly higher at the youngest and oldest ages, reflecting higher rates for the more-

educated at older ages and the less-educated at younger ages.


                                                 18
 
        Figure 2 repeats the analysis just described but with the sample restricted to those who

are working. The first panel reports the share of workers who are in employee arrangements;

after age 65, that share declines steeply, especially for the more highly educated. Among those

age 3049, workers with a graduate degree are 8 percentage points more likely to be employees

than workers with a high school education or less, but after age 65, workers with a graduate

degree are 510 percentage points less likely to be employees. The shares of workers in non-

independent-contractor self-employment, shown in the upper right panel, rise with age and, at

most ages, are clustered relatively tightly across education groups. Among those in their 70s,

rates of non-independent-contractor self-employment are lower for workers in the graduate

degree group (about one-quarter) than for those in the high school group (about one-third). As

shown in the lower-left panel, older workers also are more likely than younger workers to be

independent contractors. Independent contractors constitute between 10 and 15 percent of all

employment for workers in their 30s, 40s, and 50s, but this share rises rapidly for workers in

their 60s and 70s. In this case, however, the growth is especially marked among more-educated

older workers compared to those who did not attend college. Non-independent-contractor self-

employment is the larger component of overall self-employment at older ages only for those with

just a high school education; for those with at least some college, independent contractor work

plays the larger role.

        These results support two stylized facts about self-employment at older ages. First, older

adults with higher levels of education are considerably more likely to be in self-employment

arrangements than less-educated older adults. Second, and something not typically possible to

observe in survey data, more-educated older workers' self-employment is especially likely to

take the form of working as an independent contractor, whereas less-educated older workers'


                                                19
 
self-employment is more concentrated in other types of self-employment, such as traditional

business ownership.

       The higher incidence of independent contractor work among the highly educated relative

to the less educated also accounts for much of the difference in employment rates by education at

older ages. Online Appendix C, which shows the age profile of the overall employment-to-

population ratios for each education level, displays the well-known fact that overall employment

declines with age. It also reveals the strict ordering of employment rates by education; at every

age, those with higher education levels have a higher employment rate than those with lower

education levels. The numbers plotted in Figures 1 imply that for younger and middle-aged

workers, differences in wage and salary employment largely account for the differences in

overall employment rates across education groups. The figure also implies, however, that as the

composition of work arrangements shifts toward self-employment at older ages, differences in

the self-employment rate, especially independent contractor work, account for much of the

difference in the employment rate across education groups.

       Formal decompositions allow us to quantify the contributions of different work

arrangements to the overall employment rate differences by education at different ages. Among

those under age 65, differences in the rate of wage and salary employment (employees, not

miscoded) account for most or all of the overall employment rate differences between highly-

educated individuals (those with a bachelor's degree or more) and those with less education. In

contrast, among those age 6579, differences in the rate of self-employment (whether as an

independent contractor or in some other self-employment arrangement) account for about three-

fourths of the employment rate difference between those with a bachelor's degree or more and

those with some college; they also account for about two-thirds of the employment rate



                                                20
 
difference between those with a bachelor's degree or more and those with a high school degree

or less. Moreover, within the self-employment category, independent contractor work accounts

for the lion's share of self-employment's contribution to the differential for the 6579 age group,

representing over half of the overall differential in employment rates between those with a

bachelor's degree or more and those with lower educational attainment.14

              The large differences in independent contractor activity across education groups at older

ages may reflect differences in the types of work done by more- and less-educated workers, and

the associated differences in the opportunities for independent contractor work. Figure 3 shows

how the age profiles of the shares of workers in different employment arrangements vary by

broad occupation (professional-managerial; sales and office; blue-collar; services; and farming,

forestry, and fishing). In this figure, the age profiles are shown for three types of employment on

the main job--employee, not miscoded; self-employed, not an independent contractor; and

independent contractor.15 Aside from farming, forestry, and fishing, which is heavily comprised

of owner-operators, other occupations have a larger share of self-employment in independent

contractor arrangements. The age profiles for independent contractor work, however, differ

considerably across occupations. Among professional workers, who are generally highly

educated, the share in independent contractor arrangements is relatively stable at a low level

through age 65, but then rises sharply with age. By age 70, 40 percent or more of professional

workers are in an independent contractor arrangement. Although the share of blue-collar workers


                                                            
14
   The summary decompositions in this paragraph were derived from a linear probability model identical to that
underlying Figure 1, except with more aggregated age and education categories. Specifically, in the model, the
bachelor's and graduate degree categories were combined, and age was aggregated into three categories (1849,
5064, and 6579). These estimates are available from the authors on request.
15
   These profiles are derived similarly to those for the age-education profiles in Figure 2 but using age-occupation
interactions in place of age-education interactions and also including education dummy variables. The note to the
figure describes the occupations in each group. Because occupation was not collected for those who reported only
informal work, they are excluded from this analysis.

                                                               21
 
who are in independent contractor arrangements also rises sharply starting at age 65, the overall

number of workers in blue-collar occupations past age 65 is small, likely reflecting the physical

demands associated with many of these jobs. For workers in services, sales, and office

occupations, all groups with relatively low average educational attainment, the share who are

independent contractors remains low at older ages, possibly because there are few opportunities

for workers in these occupations to transition to that more flexible work arrangement.

       Figures 1 through 3 illustrate age trends for arrangements on the main job. We also are

interested in the characteristics associated with participation in informal work, whether as a

person's main job or as a supplement to other work activity, and in participation in online

platform work. The first column of Table 3 reports results from a linear probability model for

whether respondents engaged in any informal work in the prior seven days. Because just 2.4

percent of the (unweighted) sample did so, we include a slightly smaller set of covariates in these

models than were used to estimate the earlier age profiles. In addition to indicators for race,

gender, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave, the model includes age group indicators, education

indicators, interactions of broad age group (5064 and 6579) with education, and controls for

type of main employment arrangement if any (self-employed but not an independent contractor,

self-employed independent contractor, miscoded employee or no other job, with true employees

the omitted group). For the less educated, there is a distinct negative age gradient to the reporting

of informal work. More-educated individuals are somewhat less likely to report such work, at

least at younger ages, but the negative age gradient is much flatter for them. Consequently, more-

educated older individuals are significantly more likely to have informal work than less-educated

older individuals, a reversal of the pattern at younger ages. Interestingly, there is a strong

positive association between being in a non-employee arrangement on the main job and reporting



                                                  22
 
informal work. Those whose main job is some form of self-employment are 3 to 6 percentage

points more likely than those who are employees, conditional on other covariates, to report

informal work in the prior week.16 These findings suggest that many of the self-employed earn

money from multiple work activities.

              In the remaining columns of Table 3, we examine the factors associated with online

platform work. The sample for the second column is all respondents and that for the third column

is restricted to those with work activity in the preceding week. As with informal work, there is a

negative age gradient in platform work participation that is especially pronounced when the

sample is restricted to workers. Also, as with informal work, rates of participation in platform

work are higher among those who are working but whose main job is not a traditional employee

arrangement. Conditional on other covariates, those whose main job involves independent

contractor work are 7 percentage points more likely to have used a mobile app or online platform

to secure work during the prior week than are employees, and even the self-employed who are

not independent contractors are 56 percentage points more likely to have done so.



Differences by Gender in Patterns of Contract Work

              The analysis presented thus far does not consider whether and how the patterns of

independent contractor work differ by gender. Online Appendix D replicates several of the

tables and figures separately for men and women. As can be seen in Tables D1 and D2, which

reproduce the tabulations from Table 1 separately by gender, the share of workers who are self-

employed rises sharply after age 60 for both men and women, but the gradient is steeper for men.

At younger ages, male and female workers have similar self-employment rates, but the gender

                                                            
16
  For context, the unconditional means are roughly 2 percentage points for employees and 58 percentage points for
the self-employed, so the covariates included in the model do not alter the simple differences.

                                                               23
 
gap in self-employment widens to 78 percentage points among workers in their 60s and 1112

percentage points among workers in their 70s. Much of the widening gap is due to the larger

share of older working men who are independent contractors.

       Tables D3 and D4, which reproduce the tabulations from Table 2 separately by gender,

show, not surprisingly, that women at every age are more likely to work part-time than men. Up

to age 60, however, this differential is especially apparent among the self-employed. Self-

employment may provide a means for some working women to control their hours during years

when that flexibility is especially valued (Booth and Van Ours 2008). Starting around age 60,

however, the share of self-employed men who work part-time increases sharply and the gender

gap in the share of self-employment that is part-time shrinks. Consistent with their higher part-

time rates, working women are less likely to have multiple jobs and to combine self-employment

with other work, though the gender differences in these outcomes are smaller than the gender

difference in part-time work.

       Online Appendix Figures D1D4, which replicate Figure 1 and Figure 2 separately by

gender, show employment profiles by age and education. Educated individuals of both genders

are substantially more likely to be working at every age. As is true in the aggregate, in both

groups, the differences in employment rates between those with a bachelor's degree or higher

and those with lower education are due primarily to higher rates of wage and salary work at

younger ages; at older ages, however, the differences are primarily due to higher rates of

independent contractor work. Consistent with that pattern, self-employment generally and work

as an independent contractor specifically account for rising shares of both men's and women's

employment at older ages. Work as an independent contractor plays an especially important role

for the most highly educated men and women.


                                                 24
 
Why Older Workers Are in Independent Contractor Arrangements

       Given the importance of independent contractor work at older ages, we are interested in

how older adults end up doing such work and their motivations for doing it. To learn about

pathways and motivations, we asked independent contractors age 50 and older whether they ever

had been an employee at the firm where they were now doing independent contractor work and

their main reason for working as an independent contractor. As noted earlier, there are two ways

that respondents to the Gallup module may be identified as independent contractors. First, a

person may report working for an employer, but with further probing indicate that she is actually

an independent contractor, not an employee. Second, a person may report being self-employed

and then indicate that she is an independent contractor, independent consultant, or freelance

worker.

       Table 4 summarizes the responses to the added questions about independent contractor

work by 5-year age group from age 50 onwards. The first column shows the percentage of

respondents who report any work as an independent contractor, either as a main job or as a

secondary work activity. This rate falls steadily with age from 14.7 percent among those age

5054 to 6.5 percent among those age 7579. For most of these independent contractors, that

work is the respondent's main job. As shown in the second column, independent contractor work

is a secondary activity for 27.5 percent of those with such work in their early 50s, declining to

just 6.9 percent for those with such work in their late 70s.

       A sizable share of those with independent contractor work--between 23 and 25 percent

for each age group past age 50--report working for a former employer. Our data cannot shed

light on the important question of whether this transition reflects employer or employee



                                                 25
 
preferences. In some cases, it may represent an employer seeking to shed the responsibilities

associated with having an employee. In other cases, the move to independent contractor status

may be a way to accommodate an employee's desire for a more flexible work schedule.

              The remaining columns of Table 4 report information on the reasons these workers are in

independent contractor arrangements. Given policy interest in independent contractor work as a

mechanism for helping older individuals meet financial needs late in life, it is striking how the

share of independent contractors who report earning income as the main reason for this work

declines with age. As shown in the fourth column, about two-thirds of those age 5054 who are

doing independent contractor work report earning income as the main reason, but this share falls

to under half for those age 6569 and to about one-third for those age 7079. In contrast, staying

active and connecting with others becomes more important as a reason for independent

contractor work with age.17 As would be expected, the share who indicate that independent

contractor work is their main source of income or supplements income from a main job falls with

age while the share indicating that independent contractor work supplements retirement income

rises.

              To explore whether the motivation for work as an independent contractor differs between

men and women, we show the statistics reported in Table 4 separately by gender in Online

Appendix Tables D5 and D6. Prior to age 65, men are 610 percentage points more likely than

women to say their main reason for working as an independent contractor is to earn money, but

that gap shrinks at older ages, as both become more likely to give other reasons for independent

contractor work.


                                                            
17
  Even if not the main reason, earning income still could be one reason for contract work. It also is possible that,
were such work more readily available, more older adults in education and occupation groups with greater financial
needs would be employed as independent contractors.

                                                               26
 
       In Table 5, to better understand the circumstances and motivations of older independent

contractors, we estimate linear probability models to explore the factors associated with working

for a former employer and working primarily to earn income. These models include age group

indicators, education indicators, interactions of an indicator for being age 6579 with education,

and an indicator for having been a miscoded employee, together with controls for race, gender,

ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave. Perhaps not surprisingly, as shown in the first column,

independent contractors who initially reported working for an employer (and so were miscoded

as employees) are about 15 percentage points more likely than those who reported being self-

employed to work for a former employer. As can be seen in the second column, miscoded

employees also are significantly more likely (6 percentage points) to report earning income as

their main reason for being in an independent contractor arrangement. As suggested by the

tabulations in the prior table, conditional on having independent contractor work, there is no

association between age and working for a prior employer, and the probability of reporting

income as the main reason for this work declines with age. Interestingly, there is no apparent

association between education and the probability of working either for a former employer or as

an independent contractor to earn money.



DISCUSSION

       The rate of self-employment among those who are working rises sharply with age. Given

considerable concerns among policymakers about the adequacy of retirement savings and the

resulting policy interest in increasing employment among older Americans, it is important to

understand the incidence of various types of self-employment work and the factors that influence




                                                27
 
seniors' engagement in them. Findings from the Gallup module data provide several insights into

these issues and suggest areas for future research.

       First, the Gallup data suggest that the incidence of self-employment may be even higher

than is measured in standard household surveys. While it is possible that the respondents to the

Gallup survey are unrepresentative of the population in unobserved ways such that they are more

likely to be self-employed, at least two other factors appear to contribute to the higher self-

employment rates in the Gallup module. First, responses to the module questions suggest that a

sizable share of workers at all ages are independent contractors but miscoded as employees.

Second, the Gallup module questions are designed to capture low-hours work that may be missed

in other surveys such as the CPS. To the extent that standard surveys are miscoding independent

contractors as wage and salary workers or missing some low-hours work (or both), the resulting

estimates of the prevalence of and trends in self-employment could be misleading, especially for

older workers.

       Additionally, the data from the Gallup module point to the importance of independent

contracting among older workers. Even without accounting for independent contractors who are

miscoded as employees, they indicate that independent contractor work is as prevalent as other

types of self-employment; with the inclusion of miscoded employees, independent contractor

work is considerably more prevalent than other types of self-employment. Work for a former

employer is an important component of independent contractor work among older workers;

about one-quarter of independent contractors age 50 and older report having previously worked

for their client as an employee. Whether the implied change in employment arrangement from

employee to independent contractor is driven primarily by employers' preferences or by

workers' desire for greater flexibility warrants further exploration. Additionally, a significant



                                                 28
 
minority of those age 65 and older (2 to 6 percent) report informal work as their only form of

employment. Informal work tends to be associated with low and sporadic hours and so is

especially apt to be missed in other surveys.

       The data from the Gallup module also underscore the importance of self-employment as a

secondary work activity among older workers. Although highest at younger ages, multiple-job-

holding rates remain quite high among workers age 50 and older (between 15 and 20 percent of

workers). The high rate of multiple-job holding in the Gallup data likely reflects, at least in part,

the survey's ability to capture all types of work activity, including low-hours work. A majority of

multiple-job holders combine wage and salary work with self-employment, a phenomenon we

plan to explore in future work.

       Online platform work has garnered considerable attention in recent years as a potential

source of work for older Americans. Although the incidence of online platform work in the

Gallup data is higher than that found in the 2017 CWS fielded by BLS, only a few percent of

workers say they do such work and its prevalence is even lower among older workers.

Nevertheless, the prevalence of platform work at older ages may grow over time, and this will be

important to monitor.

       Among the most robust findings from our analysis is the strong positive association at

older ages between education and self-employment, particularly independent contractor work. At

all ages, the highly educated are more likely than those with less education to be employed. At

older ages, differences in the prevalence of independent contractor work account for a large

share of that gap in employment rates. Our analysis provides suggestive evidence that, among

seniors, the differential rates of independent contracting across education groups may reflect

differential access to this type of work. Professional and managerial workers have high levels of



                                                 29
 
educational attainment compared to other occupational groups, and the share of those in this

occupational category in independent contractor arrangements rises sharply starting at age 65. In

contrast, for lower-education occupations such as sales, office, and services, the share in

independent contractor arrangements remains flat at older ages. To the extent that financial

circumstances compel Americans to work later in life, any impediments to independent

contractor work they face--and whether these might be addressed with training, improved access

to technology, or other measures--warrant further study.




                                                 30
 
References

Abraham, Katharine G., and Ashley Amaya. 2019. "Probing for Informal Work Activity."
      Journal of Official Statistics 35(3): 487­508.

Abraham, Katharine G., John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James R. Spletzer. 2018a.
      "Measuring the Gig Economy: Current Knowledge and Open Issues." NBER Working
      Paper No. 24950.

Abraham, Katharine G., John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James R. Spletzer. 2018b.
      "Driving the Gig Economy." Unpublished working paper.

Abraham, Katharine G., John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James R. Spletzer. 2019.
      "The Rise of the Gig Economy: Fact or Fiction?" American Economic Association
      Papers and Proceedings 109: 357­361.

Abraham, Katharine G., Brad Hershbein and Susan N. Houseman. 2019. "Independent Contract,
      Informal, and Online Intermediary Work: Preliminary Evidence on Developing Better
      Measures in Household Surveys." Unpublished working paper.

Abraham, Katharine G., and Susan N. Houseman. 2005. "Work and Retirement Plans Among
      Older Americans," in Robert L. Clark and Olivia S. Mitchell, eds., Reinventing the
      Retirement Paradigm. New York: Oxford University Press, 70­91.

Abraham, Katharine G., and Susan N. Houseman. 2008. "Removing Barriers to Work for Older
      Americans," in Timothy J. Bartik and Susan N. Houseman, eds., A Future of Good
      Jobs?: America's Challenge in the Global Economy. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
      Institute for Employment Research, 161­202.

Abraham, Katharine G., and Susan N. Houseman. 2019. "Making Ends Meet: The Role of
      Informal Work in Supplementing Americans' Income." Russell Sage Foundation Journal
      of the Social Sciences, 5(5): 110­131.

Alba-Ramirez, Alfonso. 1994. "Self-employment in the Midst of Unemployment: The Case of
      Spain and the United States." Applied Economics 26: 189­204.

Ameriks, John, Joseph S. Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and
      Christopher Tonetti. 2018. "Older Americans Would Work Longer if Jobs Were
      Flexible." NBER Working Paper No. 24008.

Bendick, Marc Jr., Charles W. Jackson, and J. Horacio Romero. 1996. "Employment
      Discrimination Against Older Workers: An Experimental Study of Hiring Practices."
      Journal of Aging and Social Policy 8(4): 25­46.

Booth, Alison L., and Jan C. van Ours. 2008. "Job Satisfaction and Family Happiness: The Part-
       time Work Puzzle." Economic Journal 118: F77­F99.


                                              31
 
Bracha, Anat, and Mary A. Burke. 2019. "How Big is the Gig?" Federal Reserve Bank of
       Boston. Unpublished working paper.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2018a. Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements--May
      2017. News release. June 7.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2018b. "Electronically Mediated Work: New Questions in the
      Contingent Worker Supplement." Monthly Labor Review. September.

Collins, Brett, Andrew Garin, Emilie Jackson, Dmitri Koustas, and Mark Payne. 2019. "Is Gig
       Work Replacing Traditional Employment? Evidence from Two Decades of Tax
       Reforms." Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income Working Paper.

Evans, David S., and Linda S. Leighton. 1989. "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship."
       American Economic Review 79(3): 519­535.

Farrell, Diana, Fiona Greig, and Amar Hamoudi. 2018. The Online Platform Economy in 2018:
        Drivers, Workers, Sellers, and Lessors. Washington, DC: JPMorgan Chase Institute.

Fuchs, Victor. 1982. "Self-Employment and Labor Force Participation of Older Men" Journal of
       Human Resources 17(3): 339­357.

Giandrea, Michael D., Kevin E. Cahill, and Joseph F. Quinn. 2009. "Bridge Jobs: A Comparison
      Across Cohorts." Research on Aging 31: 549­576.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1984. "Partial Retirement and the Analysis of
      Retirement Behavior." Industrial Labor Relations Review 37(3): 403­415.

Haider, Steven J., and David S. Loughran. 2010. "Elderly Labor Supply: Work or Play?" in I.
       Christensen and B. Schneider, eds., Workplace Flexibility: Realigning 20th Century Jobs
       to 21st Century Workers. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 110­127.

Hamilton, Barton H. 2000. "Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns
      to Self-Employment." Journal of Political Economy 108(3): 604­631.

Hipple, Steven F., and Laurel A. Hammond. 2016. "BLS Spotlight on Statistics: Self-
       Employment in the United States." Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau
       of Labor Statistics.

Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin Wild Pugsley. 2011. "What Do Small Businesses Do?" Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity Fall: 73­118.

Koustas, Dmitri. 2018. "Consumption Insurance and Multiple Jobs: Evidence from Rideshare
      Drivers." Unpublished working paper.

Lahey, Joanna. 2008. "Age, Women and Hiring: An Experimental Study." Journal of Human


                                              32
 
       Resources 43(1): 30­56.

Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. 2018. "Selection into Entrepreneurship and Self-
       Employment." NBER Working Paper No. 25350.

Maestas, Nicole. 2010. "Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations of Work After
      Retirement." Journal of Human Resources 45(3): 718­748.

Maestas, Nicole and Xiaoyan Li. 2006. "Discouraged Workers? Job Search Outcomes of Older
      Workers." Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 2006­133.

Matos, Kenneth, Ellen Galinsky and James T. Bond. 2017. 2016 National Study of Employers.
       Society for Human Resource Management, Families and Work Institute, and When Work
       Works.

Munnell, Alicia H., Wenliang Hou and Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher. 2018. "National Retirement
      Risk Index Shows Modest Improvement in 2016." Center for Retirement Research at
      Boston College Brief 18-1.

Munnell, Alicia H., Anthony Webb and Anqi Chen. 2016. "To What Extent Does
      Socioeconomic Status Lead People to Retire Too Soon." Center for Retirement Research
      at Boston College Working Paper 2015-19.

Neumark, David, Ian Burn, and Patrick Button. 2019. "Is It Harder for Older Workers to Find
     Jobs? New and Improved Evidence from a Field Experiment." Journal of Political
     Economy 127(2): 922­970.

Pang, Gaobo and Mark Warshawsky. 2013. "Retirement Savings Adequacy of U.S. Workers."
       Unpublished working paper.

Quinn, Joseph F. 1980. "Labor Force Participation Patterns of Older Self-Employed Workers."
       Social Security Bulletin 43(4): 17­28.

Ramnath, Shanthi, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2017. "Pathways to Retirement
      through Self-Employment." NBER Working Paper No. 23551.

Robles, Barbara and Marysol McGee. 2016. "Exploring Online and Offline Informal Work:
       Findings from the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (EIWA) Survey." Finance
       and Economics Discussion Series 2016-089. Washington: Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 1990. "Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement," Journal of Labor Economics
      8(4): 482­501.

Tourangeau, Roger, Frederick G. Conrad, Mick P. Couper and Cong Ye. 2014. "The Effects of
      Providing Examples in Survey Questions." Public Opinion Quarterly 78(1): 100­125.


                                              33
 
VanDerhei, Jack. 2019. "Retirement Savings Shortfalls: Evidence from EBRI's 2019
     Retirement Security Projection Model." EBRI Issue Brief No. 475. March.

Zissimopoulos, Julie M. and Lynn A. Karoly. 2007. "Transitions to Self-employment at Older
       Ages: The Role of Wealth, Health, Health Insurance and Other Factors." Labour
       Economics 14: 269­295. 




                                             34
 
 Table 1: Share of Population Working and Employment Arrangement on Main Job, by Age


                                             Employment arrangement on main job among those with any work

                                                                          Specific self-employment arrangement
                                                                                                    IC,
                        Share of                                                                 miscoded
                      population                        Self-                                        as         Other
 Age Group           with any work      Employee      employed      SE, not IC      SE, IC       employee      work only

 1829                     77.9             81.2          18.8           4.5           4.6           8.3            1.4
                          (0.6)            (0.6)         (0.6)         (0.3)         (0.3)          (0.4)         (0.2)

 3049                     81.5             80.4          19.6           6.1           7.1           5.7            0.7
                          (0.4)            (0.4)         (0.4)         (0.3)         (0.3)          (0.3)         (0.1)

 5054                     74.8             77.6          22.4           7.8           8.9           5.4            0.4
                          (0.8)            (0.8)         (0.8)         (0.5)         (0.5)          (0.4)         (0.1)
 5559                     69.1             74.8          25.2           9.5           8.9           5.8            1.0
                          (0.8)            (0.8)         (0.8)         (0.6)         (0.5)          (0.4)         (0.2)
 6064                     55.8             70.4          29.6          10.6          12.1           6.0            0.9
                          (0.7)            (0.8)         (0.8)         (0.5)         (0.6)          (0.4)         (0.2)
 6569                     37.1             54.5          45.5          18.2          16.4           9.0            1.9
                          (0.6)            (1.1)         (1.1)         (0.8)         (0.8)          (0.7)         (0.3)
 7074                     26.0             40.3          59.7          25.7          21.3           9.1            3.6
                          (0.6)            (1.2)         (1.2)         (1.1)         (1.0)          (0.7)         (0.5)
 7579                     18.6             32.5          67.5          29.1          21.2           11.4           5.8
                          (0.6)            (1.8)         (1.8)         (1.7)         (1.5)          (1.1)         (0.9)

 Total                    67.0             76.4          23.6           7.8           8.1           6.6            1.1
                          (0.2)            (0.3)         (0.3)         (0.2)         (0.2)          (0.2)         (0.1)

 N                       59,593          35,477         35,477        35,477        35,477        35,477         35,477
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Shares expressed as percentages. Standard errors in parentheses. SE is selfemployed; IC is independent contractor.
Tabulations are weighted.
Table 2: Selected Employment Characteristics by Age
                    Part-time (<30 hours/week on all jobs), as        Multiple jobholder, as share of      Participates
                  share of workers by arrangement on main job                   all workers                 in online
                                                                                                            platform
                                                                                         Combines           work, as
                                     Among           Among self-                        employee and       share of all
 Age Group             All          employees         employed              All           SE work            workers

 1829                 25.0              19.4             49.3              24.7              14.8              3.8
                      (0.7)             (0.7)            (1.8)             (0.6)             (0.5)             (0.4)
 3049                 12.5              7.3              33.4              20.2              14.5              3.4
                      (0.4)             (0.3)            (1.2)             (0.4)             (0.4)             (0.3)
 5054                 12.3              7.2              30.3              19.5              14.8              2.1
                      (0.6)             (0.6)            (1.8)             (0.8)             (0.7)             (0.4)
 5559                 15.8              8.5              37.3              20.2              14.7              2.7
                      (0.7)             (0.6)            (1.8)             (0.7)             (0.6)             (0.4)

 6064                 23.7              14.0             46.7              17.9              12.7              1.6
                      (0.8)             (0.8)            (1.7)             (0.7)             (0.6)             (0.4)

 6569                 42.8              29.3             59.0              16.4              12.7              2.6
                      (1.1)             (1.4)            (1.6)             (0.8)             (0.7)             (0.5)
 7074                 58.0              45.6             66.4              15.8              11.4              2.1
                      (1.2)             (2.0)            (1.5)             (0.9)             (0.8)             (0.5)

 7579                 66.0              57.0             70.4              17.6              11.2              2.0
                      (1.8)             (3.6)            (2.0)             (1.4)             (1.1)             (0.7)

 Total                19.7              12.4             43.2              20.8              14.3              3.1
                      (0.3)             (0.3)            (0.6)             (0.3)             (0.2)             (0.2)

 N                   35,477           25,778             9,699            35,477            35,477           17,531
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Shares expressed as percentages of group. Standard errors in parentheses. SE is self-employed. Last column based on
Gallup module's third and fourth waves only. Tabulations are weighted.
Table 3: Correlates of Having Informal Work or Platform Work
                                                                                                  Among those with any
                                         Among population,            Among population,            work activity, online
                                          informal work              online platform work            platform work
 1830                                        0.011***                        0.005                        0.007
                                              (0.003)                       (0.003)                      (0.004)
 5054                                        0.012**                        0.005                        0.009
                                              (0.004)                       (0.004)                      (0.006)
 5559                                        0.010*                         0.004                        0.007
                                              (0.004)                       (0.004)                      (0.006)
 6064                                       0.014***                      0.014***                     0.022***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.004)                      (0.006)
 6569                                       0.021***                       0.007*                      0.024***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.003)                      (0.007)
 7074                                       0.021***                       0.010**                     0.037***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.003)                      (0.007)
 7579                                       0.017***                       0.009**                     0.037***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.003)                      (0.009)
 Some college                                  0.000                        0.009*                       0.011*
                                              (0.003)                       (0.004)                      (0.005)
 Bachelor's                                  0.008*                        0.020***                     0.023***
                                              (0.003)                       (0.005)                      (0.006)
 Graduate degree                              0.003                        0.021***                     0.022***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.006)                      (0.006)
 5064*Some college                             0.000                        0.004                        0.001
                                              (0.004)                       (0.005)                      (0.007)
 5064*Bachelor's                              0.010*                        0.004                         0.001
                                              (0.005)                       (0.006)                      (0.008)
 5064*Graduate degree                         0.011*                       0.014*                        0.010
                                              (0.005)                       (0.007)                      (0.008)
 6579*Some college                             0.006                        0.006                         0.005
                                              (0.004)                       (0.004)                      (0.008)
 6579*Bachelor's                             0.016***                      0.014**                        0.001
                                              (0.004)                       (0.005)                      (0.010)
 6579*Graduate degree                         0.012*                       0.019**                       0.007
                                              (0.005)                       (0.006)                      (0.009)
 Self-employed, not IC                       0.030***                      0.052***                     0.056***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.006)                      (0.006)
 Self-employed, IC                           0.060***                      0.067***                     0.070***
                                              (0.005)                       (0.007)                      (0.007)
 IC, miscoded as employee                    0.033***                      0.067***                     0.068***
                                              (0.005)                       (0.008)                      (0.008)
 Not otherwise employed                      0.005**                       0.003*                           
                                              (0.002)                       (0.001)

 R2                                            0.013                        0.038                        0.031
 N                                             59,593                       29,323                       17,356
SOURCE: Authors' estimates, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Each column represents a separate regression with the indicated sample and dependent variable. Last two columns
based on Gallup module's third and fourth waves only. Respective sample means 0.024, 0.017, and 0.029. Regressions also
include controls for race, gender, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Statistical
significance: *p<0.05, **p<0.01,***p<0.001.
Table 4: Incidence of and Reasons for Independent Contractor Work, by Age
              Population                                                           Among those with IC work:

                                                                                             Of those
                                                                                                                           Main reason        Main          Main
                                                                Main                         IC work         IC work       for IC work     reason for     reason for
                                                             reason for       IC work      supplement      supplement         to stay      IC work to      IC work
                Have any        IC work a      Work for      IC work to         main        to income            to           active,        pursue       only type
              independent       secondary        prior           earn        source of      from main       retirement       connect       interest or     of work
            contractor work        job         employer        income          income           job           income       with others       hobby        could get

 5054             14.7             27.5          24.8           65.3           41.3            14.7            2.7              9.4            9.3           3.8
                  (0.6)            (1.9)         (1.9)          (2.0)          (2.1)           (1.5)           (0.8)           (1.2)          (1.2)          (1.0)

 5559             13.9             27.1          24.2           59.7           39.0            9.7             5.4             12.6           11.2           2.7
                  (0.5)            (1.8)         (1.8)          (2.0)          (2.0)           (1.1)           (0.9)           (1.4)          (1.2)          (0.7)

 6064             12.3             18.3          22.6           54.9           34.6            7.4             10.8            17.7           10.8           2.0
                  (0.5)            (1.5)         (1.7)          (2.0)          (1.9)           (0.9)           (1.3)           (1.5)          (1.2)          (0.5)

 6569             10.6             11.0          23.8           45.6           18.2            4.6             20.1            25.5           12.1           2.2
                  (0.4)            (1.2)         (1.8)          (2.1)          (1.6)           (0.9)           (1.6)           (1.8)          (1.2)          (0.9)

 7074              8.6              8.5          24.0           37.8           10.7            2.1             22.7            34.4           12.8           0.5
                  (0.4)            (1.1)         (1.9)          (2.1)          (1.2)           (0.5)           (1.9)           (2.1)          (1.4)          (0.2)

 7579              6.5              6.9          24.1           33.6            8.3            0.9             22.6            39.2           12.2           1.4
                  (0.4)            (1.5)         (2.6)          (2.9)          (1.7)           (0.5)           (2.6)           (2.9)          (1.7)          (0.6)
 Total            11.7             19.9          23.9           54.4           31.0            8.5             10.7            18.5           11.0           2.5
                  (0.2)            (0.8)         (0.8)          (0.9)          (0.9)           (0.5)           (0.5)           (0.7)          (0.5)          (0.4)

 N               38,602            4,414         4,414         4,414           4,414          4,414           4,414           4,414           4,414         4,414
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Sample persons age 50 to 79. Shares expressed as percentages. Main reasons are mutually exclusive but do not sum to 100 due to a catchall "other" reason and
some nonresponse; the specific reasons for earning income specified in columns five through seven similarly do not sum to total who gave earning income as main reason
for IC work. Standard errors in parentheses. IC is independent contractor. Tabulations are weighted.
Table 5: Correlates of ICs Working for Prior Employer or Working Primarily to Earn Money

                                       Work for prior employer               Main reason for IC work to earn income

 5559                                           0.010                                         0.047
                                                (0.021)                                       (0.024)
 6064                                           0.003                                        0.086***
                                                (0.020)                                       (0.024)
 6569                                           0.004                                        0.195***
                                                (0.039)                                       (0.045)
 7074                                           0.002                                        0.260***
                                                (0.040)                                       (0.046)
 7579                                           0.006                                        0.331***
                                                (0.042)                                       (0.048)
 Some college                                   0.003                                         0.013
                                                (0.026)                                       (0.029)
 Bachelor's                                     0.039                                         0.006
                                                (0.026)                                       (0.030)
 Graduate deg                                   0.034                                         0.057
                                                (0.026)                                       (0.031)
 6579*Some college                              0.028                                         0.010
                                                (0.043)                                       (0.049)
 6579*Bachelor's                                 0.053                                         0.006
                                                (0.044)                                       (0.051)
 6579*Graduate deg                               0.028                                        0.025
                                                (0.042)                                       (0.049)
 Miscoded as employee                          0.149***                                      0.061***
                                                (0.014)                                       (0.015)

 R2                                              0.041                                          0.072
 N                                               4,414                                          4,414
SOURCE: Authors' estimates, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Sample persons age 50 to 79 reporting independent contract work. Each column represents a separate regression with
the indicated dependent variable. Regressions also include controls for race, gender, ZIP code poverty quintile and wave.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance: *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001.
Figure 1: Share of Population Employed by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Education




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status on main job as
shown in each panel--on age-education interactions and controls for race, gender, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave.
Values capture share of population in each status, by age group and education. IC is independent contractor. Informal work
pertains to individuals who reported only informal work not captured by standard employment and self-employment
questions. See text for details.
Figure 2: Share of Workers by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Education




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status on main job as
shown in each panel, among those with some form of employment--on age-education interactions and controls for race, gender,
ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave. Values capture share of employment in each status, by age group and education. IC is
independent contractor. Informal work pertains to individuals who reported only informal work not captured by standard
employment and self-employment questions. See text for details.
Figure 3: Share of Workers by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Occupation




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status on main job as
shown in each panel, among those with some form of employment other than informal work--on age-occupation group
interactions and controls for race, gender, education, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave. Values capture share of
employment other than informal work in each status, by age group and occupation group. Prof/Mngr corresponds to
professionals and managers (SOC codes 1129); Services corresponds to SOC codes 3139; Sales/Office corresponds to
SOC codes 4143; Farm corresponds to SOC codes 45; and Blue collar corresponds to SOC codes 4753. IC is independent
contractor. Informal work pertains to individuals who reported only informal work not captured by standard employment and
self-employment questions. See text for details.
Appendix A: Wording of Selected Questions on Gallup Education Consumer Pulse Survey and
Contract Work Module

    Question
               Waves   Wording
    ID
    WP10200    All     Thinking about your WORK SITUATION over the past seven days, have you
                       been employed by an employer -- even minimally, like for an hour or more --
                       from whom you receive money or goods? (This could be for one or more
                       employers.)
    U2         All     How many employers did you work for in the last seven days?
    U3A_1      All     (Asked of random half of sample who worked for one employer) Were you an
                       employee on this job or were you an independent contractor, independent
                       consultant or freelance worker?
    U3A_2      All     (Asked of random half of sample who worked for one employer) Did this
                       employer take any taxes out of your pay?
    U3B_1      All     (Asked of random half of sample who worked for two+ employers) Were you
                       an employee on each of your jobs; an independent contractor, independent
                       consultant, or freelance worker on each of your jobs; or did the arrangement
                       vary across jobs?
    U3B_2      All     (Asked of random half of sample who worked for two+ employers) Did all of
                       your employers take out taxes from your pay, did none of them take out taxes
                       from your pay, or did it vary across employers?
    QA_1       All     (Asked of 50- to 80-year-olds who were asked U3A_1 or U3B_1 and were
                       independent contractors, independent consultants or freelance workers) Still
                       thinking about your work situation over the past seven days, were you working
                       as an independent contractor, independent consultant or freelance worker for
                       a business or organization where you previously were an employee?
    QA_2       1,2,4   (Asked of 50- to 80-year-olds who were asked U3A_2 or U3B_2 and whose
                       employer(s) did not take taxes out of their pay) Still thinking about your work
                       situation over the past seven days, were you working on a cash or contract
                       basis for an employer who previously took taxes out of your pay?
    QA_2A      3       (Asked of 50- to 80-year-olds who were asked U3A_2 or U3B_2 and whose
                       employer(s) did not take taxes out of their pay) Thinking about the
                       [employer/employers] who currently [does/do] not take taxes out of your pay,
                       did they used to take taxes out of your pay?
    QB         All     (Asked of 50- to 80-year-olds who said they were independent contractors,
                       independent consultants or freelance workers or that their employer did not
                       take taxes out of their pay) What was your MAIN REASON for doing this
                       work? Was it to earn income, to stay active and connect with others, to pursue
                       an interest or hobby, because it was the only type of work you could get or
                       was there some other reason?
    QC         All     (Asked of 50- to 80-year-olds who said they were independent contractors,
                       independent consultants or freelance workers or that their employer did not
                       take taxes out of their pay, whose main reason for doing the work was to earn
                       income) Would you describe this work as your main source of income, a
                       supplement to the income you earn in your main job, a supplement to your
                       retirement income, or something else?
    WP102152   All     (Asked of those who work for an employer) In a typical week (seven days),
                       how many hours do you work for an employer?
    U5_1       All     (Asked of those who worked for two+ employers who were asked U3B_1 and
                       whose employment situation varied across jobs) Did you work as an
                       independent contractor, independent consultant or freelance worker for more
                       than half of these hours?
                              
    Question
               Waves   Wording
    ID
    U5_2       All     (Asked of those who worked for two+ employers who were asked U3B_2 and
                       whose employment situation varied across jobs) Did the job where taxes were
                       taken out of your pay account for more than half of these hours?
    WP10202    All     Again, thinking about the last seven days, were you self-employed, even
                       minimally, like for an hour or more? This means working for yourself,
                       freelancing or doing contract work, OR working for your own or your family's
                       business? Self-employment also includes fishing, doing farm work or raising
                       livestock for either your own or your family's farm or ranch.
    WP102162   All     (Asked of those who are self-employed) In a typical week (seven days), how
                       many hours do you work as a self-employed individual?
    U12        All     (Asked of those who are self-employed who previously indicated they were
                       independent contractors, independent consultants, freelances workers or
                       whose employer did not take taxes out of their pay) Just to check, was all or
                       was some of the self-employment work you did in the last seven days work
                       you already told me about, or not?
    U13        All     (Asked of those who did additional self-employment work not previously
                       indicated) Excluding the work you already told me about, in a typical week
                       (seven days), how many additional hours do you work as a self-employed
                       individual?
    U14        All     (Asked of those who did additional self-employment work not previously
                       indicated) Was any of this self-employment work done as an independent
                       contractor, independent consultant or freelance worker?
    QD         All     (Asked of those 50-80 years old who did self-employment work not previously
                       indicated) Still thinking about the self-employment work you did over the past
                       seven days, were you working as an independent contractor, independent
                       consultant, or freelance worker for a business or organization where you
                       previously were an employee?
    QE         All     (Asked of those 50-80 years old who did self-employment work not previously
                       indicated) What was your MAIN REASON for doing this work as an
                       independent contractor, independent consultant or freelance worker? Was it to
                       earn income, to stay active and connect with others, to pursue an interest or
                       hobby, because it was the only type of work you could get, or was there some
                       other reason?
    QF         All     (Asked of those 50-80 years old who did self-employment work not previously
                       indicated whose main reason for doing the work was to earn income) Would
                       you describe what you earn from this work as your main source of income, a
                       supplement to the income you earn in your main job, a supplement to your
                       retirement income, or something else?
    U17_1      All     (Asked of a random half of the sample) Did you do anything else in the last
                       seven days that you have not already mentioned for which you received (or
                       expect to receive) payment?
    U17_2      All     (Asked of a random half of the sample) Did you do anything else in the last
                       seven days that you have not already mentioned for which you received (or
                       expect to receive) payment? Examples might include babysitting or eldercare,
                       cleaning, maintenance work, data entry tasks, driving for a car service or
                       making and selling handicrafts.
                              
    Question
               Waves   Wording
    ID
    U18        All     (Asked of those who did any other activities for which they expect to receive
                       payment) How many hours did you spend on these activities in the last seven
                       days?
    U19_1      All     (Asked of a random half of the sample who were self-employed, worked as an
                       independent consultant, independent contractor or freelancer, worked for an
                       employer who did not take taxes out of their pay, or did work outside of an
                       employer-paid job for which they expected to be paid) For any of the work you
                       did in the past seven days, did you connect directly with new customers or
                       clients through a mobile app or online platform?
    U19_2      All     (Asked of a random half of the sample who were self-employed, worked as an
                       independent consultant, independent contractor or freelancer, worked for an
                       employer who did not take taxes out of their pay, or did work outside of an
                       employer-paid job for which they expected to be paid) For any of the work you
                       did in the past seven days, did you connect directly with new customers or
                       clients through a mobile app or online platform? For example, you might have
                       given rides to people using a ridesharing app; used an app to find people
                       looking for cleaning, delivery or handyman services; or used an online
                       platform where people can bid on data entry or other tasks.
    U20        3,4     (Asked of those who connected with new customers through a mobile app or
                       online platform) Did the customers pay you directly, or did they pay the mobile
                       app or online platform which then pays you?
 
                              
Appendix B: Employment and Self-employment Rates, Gallup versus Current Population Survey

Table B1: All Work Activity
                       Employment rate                         Self-employment rate (in population)
                                                                  Gallup w/o         Gallup w/o
                     Gallup           CPS           Gallup         miscoded      miscoded emp. or            CPS
 Age group                                                        employees        informal work
 1829                 77.9            68.2             14.6             8.2                7.1               2.3
 3049                 81.5            80.5             16.0            11.3               10.8               7.7
 5054                 74.8            77.4             16.8            12.8               12.4               9.4
 5559                 69.1            70.7             17.4            13.4               12.7               9.2
 6064                 55.8            56.4             16.5            13.2               12.7               8.3
 6569                 37.1            33.0             16.9            13.5               12.8               6.8
 7074                 26.0            19.4             15.5            13.1               12.2               5.1
 7579                 18.6            11.9             12.6            10.4                9.4               3.5
 Total                67.0            65.0             15.8            11.4               10.7               6.5
 N                   59,593         715,693          59,593           59,593           59,593          715,693



Table B2: Work Activity Based on Working 15-plus Hours per Week
                        Employment rate                        Self-employment rate (in population)
                                                                  Gallup w/o         Gallup w/o
                     Gallup            CPS          Gallup         miscoded      miscoded emp. or             CPS
 Age group                                                        employees        informal work
 1829                 69.9             64.0            10.3             4.9              4.5                  2.1
 3049                 78.0             78.7            13.3             9.2              8.9                  7.2
 5054                 70.8             75.7            14.1            10.7             10.5                  8.9
 5559                 64.2             68.5            13.8            10.5             10.2                  8.5
 6064                 49.7             53.6            12.1             9.7              9.6                  7.4
 6569                 29.1             29.1            10.7             8.7              8.4                  5.4
 7074                 17.5             16.0             8.8             7.4              7.2                  3.8
 7579                 11.4              9.1             6.8             5.6              5.3                  2.5
 Total                61.2             62.3            11.9             8.3              8.0                  5.8
 N                   59,593          715,693          59,593           59,593            59,593             715,693
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module and Current Population Survey, May-June 2018,
August-September 2018, November-December 2018 and February-March 2019.
NOTE: Gallup employment includes all individuals reporting work for an employer, self-employment or any
other work for pay. Self-employment rate as share of population. Main job defined based on hours worked. 
Appendix C: Share of Population Employed, by Education and Age
 




                                                                                                                      
SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of the dependent variable--an indicator variable of any form of
employment--on age-education interactions and controls for race, gender, wave, and poverty quintile. The values
capture the share of the population with any form of employment, by age group and education. See text for details.
                                    
    Appendix D: Tabulations and Figures by Gender


    Table D1: Share of Population Working and Employment Arrangement on Main Job, by Age, Men

                                              Employment arrangement on main job among those with any work

                                                                            Specific self-employment arrangement

                                                                                                  IC,
                         Share of                                                               miscoded
                        population                        Self-                                    as            Other
    Age Group         with any work      Employee       employed      SE, not IC      SE, IC    employee        work only
    1829                    82.0            79.6          20.4           4.4            5.7           9.3           1.0
                            (0.7)           (0.8)         (0.8)          (0.4)         (0.5)         (0.6)         (0.2)

    3049                    88.3            80.2          19.8           5.8            7.4           6.1           0.5
                            (0.5)           (0.6)         (0.6)          (0.3)         (0.4)         (0.4)         (0.1)

    5054                    79.8            76.3          23.7           7.6            9.9           5.7           0.5
                            (1.0)           (1.1)         (1.1)          (0.7)         (0.8)         (0.6)         (0.2)

    5559                    74.9            74.1          25.9           9.8            8.7           6.8           0.6
                            (1.0)           (1.1)         (1.1)          (0.8)         (0.7)         (0.6)         (0.2)

    6064                    62.2            66.9          33.1           11.9          14.2           6.2           0.8
                            (1.0)           (1.2)         (1.2)          (0.8)         (0.9)         (0.6)         (0.2)

    6569                    43.8            51.1          48.9           20.0          17.8           9.1           1.9
                            (1.0)           (1.4)         (1.4)          (1.1)         (1.1)         (0.9)         (0.4)

    7074                    32.6            35.4          64.6           28.3          23.6           9.7           3.0
                            (0.9)           (1.6)         (1.6)          (1.5)         (1.4)         (1.0)         (0.5)

    7579                    24.7            28.0          72.0           29.7          25.3          11.3           5.6
                            (1.1)           (2.3)         (2.3)          (2.3)         (2.2)         (1.4)         (1.4)

    Total                   73.6            75.0           25.0          7.9            9.0           7.2           0.8
                            (0.3)           (0.4)          (0.4)         (0.2)         (0.2)         (0.2)         (0.1)

    N                     30,327           20,376        20,376        20,376         20,376        20,376        20,376
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Shares expressed as percentages. Standard errors in parentheses. SE is selfemployed; IC is independent contractor.
Tabulations are weighted.
                                     
Table D2: Share of Population Working and Employment Arrangement on Main Job, by Age, Women

                                              Employment arrangement on main job among those with any work

                                                                            Specific self-employment arrangement

                                                                                                      IC,
                         Share of                                                                 miscoded
                        population                        Self-                                      as          Other
  Age Group           with any work      Employee       employed      SE, not IC SE, IC           employee      work only
  1829                      73.4            83.1          16.9           4.6            3.4           7.1           1.8
                            (0.9)           (0.9)         (0.9)          (0.5)         (0.4)         (0.6)         (0.3)
  3049                      74.7            80.5          19.5           6.5            6.7           5.3           1.0
                            (0.7)           (0.7)         (0.7)          (0.4)         (0.4)         (0.4)         (0.2)
  5054                      70.1            79.0          21.0           7.9            7.8           5.0           0.4
                            (1.2)           (1.1)         (1.1)          (0.7)         (0.7)         (0.6)         (0.1)
  5559                      63.6            75.6          24.4           9.3            9.0           4.7           1.4
                            (1.1)           (1.2)         (1.2)          (0.8)         (0.8)         (0.6)         (0.4)
  6064                      50.1            74.3          25.7           9.2            9.8           5.7           1.0
                            (1.0)           (1.2)         (1.2)          (0.7)         (0.9)         (0.6)         (0.2)
  6569                      31.1            58.7          41.3           15.9          14.5           8.9           1.9
                            (0.9)           (1.6)         (1.6)          (1.1)         (1.2)         (0.9)         (0.5)
  7074                      20.2            47.2          52.8           22.2          17.9           8.2           4.6
                            (0.7)           (1.9)         (1.9)          (1.6)         (1.5)         (1.1)         (0.8)
  7579                      14.0            38.6          61.4           28.3          15.5          11.6           6.0
                            (0.7)           (2.9)         (2.9)          (2.5)         (1.8)         (1.8)         (1.1)

  Total                     60.7            78.0           22.0          7.6            7.1           5.9           1.3
                            (0.4)           (0.4)          (0.4)         (0.2)         (0.2)         (0.2)         (0.1)

   N                      29,266           15,101        15,101        15,101         15,101        15,101        15,101
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Shares expressed as percentages. Standard errors in parentheses. SE is selfemployed; IC is independent contractor.
Tabulations are weighted.
Table D3: Selected Employment Characteristics by Age, Men

                   Part-time (<30 hours/week on all jobs), as            Multiple jobholders, as share
                   share of workers by arrangement on main job           of all workers
                                                                                                             Participates in
                                                                                                                 online
  Age Group                                                                                                     platform
                                                          Among                             Combines
                                                                                                             work, as share
                                       Among               self-                           employee and
                                                                                                             of all workers
                        All           employees          employed           All              SE work
  1829                 19.9              14.1               42.6             25.8              17.2               4.0
                       (0.8)             (0.7)              (2.2)            (0.8)             (0.7)              (0.5)

  3049                  6.8               3.4               20.7             21.3              16.4               3.4
                       (0.4)             (0.3)              (1.3)            (0.6)             (0.5)              (0.3)

  5054                  7.7               3.3               21.8             21.1              16.7               2.3
                       (0.7)             (0.6)              (2.2)            (1.0)             (0.9)              (0.5)

  5559                  9.6               4.1               25.4             21.7              17.0               2.9
                       (0.8)             (0.6)              (2.2)            (1.0)             (0.9)              (0.6)

  6064                 18.4               8.8               37.8             18.5              15.0               1.6
                       (1.0)             (0.8)              (2.1)            (0.9)             (0.9)              (0.4)

  6569                 36.9              22.6               51.9             17.4              13.9               3.0
                       (1.4)             (1.7)              (2.1)            (1.1)             (0.9)              (0.7)

  7074                 52.5              37.7               60.6             16.9              13.1               2.0
                       (1.6)             (2.7)              (2.0)            (1.2)             (1.1)              (0.6)

  7579                 60.4              49.1               64.8             17.8              11.4               1.7
                       (2.5)             (4.9)              (2.8)            (1.8)             (1.5)              (0.7)

  Total                14.5               7.8               34.4             21.9              16.3               3.2
                       (0.3)             (0.3)              (0.8)            (0.4)             (0.3)              (0.2)

  N                   20,376            14,591             5,785            20,376            20,376            10,079
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Shares expressed as percentages of group. Standard errors in parentheses. SE is self-employed. Last column based
on Gallup module's third and fourth waves only. Tabulations are weighted.
Table D4: Selected Employment Characteristics by Age, Women

                     Part-time (<30 hours/week on all jobs), as          Multiple jobholders, as share
                     share of workers by arrangement on main job         of all workers
                                                                                                            Participates
                                                                                                             in online
Age Group                                                                                                    platform
                                                          Among                           Combines           work, as
                                       Among               self-                          employee and      share of all
                        All           employees          employed            All          SE work             workers
1829                   31.2              25.6               59.1             23.2              11.9             3.5
                       (1.1)             (1.1)              (2.9)            (1.0)             (0.7)           (0.6)

3049                   19.1              11.9               48.7             18.9              12.1             3.4
                       (0.7)             (0.6)              (1.9)            (0.6)             (0.5)           (0.4)

5054                   17.2              11.0               40.2             17.8              12.9             2.0
                       (1.1)             (1.0)              (3.0)            (1.1)             (0.9)           (0.5)

5559                   22.6              13.4               51.3             18.4              12.1             2.5
                       (1.2)             (1.1)              (2.7)            (1.0)             (0.8)           (0.6)

6064                   29.6              19.2               59.5             17.1              10.2             1.6
                       (1.3)             (1.3)              (2.6)            (1.0)             (0.8)           (0.6)

6569                   50.3              36.7               69.6             15.2              11.2             2.1
                       (1.6)             (2.2)              (2.3)            (1.1)             (1.0)           (0.6)

7074                   65.8              54.0               76.3             14.1               9.0             2.4
                       (1.9)             (2.9)              (2.3)            (1.3)             (1.0)           (0.8)

7579                   73.7              64.9               79.3             17.3              10.9             2.4
                       (2.7)             (5.2)              (2.8)            (2.1)             (1.7)           (1.3)

Total                  25.8              17.6               54.9             19.4              11.9             2.9
                       (0.4)             (0.4)              (1.0)            (0.4)             (0.3)           (0.2)

N                     15,101            11,187             3,914            15,101            15,101           7,452
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Shares expressed as percentages of group. Standard errors in parentheses. SE is self-employed. Last
column based on Gallup module's third and fourth waves only. Tabulations are weighted.
Table D5: Incidence of and Reasons for Independent Contractor Work, by Age, Men
              Population                                                           Among those with IC work:

                                                                                             Of those
                                                                                                                           Main reason        Main          Main
                                                                Main                         IC work         IC work       for IC work     reason for     reason for
                                                             reason for       IC work      supplement      supplement         to stay      IC work to      IC work
                Have any        IC work a      Work for      IC work to         main        to income            to           active,        pursue       only type
              independent       secondary        prior           earn        source of      from main       retirement       connect       interest or     of work
            contractor work        job         employer        income          income           job           income       with others       hobby        could get
 5054             17.2             27.5          28.1           69.0           47.7            14.3            2.5              8.4            8.4           3.4
                  (0.9)            (2.4)         (2.6)          (2.6)          (2.8)           (1.8)            (1)            (1.5)          (1.6)          (1.2)

 5559             16.5             29.4          27.1           62.1           43.4            9.9             5.5             10.1           10.5           3.3
                  (0.8)            (2.4)         (2.5)          (2.6)          (2.6)           (1.5)           (1.2)           (1.7)          (1.6)          (1.0)

 6064             15.4             17.6          22.9           58.9           38.8            7.9             9.4             14.9           10.9           2.9
                  (0.7)            (1.7)         (2.0)          (2.4)          (2.4)           (1.2)           (1.4)           (1.7)          (1.5)          (0.8)

 6569             13.5             12.6          26.8           46.4           19.6            5.2             18.8            26.0           13.1           2.9
                  (0.7)            (1.7)         (2.4)          (2.7)          (2.2)           (1.2)           (2.1)           (2.3)          (1.7)          (1.4)

 7074             11.8              7.7          23.1           38.7           11.7            2.4             22.8            32.0           14.2           0.5
                  (0.6)            (1.3)         (2.3)          (2.7)          (1.6)           (0.7)           (2.4)           (2.5)          (2.0)          (0.3)

 7579              9.5              4.6          22.5           35.6            9.8            1.2             23.3            36.8           13.2           1.6
                  (0.7)            (1.5)         (3.4)          (3.8)          (2.3)           (0.7)           (3.5)           (3.7)          (2.3)          (0.9)

 Total            14.6             20.0          25.7           56.6           34.4             8.5           10.6             17.2           11.0           2.8
                  (0.3)            (0.9)         (1.1)          (1.2)          (1.1)           (0.7)          (0.7)            (0.8)          (0.7)         (0.5)

 N               18,316            2,655         2,655         2,655           2,655          2,655           2,655           2,655           2,655         2,655
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Sample persons age 50 to 79. Shares expressed as percentages. Main reasons are mutually exclusive but do not sum to 100 due to a catchall "other" reason and
some nonresponse; the specific reasons for earning income specified in columns five through seven similarly do not sum to total who gave earning income as main reason
for IC work. Standard errors in parentheses. IC is independent contractor. Tabulations are weighted.
Table D6: Incidence of and Reasons for Independent Contractor Work, by Age, Women
              Population                                                           Among those with IC work:

                                                                                             Of those
                                                                                                                           Main reason        Main          Main
                                                                Main                         IC work         IC work       for IC work     reason for     reason for
                                                             reason for      IC work       supplement      supplement         to stay      IC work to      IC work
                Have any        IC work a      Work for      IC work to        main         to income            to           active,        pursue       only type
              independent       secondary        prior           earn        source of      from main       retirement       connect       interest or     of work
            contractor work        job         employer        income         income            job           income       with others       hobby        could get
 5054             12.3             27.4          20.6           60.5           33.2            15.1            3.0             10.6           10.6            4.3
                  (0.8)            (2.8)         (2.8)          (3.2)          (3.1)           (2.4)           (1.2)           (2.0)          (1.9)          (1.7)

 5559             11.5             24.0          20.3           56.4           33.2            9.5             5.4             16.1           12.2            1.8
                  (0.7)            (2.6)         (2.7)          (3.1)          (3.0)           (1.7)           (1.2)           (2.5)          (1.9)          (0.7)

 6064              9.6             19.4          22.2           49.3           28.6            6.7             12.9            21.7           10.6            0.9
                  (0.6)            (2.6)         (2.8)          (3.2)          (3.0)           (1.4)           (2.3)           (2.7)          (2.0)          (0.6)

 6569              8.0              8.6          19.2           44.3           16.1            3.6             22.0            24.7           10.5           1.1
                  (0.5)            (1.4)         (2.6)          (3.2)          (2.4)           (1.1)           (2.6)           (2.7)          (1.7)          (0.5)

 7074              5.8              9.7          25.5           36.3            8.9            1.5             22.5            38.7           10.2           0.4
                  (0.4)            (2.1)         (3.4)          (3.4)          (2.0)           (0.7)           (2.9)           (3.6)          (1.9)          (0.4)

 7579              4.2             10.8          26.9           30.2            5.6            0.4             21.4            43.2           10.4           0.9
                  (0.4)            (3.1)         (4.2)          (4.2)          (2.1)           (0.4)           (3.7)           (4.7)          (2.5)          (0.9)

 Total             9.1             19.9          21.5           51.2           26.2            8.5             11.0            20.4           10.9           2.0
                  (0.3)            (1.2)         (1.3)          (1.5)          (1.3)           (0.8)           (0.8)           (1.2)          (0.9)          (0.5)

 N               20,286            1,759         1,759         1,759           1,759          1,759           1,759           1,759           1,759         1,759
SOURCE: Authors' tabulations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Sample persons age 50 to 79. Shares expressed as percentages. Main reasons are mutually exclusive but do not sum to 100 due to a catchall "other" reason and
some nonresponse; the specific reasons for earning income specified in columns five through seven similarly do not sum to total who gave earning income as main reason
for IC work. Standard errors in parentheses. IC is independent contractor. Tabulations are weighted.
Figure D1: Share of Population Employed by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Education, Men




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.                                       
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status 
on main job as shown in each panel--on ageeducation interactions and controls for race, gender, ZIP code 
poverty quintile, and wave. Values capture share of population in each status, by age group and education. IC 
is independent contractor. Informal work pertains to individuals who reported only informal work not 
captured by standard employment and selfemployment questions. See text for details. 
                                                               
Figure D2: Share of Population Employed by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Education, Women




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.                                       
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status 
on main job as shown in each panel--on ageeducation interactions and controls for race, gender, ZIP code 
poverty quintile, and wave. Values capture share of population in each status, by age group and education. IC 
is independent contractor. Informal work pertains to individuals who reported only informal work not 
captured by standard employment and selfemployment questions. See text for details. 
                                     
Figure D3: Share of Workers by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Education, Men




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status
on main job as shown in each panel, among those with some form of employment--on age-education
interactions and controls for race, gender, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave. Values capture share of
employment in each status, by age group and education. IC is independent contractor. Informal work pertains to
individuals who reported only informal work not captured by standard employment and self-employment
questions. See text for details.
Figure D4: Share of Workers by Employment Status on Main Job, by Age and Education, Women




SOURCE: Authors' calculations, Gallup Contract Work Module.
NOTE: Figure shows fitted values from regressions of dependent variable--an indicator for employment status
on main job as shown in each panel, among those with some form of employment--on age-education
interactions and controls for race, gender, ZIP code poverty quintile, and wave. Values capture share of
employment in each status, by age group and education. IC is independent contractor. Informal work pertains to
individuals who reported only informal work not captured by standard employment and self-employment
questions. See text for details. 
 
