                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WHY FIRMS OFFER PAID PARENTAL LEAVE:
                             AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

                                       Claudia Goldin
                                      Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                       Claudia Olivetti

                                     Working Paper 26617
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26617


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We are extremely grateful to Namrata Narain, the primary RA on the project, to Jennifer Walsh
who followed her, and to Valeria Ferraro who ably assisted in collecting data on firm-level
benefits. Kristen Monaco of the BLS kindly helped us obtain the cross-tabulations of the
Economic Benefits Survey (EBS). We thank Dev Patel and participants at the HKS-WAPPP
seminar for providing helpful comments. The Russell Sage Foundation (Grant #85-18-05) and the
NSF (Grant #1823635) are to be gratefully acknowledged for providing the research funding. We
presented an earlier version of this paper at the AEI/Brookings "Paid Family and Medical Leave
Author's Conference," November 19, 2019. We thank the participants and especially our
discussant, Ann Bartel, for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Claudia Goldin, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and Claudia Olivetti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Firms Offer Paid Parental Leave: An Exploratory Study
Claudia Goldin, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and Claudia Olivetti
NBER Working Paper No. 26617
January 2020
JEL No. J13,J2,J32

                                         ABSTRACT

Why do competitive firms in the US provide paid parental leave (PPL)? Which firms do and to
what extent? We use several firm- and individual-level data sets to answer these questions. These
include the BLS-Employee Benefit Survey (EBS) for 2010 to 2018 and an extensive firm-level
data collection that we compiled. Our work is undergirded by a two-period model with
competitive firms whose workers vary by their optimal firm-specific training and the probability
that each will remain on the job after PPL is taken. We find that firm-provided PPL has greatly
increased in the last two decades and generally covers new fathers. The levels of provision differ
greatly by the industry, firm size, and the degree of firm-specific training. But even the top-of-
the-line firm in the US provides fewer fully paid parental weeks than does the median OECD
nation.

Claudia Goldin                                  Claudia Olivetti
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
229 Littauer                                    Dartmouth College
Harvard University                              6106 Rockefeller Hall
Cambridge MA 02138                              Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                        and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu                             claudia.olivetti@dartmouth.edu

Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu
        Even though the US is in last place in the paid and job-protected family-leave
Olympics, many states have stepped up to the plate offering paid family and medical leave.
Until a few years ago, the only states that offered paid leave (or passed paid leave
legislation) were those with Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) programs (CA, NJ, NY,
RI). 1 But, more recently, other states have begun to formulate paid family leave legislation
following the leads of WA and MA. MA recently passed a paid-leave law using its
Unemployment Insurance (UI) system to administer the additional tax contributions.

       At the time of this writing, two more have joined the list of states that have passed
paid family leave legislation, and more than a dozen states across the political spectrum are
expected to introduce legislation soon including liberal states, such as CO, MN, and ME, and
more conservative ones, such as IN, NE, and OK. Paid family leave could soon become law
in enough states to render a federal act unnecessary, similar to what happened to workers'
compensation from 1910 to 1921 when all but five states passed a law. 2

        But even if all states passed a paid family leave law at the level of the most generous
state today, the US would still be in last place in the world, most likely tied with Mexico at
12 weeks of (partially) paid leave. 3

       At the same time that states have been filling in for the federal government, firms
have been filling in for both. Firms in states without paid family leave are providing their
own form of insurance, and firms in states with leave often "top off" the amount of earnings
replacement and extend the number of paid weeks.

       We should be clear at the outset that our paper mainly concerns Paid Parental Leave
(PPL)--paid employee leave to care for newborns (and adopted children). PPL can be
gender neutral. But, in most cases, women are offered more PPL than are fathers, and birth
mothers often must take the firm's Short-Term Disability before they are eligible for PPL.
Even though firms often require employees to use personal days off (e.g., vacation,
sickness) before they access paid parental leave days, our compilations of PPL try to


1 One reason that US states with temporary disability programs can have paid family leave is that it
provided the fiscal apparatus needed to fund the social insurance program. Another is that
pregnancy is treated as a disability. DC also has a paid family leave policy.
2 On the history of workers' compensation see Fishback and Kantor's aptly titled book A Prelude to

the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers' Compensation (2000).
3 California, with six weeks of disability leave for mothers and another six to eight weeks of paid

family leave, is the most generous state today. The replacement rate is 70% and the maximum
weekly payment is $1,216. For comparison, in 2018 the median duration of paid maternity leave
across OECD countries was 16 weeks, with a median average payment rate of approximately 80%
of average national full-time earnings. See:
https://www.oecd.org/els/soc/PF2_1_Parental_leave_systems.pdf.


                                                                          Version of: 12/31/19     1
measure the PPL benefit separately from other leaves.

       PPL is generally distinct from benefits that grant paid leave to care for sick children
and other family members, also known as Paid Family Leave (PFL). It is also distinct from
medical leave for oneself, often termed Short-Term Disability. Many firms lump vacation,
personal, and sick days together and give them as an aggregate "paid time off" benefit. 4
Because monitoring is costly, except in the case of births and adoptions, firms that offer
PPL, often also provide a lump of paid time off days (PTO) for all other reasons. One
exception is Short-term Disability, which is occasionally a separate benefit that is free or
offered at subsidized rates. We provide summaries on the levels of PTO from our firm data.

       Our reasons for concentrating on PPL as a subset of paid family and medical leave
are several. Even though paid family and medical leave can encompass a host of
circumstances, including leave by the worker to care for relatives and for the worker's own
short-term disability, a substantial fraction of such leaves are taken by new parents, both
mothers and fathers. In California, for example, about 70% of paid family leave claims by
female workers, 20 to 39 years old, are for births and adoptions. 5

       Another reason to concentrate on the maternity and infant bonding aspects of the
family and medical leave benefit is that firms tout those benefits when recruiting new
employees, possibly because applicants are younger than existing workers. Also, most of
the economics literature on the impact of current state plans emphasizes their impact on
birth mothers' employment and earnings post leave. 6 Finally, a main drawing card of the
state plan advocates is that PPL is both woman and child centered.

       The focus of our paper on PPL does not imply that other forms of caring and medical

4 Most of these terms are defined in the EBS glossary: https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/national-
compensation-survey-glossary-of-employee-benefit-terms.htm#paid_leave
5 Bana, Bedard, Rossin-Slater, and Stearns (2018), table 3, indicates that, among women 20 to 39

years old, there were 0.778 disability claims and 0.345 "bonding" claims. Assuming that each
"bonding" claim is also a disability (maternity) claim and that 0.235 (the value for men) claims have
nothing to do with a birth, then 0.198 claims were for births without a bonding claim. This implies
that 70% (0.543/0.778) of all claims for women 20 to 39 years involved a birth (or adoption). The
0.235 figure assumes that disability claims that are not for births are the same for males and
females. That is probably an overstatement for women and thus the fraction of all claims for women
that involve a birth would be even higher. We ignore the small fraction with caring leaves.
6 Baum and Ruhm (2016), using the NLSY97, find that female employment increased with CA-PFL

seven to 12 months after a birth. Rossin-Slater et al. (2013) show that CA-PFL increased leaves for
mothers by about three weeks and that PFL had a positive impact on their later employment.
Bycker (2016) finds that the increase in worker attachment after leave comes mainly from the
lower-educated group of women. Others have noted that employers may be less likely to promote
women (and possibly men) who take leave and that maternity leave takers may have had slower
wage growth after passage of FMLA (Manchester, Leslie, and Park 2008; Thomas 2019).


                                                                          Version of: 12/31/19     2
leave are unimportant to firms and their employees. In fact, our discussion of the BLS data
concerns PFL, rather than PPL, since the data collected are for paid family leave even
though the majority taken is probably in the form of PPL.

        We begin with an overview of national data on paid leave at the individual level as
provided by the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). We then move to firm-level
data, first those collected as part of the Employee Benefit Survey (EBS) by the BLS. Finally,
we present and analyze our collection of firm-level data for a vast array of firms and
compare the aggregate findings from the EBS to ours at the firm-level.

       The firm-level data motivate our central questions: Why do firms that compete in
product (and labor) markets provide paid family or paid parental leave and which firms
provide this benefit and at what levels? We frame our answers to these questions in a two-
period model with competitive firms, and workers who are, ex ante, identical except for the
expected value they place on returning to work after a birth. That determines their optimal
firm-specific training and the degree to which each will remain on the job if PPL is taken.
The model has a number of implications regarding which firms provide PPL and how much
is provided.

       We then move to an analysis of our firm level data using the insights from our
model. We provide data on the levels of PPL by industry, size of firm, percent female, age
distribution of employees, and the home-office state. We provide extensions to our data for
three professional service industries for which we know the identity of all firms by number
of employees. We also explore the provision of fully-paid personal days (PTO). We end with
a summary of our findings.

A. Paid Parental and Family Leave: Evidence from Firms

   1. The Data: Firm-Level and Aggregate

        To understand the amount of paid family or parental leave offered by private-sector
firms and used by employees, we use three sources. The first is the National Survey of
Family Growth (NSFG), which asks respondents about the leave they took after a birth. We
tabulate the leave they took for which they received remuneration. One potential drawback
is that the NSFG data do not specifically concern leave provided by private-sector firms,
about which we are concerned here. In addition, the benefit used may include accumulated
sick and vacation days.

       The second source is the Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) collected by the BLS. The
EBS is the most comprehensive source to measure firm-level benefits in the US, including



                                                                      Version of: 12/31/19      3
paid family leave (PFL). The data are available in a consistent form from 2010 to 2018. But
because they are confidential, they can be accessed only as tabular materials by industry,
occupation, and separately by characteristics of firms and workers, such as number of
employees and wage percentiles.

        The final source, and the one that is our main contribution, is our extensive
collection of firm-level PPL information. The main data used in the paper come from Great
Place to Work (GPTW) and are for 2017/18. 7 We also use a host of other sources including
compilations by various aggregators and the Working Mother magazine

       We have compiled extensive information on 1,135 firms, for which we have paid
parental leave (PPL) benefits information on 960 firms. The availability of various
correlates, including employment, the state of the headquarters, and the composition of the
firm's workforce, reduces our sample to around 500 to 600 for the regression analyses.

       The policies listed by firms are often complex. Firms do not always clearly state
whether their short-term (or temporary) disability program is included in the number of
PPL weeks they claim to offer and whether workers who take PPL are first required to
exhaust their vacation, and sick days. Even more difficult is figuring whether all workers at
the firm are covered. When the firm provides data for full-time and part-time workers
separately, we use only the data for full-time workers.

        The coverage that we list was given as the full replacement rate. Some firms offer
full replacement for some period and then partial replacement beyond that. In most cases
we use only instances of full replacement and exclude partial replacement. 8 We emphasize
that we have tried to use data only for the firms that provide nearly universal fully-paid
parental leave.

        There is also the question of employee coverage. Many of the firms we list are
professional service firms. We often do not have direct information on whether firm
policies cover staff positions to the same degree they cover professionals. But auxiliary
information indicates that most cover both. Recent news articles reveal that large law firms
generally have leave equality between attorneys and administrative staff. Many have
recently changed from a previous two-tiered system where administrative staff had been
eligible for a shorter paid leave than the attorneys. 9 A 2017 survey of 18 law firms by the

7 The benefits data we obtained from Great Place to Work were listed for 2017. Our web scouring
and phone calls may include some data for 2018. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data for details.
8 Our data set has just a small number of firms with partial replacement or a mixture of both.
9 Based on a 2017 survey of 44 large law firms, the issue is discussed further in:

https://news.bloomberglaw.com/daily-labor-report/big-law-firms-have-sharp-divide-on-parental-
leave-policies


                                                                      Version of: 12/31/19   4
Diversity and Flexibility Alliance shows that just 22 percent of the firms had no paid
parental leave for the staff. 10

       Because much of the firm-level information we have collected comes from
aggregator websites that applaud the family-friendly policies of our sample firms, we will
be missing firms that provide no, or few, benefits. Firms tout their benefit packages, such as
PPL, but do not advertise a program's absence or its restrictions in covering only those in
salaried positions. To address the problem of the "missing zeros," we have supplemented
our sample. We have done a deeper dive into three well-defined sectors--Accounting, Law,
and Finance & Insurance--for which the top hundred or so firms by number of employees
are clearly known. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data.

       We also present evidence on changes in PPL coverage from around 2000 to 2017 for
various industries to demonstrate how benefits have increased in a follow-the-leader
manner. Finally, we analyze information on a broader form of "caring leave"--fully paid
personal days or personal time off (PTO).

     2. National Survey of Family Growth and CPS Data

       The National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) provides the best individual-level
estimates of the fraction of women who received paid parental leave. The survey spans
2001 to 2010. Female respondents, 15 to 45 years old, were asked whether they were at
work at the time of their most recent pregnancy and whether they were able to take any
leave after that birth. 11

       Of those who could take any kind of leave, the number of paid weeks was requested.
Those who were unable to take leave include those who left employment at the time of the
birth with no intention of returning and those working in firms or business that were not
subject to FMLA (e.g., small businesses).

       We divide the sample into two groups by education. Among the college graduate
group, about 80% of those who were at work while pregnant took some leave (paid or
unpaid). 12 In addition, 64% of those who were at work while pregnant received paid leave
of some duration. Among the group who received paid leave, 45% received six or more



10 See https://dfalliance.com/action-step-inclusive-flexible-work-policies-include-staff/
11 We have tabulated the data by the year of the child's birth, but the sample sizes are too small to
allow consideration of year effects. In addition, there are few consistent differences by birth year.
12 Those who did not take leave probably left the workforce, although some may have not been

covered by FMLA and left employment without any job protection.


                                                                             Version of: 12/31/19       5
weeks; 20% received ten or more. The mean number of weeks for those receiving some
paid leave was about eight.

       The situation for mothers with an education below college graduate is rather
different. In the lower-educated group, 64% of those who worked while pregnant took
some leave (paid and unpaid). Just 36% of women who were at work while pregnant
received some paid leave. Of those, 30% received six or more weeks and 10% received ten
or more weeks. Even though a much smaller fraction of the lower-educated group received
any paid leave, the mean number of weeks for those receiving some paid leave--at 7.6
weeks--was almost the same as for the college graduate group.

       The NSFG is useful for placing the firm-level data in a larger context. 13 The
comparison that we will make is of the mean number of leave weeks conditional on having
paid leave. The more-educated group of mothers receive far more leave than do the less-
educated group. But all women with paid leave receive about eight weeks. The firms in our
data provide more leave, but that is to be expected since they were chosen because of their
more generous leave policies and because they provide fully-paid leave. The surprising
finding is that they do not provide that much more paid leave than the national average of
what new mothers take.

     3. BLS Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) Data

       The EBS is the only source of benefits statistics of private-sector firms at the
national level. Because of the confidentiality of the firm-level microdata, BLS researchers
kindly provided us with cross tabulations of industries by firm size bins and also
occupations by wage bins (when the number of observations is sufficiently large by cell).
We use the EBS industry data since they are most comparable with our firm data.

       An important point about the EBS data is that they give the fraction of employees
with any level of a particular benefit, such as paid vacation, paid sickness and family leave,
and unpaid family leave. We give, in Figure 1, annual information from 2010 to 2018 for the
fraction of firms that offered PFL (of any length) in six industries (the BLS uses NAICS
codes) by firm size. 14 Note that EBS data are at the firm level and implicitly assume that all
workers are covered by a benefit if the firm offers that benefit. We cross classify size of firm

13 The NSFG does not distinguish between women who had been employed in the private and public
sectors, whereas our evidence here only concerns the private sector. For evidence on paid and
unpaid leave taken by women working in the private sector, see Kerr (2016), which uses the
NLSY79 and explores the impact of FMLA.
14 The BLS uses the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). We use the higher level

of aggregation except for the Professional & Technical and Health Care & Social Assistance
industries.


                                                                        Version of: 12/31/19    6
in two buckets (< 100 workers and  100 workers) as that is the only firm size variable that
has no missing cells for the six industries. 15

         Access to PFL across all industries increased from 11% to 17% of all workers
between 2010 and 2018. 16 A main finding from the EBS industry data is that the trend in
PFL provision from 2010 to 2018 was distinctly upward, particularly in industries having
significant levels in the base year. In the Information and Professional & Technical sectors,
for example, the fraction of firms offering PFL nearly doubled from around 15% to 20% to
30% to 40% in the 18 years. But in industries like Manufacturing and Retail, where the
initial levels were low, there was only a minor increase.

        Also important is that there are significant differences by industry in all years, given
size of the firm. In the Information, Finance & Insurance, and Professional & Technical
industries, 45% of larger firms offered PFL to their workers in 2018. In the Manufacturing
and Retail Trade sectors, however, barely 10% of the larger firms offered PFL, and 20% of
the larger firms in the Health sector offered PFL.

         Large firms (100 workers) in all industries offer more paid leave than small firms
(< 100 workers). In the Professional & Technical sector, 19% of the small firms offered PFL
but 40% of the large firms did in 2017. In Finance & Insurance, 37% of the small firms
offered PFL but 43% of the large ones did, and in Health Care and Social Assistance it was
13% versus 22%. The low levels of provision in Manufacturing conceal the fact that there
are large differences by size. Retail shows little difference by size, although the enormous
increase for larger firms in 2018 was almost certainly caused by Walmart's PFL change that
year. 17

     4. Comparing the EBS and Firm-level Data

      Our firm-level data give the number of days of paid leave (separately for birth
mothers, fathers and, often, adoptive parents) conditional on having some PPL. 18 The

15 Missing cells occur when the number of firms in a cell is too small for the BLS to report.
16 See https://data.bls.gov/timeseries/NBU18700000000000033349.
17 In March 2018, Walmart began to offer ten weeks of fully paid maternity leave to all full-time

hourly and salaried employees. Walmart also offers six weeks of paid parental leave, giving 16
weeks total for birth mothers and six weeks for fathers. See:
https://smartguide.walmartone.com/SmartPages/Media/Default/LeadershipGuide/Maternity-
Parental-FAQ-2018.pdf
18 There are some firms that list "primary caregiver" (referred to in some literature as "primary

custodial parent") as the individual who can collect the PPL. A class-action sex-discrimination case
against JPMorgan Chase brought by male plaintiff Derek Rotondo was recently settled for $5 million
and may provide an important precedent giving men the ability to be considered as primary
custodial parents when they request the full PPL. Case law in the area is still in flux, however. See


                                                                           Version of: 12/31/19    7
construction of the EBS data make the implicit (and not always believable) assumption that
a firm policy for any worker applies to all workers equally.

       As shown in Figure 2, the Finance & Insurance, Information, and Professional &
Technical industries all have high fractions of PFL in the EBS sample and, generally, the
greatest number of days of PPL leave offered in the firm-level data. Because the firm-level
dataset has disproportionately large firms, the EBS data for the larger firms are more
relevant. 19

        As seen in the second panel of Table 1, the mean number of PPL days for mothers in
the analysis sample of firms is 46 and is 54 when weighted by the firm's employees. In the
expanded sample of firms the mean number of PPL days is 55, and is 69 when weighted by
the firm's employees. Around ten to twelve weeks seems to be a norm for firms that offer
leave. 20 Some sectors have higher PPL than suggested by the EBS data. For example, our
Retail sample, while small, indicates that leaders in the industry are providing PPL for all
employees. 21

        Earlier, we produced estimates from the NSFG on weeks of paid leave taken by
women by education group. For the college graduate group about eight weeks were taken
and for the non-college graduate group a slightly smaller number of weeks were. As we
pointed out, even though leave length conditional on some paid leave are about the same
by education, the fraction of non-college graduate women who can take paid leave is just
half that for college graduate women.

       The weighted means in Table 1, part A are higher than those in the NSFG, and that is
to be expected given that our firm-level data comes from those that provide paid leave and
boast about it. But the differences are not enormously large--around 54 days for our firms




https://www.cbsnews.com/news/pmorgan-chase-to-pay-5-million-to-male-employees-who-say-
they-were-unfairly-denied-parental-leave/
19 The largest size division we have for the EBS is 500 workers and the median size for the firm-

level sample is 1,000 workers. In addition, the EBS cross-classified data for the large firms is not
available for all industries and all years.
20 Table 1 indicates that firms in Finance & Insurance have only slightly higher (by about two

weeks, employment weighted) PPL, than those in Manufacturing, which would appear different
from the EBS data. The manufacturing firms in the firm-level data are the larger ones (e.g., GM, GE,
Ford, PepsiCo, Boeing, Johnson & Johnson, Eli Lilly, Merck, Abbott). The relationship is attenuated
when the firm's employment is held constant. But the difference between the firm and the EBS data
shows the importance of finding the firms that provide no PPL.
21 It is likely that benefits are provided for those who have some tenure with the firm.




                                                                          Version of: 12/31/19     8
versus around 40 days for new mothers in the NSFG. 22

       Not surprisingly, firms offer fewer days of PPL to fathers than to mothers. The mean
firm, weighted across all industries, in the analysis sample offers 24 fewer days to fathers,
or about five fewer weeks. 23 The difference is consistent with the notion that birth fathers
get baby-bonding time that is often similar to that offered to birth mothers, but mothers
also get five to six short-term disability weeks.

       The firms in our sample have worker benefits that are more generous than those of
the average firm. Firms in our analysis sample have been singled out as being a "good place
to work." Although some are large, there are also many small firms in our sample. In the
analysis sample (for mothers) of 384 firms, the mean number of employees is 5,444 but the
median is 440 and 25% have fewer than 110 employees. 24

       It should be noted that all but small firms in the US are mandated to have a policy
with regard to protected, unpaid family leave since firms with more than 50 employees
(within a 75-mile radius of the company's worksite) are covered by the federal Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA). In the EBS, 88% of all firms have such a policy and 95% of those
with more than 500 employees do. 25

     5. Changes in PPL over Time

       The EBS data show substantial increases in PFL over time for industries that had a
modicum of coverage in 2010, the base year. To explore changes over time by firm, we have
also collected information on leave policies from Working Mother magazine's best
companies from around 2003 to 2017, similar to the years given in the EBS. Only the
largest firms are included by Working Mother in each of the following sectors: Professional
Services, Financial Services (consumer finance, insurance, corporate banking), Biotech,
Manufacturing, Healthcare, and Technology.

       PPL increased in each of these sectors during the 15 or so years. The largest gains
were in Professional Services and Financial Services, but all had gains. We have the most
complete information by firm in Professional Services. Those data reveal a follow-the-


22 We use the analysis sample in part A that does not include the added professional service firms.
The data weighted by the number of employees average 54 days; the unweighted mean is 42 days.
23 Calculated using only firms with positive PPL and averaged by firm across all industries,

including those "not classified."
24 In the expanded sample (for mothers), which by design has larger firms, the mean number of

employees is 21,785 (745 firms) but the median is 1,237 and 25% have fewer than 278 employees.
25 See U.S. Department of Labor (2017) table 32, March 2017. The reason 100% of the larger firms

do not have a policy is because there are many smaller work sites, more than 75 miles apart.


                                                                          Version of: 12/31/19    9
leader strategy where one of the companies increases benefits and then the others follow
within a few years until they all bunch at about the same number.

       For example, in 2003 the big accounting and consulting firms all offered between
two and nine weeks PPL for mothers. PwC and Deloitte were in the lead with nine. But in
2006 BCG led with 12 and in 2015, KPMG was in the lead at 16. By 2017, Deloitte was
leading the pack at 22 weeks of paid leave. Accenture, PwC, KPMG, and McKinsey were all
bunched around 14. They are probably still playing a game of leap-frog, competing for
workers with similar skills in the same markets. 26

B. Why Firms Provide Paid Parental Leave (PPL): A Simple Two-Period Model

       Paid leave is a cost to the firm. Its value to workers depends on age, gender, and
various circumstances. Why are firms in some industries more apt to offer PPL than in
other industries? Why do firms provide paid leave and why have firms increased their PPL
coverage in the past decade? 27

       We develop a two-period model to understand why competitive, profit-maximizing
firms offer PPL. Simply put, a firm will offer PPL if its workers value it sufficiently and if
enough of their workers are bonded to the firm so that they return after taking PPL. The
model's structure is reminiscent of Lazear and Rosen (1990). 28

       The model has two key ingredients for workers. One is firm-specific human capital
investment, i , undertaken in period one (P1) and increasing the worker's wage in the
second period (P2). The second is a stochastic value of time, v, after a worker has a birth,
which occurs with probability p between P1 and P2. The precise value of v is unknown at
the time of the human capital investment but its distribution is known.

       Each of N firms (i) has a unique minimum amount of firm-specific human capital
investment (i) required by each of their employees to be a productive worker in the firm.
All employees of firm i will invest the same i in P1. In addition to paying wages, firms can
offer PPL of some duration covering all employees who have a birth.




26 McKinsey is not listed in GPTW, probably because it does not need to advertise the generosity of
its benefits. The GPTW firms omit several other well-known employers.
27 The question is related to the literature on the provision of employee benefits versus higher

wages (e.g., Eriksson and Kristensen 2014; Oyer 2008). Oyer points out that including
nonpecuniary benefit in the compensation package acts as a sorting mechanism to attract and
retain key employees.
28 The full-blown version is provided in Appendix: Two-Period Model of Paid Parental Leave (PPL).




                                                                          Version of: 12/31/19 10
        Firms have two types of workers, Male (M) and Female (F), who are potentially
perfect substitutes in production. Each worker has a cost of investment effort (),
identically distributed, f (), and known to all. All workers face a probability p of having a
child after P1. In the event of a birth, they will value time at home at v, distributed gm(v) <
gf(v) for all v, known to all. But workers do not know the precise value of v until
experiencing the birth and taking leave in P2. The cost of effort function, f (), and the value
of time, gm,f (v), distributions are orthogonal.

       The key source of gender difference in our model is that women have a higher value
of nonmarket time in expectation. Gender matters because gm < gf . Women will do less
investing because they know that, on average, they are more likely to value home time
more than wage in P2 and exit the firm after leave. Note that some men will also exit at the
end of their leave.

       At the start of P1, men and women sort into firms by their investment effort cost and
by gender. Workers choose whether and how much to invest in firm-specific human capital
leading to proportionally higher earnings in P2. To invest, workers have to forgo earnings
during the investment period (). Because workers have children with probability p, they
will not recoup their investment with certainty. Women know that they stand a higher
probability of exiting the firm after taking PPL and will, therefore, invest less.

        The demand for PPL arises because workers all stand a chance of having a child. In
the model, all workers with a birth (which occurs with probability p) take some duration of
leave from work and then determine how much they value remaining at home beyond their
paid leave. They compare their wage to their value of v to determine whether they will
return to the firm.

       On the supply side, firms will provide PPL if a sufficient number of their workers
returns to the firm after taking PPL. The reason is because the PPL benefit is financed by
lower earnings among those working. Therefore, PPL will be offered if workers engage in a
enough firm-specific human capital investment giving them a high-enough P2 wage.

       Which firms will offer PPL with respect to worker investment and the fraction
female? At one extreme, we assume that firms with workers having zero investment ( = 0)
will not offer PPL since their workers are less likely to return to work at the end of the
unpaid leave and that is especially true of their female workers. If workers do come back to
work, they will not necessarily return to the same firm because they will receive the same
wage wherever they work. At the other extreme, firms with workers having the maximum
investment ( = 1) will offer PPL. The higher the level of investment, the lower the fraction
female. Therefore, there is a tension between the fraction female and the level of PPL and


                                                                       Version of: 12/31/19 11
the relationship can be monotonic or nonmonotonic depending on the parameters.

       If there is no investment, firms will not offer PPL. But at some higher level of
investment, PPL will be positive. Greater investment leads to greater bonding of workers to
the firm. But a greater fraction female leads to a greater willingness to pay for the benefit.

       Note that the mechanism we describe does not involve compensating differentials.
In addition, there is no adverse selection. Men and women in the same firm are offered the
same contracts: they receive the same wage and they are offered the same parental leave.
Men are as likely to have a child as are women, although women have a higher value of
nonmarket time (in expectation). In the real world, workers will probably have a good
sense if and when they would like to take advantage of a PPL benefit. That possibility
heightens the notion that employees with more specific human capital and those at higher
pay grades will be less apt to exit the firm after taking paid leave. It is also a reason why
firms with a low fraction of female employees have more generous PPL offerings. 29

D. Analyzing Firm-level Parental Leave Policies

     1. Implications of the Model

        The central question we have posed is why firms offer paid parental leave. Such
leaves are disproportionately taken by younger employees and by women, yet all
employees in the firm pay for them. 30 The model we developed suggests the characteristics
of firm that would be more likely to provide fully-paid parental leave as an equilibrium
condition.

        A main prediction of the model is that paid leave will be provided by firms if their
workers are effectively "bonded" to the firm because they have invested a sufficient
amount in firm-specific training in the first period. The firms, in the model, are the higher-
wage firms since their workers have more training. Lower-wage firms, with lower levels of
firm-specific investment, would generally not be able to offer PPL because workers would
have less incentive to return to the firm, and even to work more generally, after taking a
parental leave. In addition, the lower the wage, the less able and willing the workers would
be to fund the benefit.




29See Manchester, Leslie, and Park (2008).
30This point can be made for all benefits where there is heterogeneity in use and even in ex ante
probabilities of use, including health care. But PPL is more clearly gender and age specific in its
take-up.


                                                                            Version of: 12/31/19 12
       We also noted a factor going in the opposite direction. Firms with a greater fraction
of female employees will have a larger group of workers who value PPL even if the firm-
specific investment was low. Although firms with a low fraction of female employees will
have lower costs of providing paid leave, firms with a high fraction of females have a larger
group willing to pay for the leave. Similarly, firms with a larger fraction of workers in their
child-bearing years should have the greatest willingness to pay.

        Thus, the relationship between PPL and fraction female is an empirical question.
They may be negatively related or the relationship may take the form of a quadratic. Note,
however, that firms with no firm-specific training, and thus the highest fraction female, will
likely not provide PPL.

       An additional implication of the model is that, because of the insurance nature of the
benefit, larger firms should offer more PPL. 31 In addition, firms that compete in the labor
market (in terms of the model, we mean firms that are close in terms of their minimum
human capital investment requirement), will evolve a "follow the leader" strategy in
providing the benefit. Although we cannot explore this prediction using the GPTW data, the
firm level evidence from Working Mother magazine suggests that firms that hire particular
professionals compete for labor in this manner. It is possible that they are learning about
what benefits are valued by their workers, both male and female.

       We mentioned before that the PPL benefit in our sample is generally for full-time
salaried workers. Most firms in our sample also have a group of also salaried staff who are
covered by the same PPL benefit as are the salaried professionals. But are the admins also
bonded to the firm through investments in specific human capital, as the model would
predict? Some of the admins could have specific human capital related to that of the
professionals. But it is also possible that they receive the same benefit because of
horizontal equity concerns that the professionals essentially pay for.

     2. Analysis of the Firm-Level Data on PPL

          a.   Firms with PPL

       To understand why firms provide PPL, we examine the correlates of fully paid leave
days offered to new parents. We regress the number of days of leave (for mothers and
fathers, separately) on the fraction female (and its square), the (log of) number of
employees, indicators of the workforce's age, and dummies for states with currently active

31The prediction is in line with the empirical literature showing that larger firms generally pay
higher wages and provide more employee benefits (e.g., Brown and Medoff 1989; Dale-Olsen 2006;
Davis and Haltiwanger 1996).


                                                                        Version of: 12/31/19 13
policies and those with active policies in the near future. We also include industry fixed
effects, when relevant.

       We use the GPTW sample and thus are exploring the correlates of days of fully paid
family leave given that firms are providing some PPL. We also take as given that some
states had a paid family and medical leave policy in operation (or were anticipated to pass
one in the near future). We later explore three industries for which we know the full list of
firms and can with some accuracy identify those with no PPL.

       The analysis sample firms in Table 2 (cols. 1, 2) span almost the entire range of
percent female, from 6% to 100% with a mean and a median of 46%. 32 As can be seen in
the regression results in Table 2 (cols. 1), the fraction female is nonlinear in its impact.
Days of paid family leave decrease from around 60 for the highest percentage female to 46
around the mean and then increase to around 60 again, for the lowest fraction female. 33

        Larger firms offer their workers more leave. Because of the insurance aspect of paid
leave benefits, larger firms should be more willing to provide social insurance programs, all
else equal. 34 The size distribution of our analysis sample firms has a long right tail with a
median of 440 but a mean 5,444. Limiting to firms with fewer than 50,000 employees
yields a median of 417 and a mean of 3,241. Increasing firm size by 100 employees would,
according to the estimates in col. (1), increase days of paid leave for mothers by 7 or by
16% of the mean.

       Firms with a larger fraction of their workforce in childbearing age offer more leave.
The coefficients are largest for the fraction in the GenX (born 1965 to 1979) and Millennial
(born 1980 to 2000) groups, that is those who were 17 to 37 years old in 2017. 35 The
omitted group is mainly the Baby Boom generation, born 1946 to 1964.

         Interestingly, the results are similar for men's PPL benefits (col. 2). As mentioned
before, men receive fewer weeks than do birth mothers because of the implicit (or explicit)
short-term disability portion of PPL. The relationship to state laws is a bit more tenuous
and that may be because men take less leave than do women and the issue of "topping off"
is less important for them.

       In sum, the analysis of the GPTW dataset shows that larger firms, those with

32 The median and mean given are for the Table 2, col. (1) firms. Firms with more than 90% female
are mainly in Health and Professional services and they contain both small and large firms (e.g.,
Bright Horizons has many thousands of employees whereas Beyond Blue Consulting is small).
33 These estimates come from using the fact that the regression goes through the means.
34 The rationale is simply the law of large numbers.
35 The age cutoffs are from the Great Place to Work website from which we obtained these data.




                                                                         Version of: 12/31/19 14
workforces disproportionately in the childbearing ages, and firms that have either a high or
a low percentage of female employees offer the most leave. These findings are consistent
with the implications of the model we developed to explain why firms offer PPL at all and
why some offer more than others. 36

       The GPTW data are less clear about the degree to which workers accumulate firm-
specific human capital, a critical part of the model and our understanding why firms
provide PPL. The fact that PPL generosity is highest in the professional, technical, and
finance sectors, is suggestive of that factor. 37

         b.    Law, Accounting, and Finance: Expanding the Sample

        We noted before that because the GPTW dataset contains firms that are the "better
places to work", they have benefit programs almost by definition. To explore a less select
group of firms, we expanded the sample in three sectors for which we could compile a full
listing of the largest firms.

         In the case of law firms, we have used the ALM Intelligence Legal Compass, which
lists information on every law firm. In the case of accounting we have used the list in
Accounting Today and for finance we used a host of lists, since the industry is broad and
encompasses several different sectors from banking to insurance. 38

        Our next challenge was to find the relevant information on benefits for the firms on
these lists. Armed with a fairly complete listing of firms, we then did an intensive search for
benefit programs using company websites, other on-line information and direct contact.
These methods provided us with a reasonably good sense when a PPL benefit exists and
when it does not. We have listed, in Table 3, the distribution of weeks of PPL (for mothers),
including the zeros, for the three industry groups.

       In the law and finance groups about 20% of the firms have no benefits, whereas
about a half of the accountancy firms have none. Law has significant bunching at both 60

36 As we noted previously, we do not have a good sense which firms offer no PPL (or PFL). In doing
a deeper dive into three professional service sectors, we uncovered a number of firms that have no
PPL or PFL. Our analysis suggests that these firms are smaller than the median firm in their
industry. But otherwise we cannot identify any obvious differences between them and other firms
of their size. These firms may soon converge on the PPL and PFL benefits of their closest
competitors in the labor market as has occurred among the larger firms in various industries.
37 Data from the 2004 SIPP indicate that the prevalence of on-the-job training (OJT) is positively

related to firm size, wages, employee educational attainment, and being in a service-providing
(versus goods-producing) sector. The prevalence of OJT is particularly high in finance, real estate,
and insurance (Small Business Administration 2009).
38 For more details, see Appendix: Firm Level Data (Expanded GPTW Dataset).




                                                                           Version of: 12/31/19 15
and 90 days, which is not surprising given that competition for lawyers is regional, if not
national. Finance is less bunched probably because the job categories are broad.
Accountancy has the largest variance in size. Although there is little bunching overall in
PPL levels, there is some for the four largest national accounting firms.

       In all three industries, firms without PPL are those with lower than average
employment levels although the relationship is not always very strong. Some of the
correlation could be because it is harder to obtain reliable data on small firms. But the
smallest of our accountancy firms have around 250 employees and the smallest in the
finance group have around 500 employees. 39 We do not think that we are missing a
publicly stated leave policy because a firm is small, but we are surely missing leaves that
are negotiated separately by individual employees.

        By using the ALM Intelligence Legal Compass we were able to find detailed
information on the employee makeup of law firms including the fraction at different ranks
and the fraction female at each rank. We have included, in Table 2, two columns on the
lawyers (cols. 3 and 4) that report the correlates in a manner that is similar to those for the
larger sample (cols. 1 and 2) drawn from the GPTW dataset.

       The most important correlate for the lawyers is the fraction of the employees who
are associates. These would be the youngest workers and would be the ones the firms
would be trying to attract and keep to determine if they should eventually make partner.
The fraction who are equity partners has a slight negative impact. The other categories are
non-equity partner and an "other" category of lawyers that is a non-ladder group. The
fraction of the group that is female does not matter much. The main factor in analyzing the
law firm data is the fraction in the associate pool. Given the sample size and the bunching at
various levels, we do not think that adding more variables is sensible.

         c.    Relationship between State and Firm PPL and PFL Policies

        Some firms in our sample have headquarters in states that have long had a PFL
policy, such as CA. But some are in states that have only recently passed PFL or passed a
law just after our cutoff year (around 2017). State policies could have been anticipated,
although there have been PFL policies floating around many state legislatures for some
time. Another potential issue is that the location of the home office of a firm may not be the
location of the majority of its employees. It would be very difficult to obtain estimates of



39We mean that in the finance group we encounter somewhat more zeros around 500 employees
but the very smallest of the firms is around 200 employees. Finance also contains mega-firms with
more than 200K employees.


                                                                         Version of: 12/31/19 16
the number of employees in each state.

       The question is whether firms in states with active or anticipated PFL laws by 2017
have more or less generous paid family leave policies. On average, the states with PFL
policies have firms with more generous PPL benefits (see Table 2 cols. 1 and 2). The causal
channel could be that if a firm is on the margin of instituting PFL and PPL benefits, the
implicit subsidy from the state, due to the ability to "top-off" the payment to the worker by
the state, will push them over the edge. 40

       Much of the previous literature on PFL and PPL has examined state policies and
some of that research has analyzed the relationship between state and firm policies.
Appelbaum and Milkman (2011) surveyed firms in CA and found that although workers
registered slim awareness of the state program, employers stood ready to provide this
information when needed. According to the authors, employers with their own PPL receive
an implicit subsidy from the state program and, since these firms tend to employ higher
wage workers, their programs are used to "top-off" the state amount.

        Bana, Bedard, Rossin-Slater, and Stearns (2018; see also Bana, Bedard, and Rossin-
Slater 2018), examine the role of employer characteristics in the take-up of DI and PFL in
CA and find, consistent with Appelbaum and Milkman (2011), that employees in larger and
higher-wage firms have greater take-up of both. Again, a major reason is that employers
with the most generous policies encourage workers to use the state system to reduce the
firm's contribution when they "top-off" the state payout.

       State fixed effects have been added for the states (and DC) that have policies or
passed a relevant law around 2017. 41 CA and NJ laws went into effect in 2004 and 2009
respectively. NY enacted a law in 2016 that became effective in 2018. WA enacted one in
2017 that took effect in 2019. The DC and MA laws were passed in 2017 and 2018
respectively and are not yet operational at the time of this writing. Eligible MA employees
can apply for benefits in 2021 and those in DC can apply in 2020. CT and OR passed laws
that will just begin collecting taxes in January 2022.

      Relative to states with no PFL laws, the aggregated PFL states have firms with more
generous paid leave (Table 2, cols. 1 and 2, given industry, size of firm, and the included
employee characteristics). But the results are mixed at the individual state level. CA and
WA firms offer more generous paid leave benefits, but NJ firms do not. NY firms are more


40 There is another reason for the relationship. States may allow firms to have their own policies

and avoid the tax, as a form of self-insurance. The state of Washington has such a policy termed a
"voluntary plan." See https://esd.wa.gov/paid-family-medical-leave/voluntary
41 There are no firms in the data set with a home office in Rhode Island.




                                                                           Version of: 12/31/19 17
generous than those in the average state, but MA, with the most recently passed law, is not.
The results for the law firms (Table 2, cols. 3 and 4) do not indicate any clear relationship
between the state law of the firm's headquarters and the firm's PPL. 42 Our results are
correlational but cannot be considered causal given our single cross section of data.

E. Fully Paid Personal Time Off (PTO) Days

       Thus far, we have analyzed the provision of fully paid leave to new mothers and
fathers for a birth or adoption. 43 Firms also provide paid leave for other reasons. Almost all
firms provide paid sick and vacation leave to their full-time employees. Some firms
designate paid leave that can be taken for a host of reasons including caregiving to family
members. These are generally called "discretionary leave" or "paid time off" (PTO) days.
Many firms aggregate vacation, sick leave, and discretionary leave into one bundle of PTO
days that can be taken whenever the employees would like and can often be banked.

       Days of "paid time off" are given in Table 4 by the six industry groups used
previously, plus the industries that are not in those six categories. The variance in the
number of PTO days is small and is far less than for parental leave, given in Table 1. The
lower variance is because most firms have paid vacation and sick days and provide, in total,
about four to six weeks of PTO leave. The ordering of the industries is approximately the
same as for maternity leave, but there is only a slight relationship between PTO days and
maternity leave days.

F. Discussion and Conclusions

       This paper has concerned the provision of paid family leave (PFL) and paid parental
leave (PPL) by firms in states that currently have, and do not have, a paid leave policy.

       The first point is that PPL and PFL provided by private-sector firms have been
increasing. Using a cross-tabulated version of the BLS Employment Benefit Survey (EBS)
data, we find that PFL increased from 2010 to 2018 across US firms from 11% to 17% of
the total employment in firms. We have emphasized that the EBS measure includes all
employment in firms that offer some PFL even if all employees are not covered. The EBS
data do not divulge the precise fraction of workers in these firms covered by the policies
and the rate of coverage. We also find, using data compiled from Working Mother magazine,

42 Similarly, studies for the second half of the 1990s do not find a clear cross-country relation
between firm-based extra-statutory maternity leave and the generosity of paid maternity leave
provision (Evans, 2002; OECD, 2001). However, nations with extremely generous paid maternity
leave (e.g., Sweden, Denmark, and Finland) had an extremely low number of workers reporting
additional firm coverage.
43 When a firm distinguishes between birth and adoptive parents, we record data for birth parents.




                                                                         Version of: 12/31/19 18
that PPL increased considerably during the last 15 years for large firms in the professional
service sector. For example, days offered increased in consulting from around seven weeks
in 2003 to 15 weeks in 2017 for the median firm.

       The next point concerns the length of leave. The individual level data from the NSFG
show that among employees who could take paid leave, the mean leave taken is about
eight weeks independent of education level. But the fraction of more-educated women who
are able to take paid leave is considerably greater than for the less-educated. Even for the
more-educated, about 20% did not take any leave (and may have left the workforce at the
time of the birth) and 65% of new mothers took advantage of paid leave. For the less-
educated group, 36% took no leave and just 36% of new mothers could access paid leave
(the equivalence of those numbers is coincidental). Across all new mothers, 42% accessed
some paid leave. The NSFG does not show increased leave during the 2000s decade, but it
seems likely, given the evidence we have presented, that paid leave increased in the next
decade.

       Our firm-level data reveal large differences in paid leave by sector, size of firm, and
fraction female. It appears that firms headquartered states with current paid leave laws
have higher firm-based paid leave levels, which would be consistent with their topping off
the amount given by the state. Although our firms are a special group that are more open
about their leave policies, mean leave levels are not that much above those of workers in
the NSFG.

       The question we pose is why firms provide PPL and which firms do. To understand
the provision of PPL we needed a larger group of identifiable firms that provide fully paid
parental leave for all full-time workers. To accomplish this, we collected our own sample
beginning with data from the aggregator Great Place to Work. The information we have
compiled contains data on PPL and other benefits for 1,135 firms across a wide range of
industries. We added data on employment, composition of the labor force, and geographic
location of the headquarters.

       We have been guided in our thinking by a simple two-period model in which male
and female workers are identical except that female workers have a higher expected
valuation of time outside the labor market after taking parental leave. Workers engage in
training in the first period and reap its rewards in the second period. All workers have
some probability of having a child between period 1 and period 2. Because women have a
higher value of home time, they will engage in less training and will be found in firms that
hire workers with lower human capital. Firms offer PPL when a sufficient number of
workers will return to the labor force in period 2. The model has implications for the
provision of PPL.



                                                                       Version of: 12/31/19 19
        Our firm-level data show that firms that provide PPL are disproportionately those
that hire workers who invest in firm specific human capital generally prior to the birth. The
firms with more generous leave are larger. Their workforces are younger (but not too
young). Our model, and the empirical results, do not tell us what relationship should exist
between PPL and the fraction female. On the one hand, women have greater demand for
PPL. But, on the other, they stand a higher probability of leaving the firm once they take it.
One of our estimations prefers the quadratic form. Firms headquartered in states that
already have PFL, tend to have more generous PPL policies.

        But PPL across the firms in our sample is not very generous relative to that provided
by many social insurance programs in other countries. The mean firm in our analysis
sample (Table 2, col. 1, unweighted) gives 46 days to new moms. Firms in the top quarter
offer at least 60 days or 12 weeks.

       Our analysis sample contains only firms that offer positive amounts PPL. To learn
more about the firms that do not offer PPL, we collected information from sectors for which
we knew the identities of all firms above some size (e.g., accounting, finance, law). The
conditional means in those samples are higher than in the analysis sample for all sectors.
For example, the female lawyers in the median firm that offers some leave are offered 90
days or 16 weeks, and 18.5% of the firms offer no leave.

       The vast majority of firms--88%--that offer PPL to their female employees also
offer PPL to their males employees. The average difference in leave length is 29 days (about
five weeks) or approximately the short-term disability leave allotted to women when they
have a birth. Firms realize that female employees would like the PPL benefit, but that if
firms do not get sufficient buy-in from male workers, they would not be able to afford it.
Therefore, many firms have been trying to encourage men to take PPL. 44 This strategy may
seem counter-productive. But it is not. If males and females both value PPL, then they are
both willing to pay for it in terms of lower earnings. Firms will then be able to hire more
women and be less constrained.

      The business case for offering PPL is that workers value it sufficiently to pay for it
when specific human capital bonds most workers to firms after the leave. A positive feature

44See Wall Street Journal article, "Want Equality: Make New Dads Stay Home" (Sept. 28, 2018),
about a Boston-based company that offers fully-paid parental leave to its male and female
employees who are new parents but also requires that all (male and female) employees take the
leave. "As the co-founder of the company [Ben Waber, Humanyze co-founder] stated: "Bias plays
such a clear role, we decided we are going to say, `It's not an option. You [men] have to take the time
off.' " As the author of the article noted: "After all, if men and women have to take equal leaves,
there's no excuse to penalize either one." See Johnsen, Ku, and Salvanes (2019) for an estimate of
the penalty men sustain who take daddy leave in Sweden.


                                                                            Version of: 12/31/19 20
of firm-provided PPL is that firms benefit from getting buy-in from their male workforce. A
critical negative feature is that lower-income members of the workforce will not be offered
the benefit since they will be insufficiently bonded to the firm. There is a clear role for
policy. State-mandated PFL or PPL fills a gap since more firms hiring low income workers
will not provide it.

        The landscape of PPL is changing rapidly for US firms. As more states are mandating
PFL, firms that would have provided PPL (or PFL) in the absence of state requirements can
top-off the amount given by the state. Male buy-in for state mandates has been meager
because the replacement rate is low and negative future promotion effects may be high. A
potential role exists for firms to top-off state-provided PPL and incentivize their male
workers to support the higher levels of PPL that the firm would like to supply.




                                                                    Version of: 12/31/19 21
                                         References

Applebaum, Eileen, and Ruth Milkman. 2011. "Leaves That Pay: Employer and Worker
   Experiences with Paid Family Leave in California." Washington, D.C.: Center for
   Economic and Policy Research.

Bana, Sarah, Kelly Bedard, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. "Trends and Disparities in Leave
   Use under California's Paid Family Leave Program: New Evidence from Administrative
   Data," American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings (108): 388-91.

Bana, Sarah, Kelly Bedard, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Jenna Stearns. 2018. "Unequal Use of
   Social Insurance Benefits: The Role of Employers." Working Paper (October 6).

Baum, Charles L., and Christopher J. Ruhm. 2016. "The Effects of Paid Family Leave in
   California on Labor Market Outcomes," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
   35(2): 333-56.

Brown, Charles, and James Medoff. 1989. "The Employer Size Wage Effect," Journal of
   Political Economy, 97(5): 1027-59.

Byker, Tanya. 2016. "Paid Parental Leave Laws in the United States: Does Short-Duration
   Leave Affect Women's Labor-Force Attachment?" American Economic Review Papers &
   Proceedings 106(5): 242-46.

Dale-Olsen, Harald. 2006. "Wages, Fringe Benefits and Worker Turnover," Labour
    Economics, 13(1): 87-105

Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. 1996. "Employer Size and the Wage Structure in U.S.
    Manufacturing," Annales d' Economie et de Statistique, (January/July): 323-68.

Eriksson, Tor, and Nicolai Kristensen. 2014. "Wages or Fringes? Some Evidence on Trade-
    Offs and Sorting," Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4): 899-928.

Evans, John M. 2002. "Work/Family Reconciliation, Gender Wage Equity and Occupational
   Segregation: The Role of Firms and Public Policy," Canadian Public Policy, 28: S187-
   S216.

Fishback, Price V., and Shawn E. Kantor. 2000. A Prelude to the Welfare States: The Origins
    of Workers' Compensation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                                                     Version of: 12/31/19 22
Johnsen, Julian, Hyejin Ku, and Kjell Salvanes. 2019. "Competition, Paternity Leave and
    Career Advancement." Paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala. 2016. "Parental Leave Legislation and Women's Work: A Story of
    Unequal Opportunities," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 35(1): 117­44.

Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen. 1990. "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Job
    Ladders," Journal of Labor Economics, 8(1): S106-S123.

Manchester, Colleen F., Lisa M. Leslie, Tae-Youn Park. 2008. "Screening for Commitment:
   The Effect of Maternity Leave Usage on Wages." Working Paper.

OECD (2001), "Balancing Work and Family Life: Helping Parents into Paid Employment,"
   Chapter 5 in OECD Employment Outlook 2001: June, OECD Publishing, Paris.

Oyer, Paul. 2008. "Salary or Benefits," Research in Labor Economics, 28: 429-67.

Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2013. "The Effects of
    California's Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers' Leave-Taking and Subsequent
    Labor Market Outcomes," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 32(2): 224-45.

Small Business Administration. (2009). The Small Business Economy. A Report to the
   President. Washington, DC: US GPO.

Thomas, Mallika. 2019. "The Impact of Mandated Maternity Benefits on the Gender
   Differential in Promotions: Examining the Role of Adverse Selection." Cornell ILR
   working paper. March 6.

U.S. Department of Labor, BLS. 2017. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in
     the United States (March), Bulletin 2787.
     https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2017/ebbl0061.pdf




                                                                    Version of: 12/31/19 23
Figure 1: Fraction of Workers in Firms with Paid Family Leave by Industry



                   Finance & Insurance                            Health Care & Social Assistance
50                                                       50

40                                                       40

30                                                       30

20                                                       20

10                                                       10

 0                                                        0
         2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018         2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                        < 100    >= 100                                      < 100   >= 100


                        Information                                       Manufacturing
 50                                                      50

 40                                                      40

 30                                                      30

 20                                                      20

 10                                                      10

     0                                                    0
          2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018        2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                         < 100   >= 100                                      < 100   >= 100


                Professional and Technical                                  Retail Trade
 50                                                      50

 40                                                      40

 30                                                      30

 20                                                      20

 10                                                      10

     0                                                    0
          2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018        2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                         < 100   >= 100                                      < 100   >= 100




                                                                             Version of: 12/31/19 24
(Figure 1, continued)

Sources: BLS National Compensation Survey-Employee Benefits Survey (EBS).
https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/home.htm The cross tabulations of industry by firm size
were done by researchers at the BLS at the Office of Compensation and Working
Conditions.

Notes: The EBS surveys firms about aspects of their benefit provision. The data are
confidential and information about firm benefits is released in tabular form by industry,
occupation, firm size, wage quantile, region, part-time status, and union status. BLS
researchers created cross-tabulations for us of industry by firm size. The < 100 and  100
worker division provided the most cells that BLS could release. There are no small firms for
colleges and universities. The spike for Retail Trade in 2018 is almost certainly due to
Walmart's provision of paid family leave.




                                                                    Version of: 12/31/19 25
Figure 2: Firm-Level Paid Parental Leave (PPL) and Paid Family Leave (PFL): c. 2017

A. Firm-Level Sample: Distribution of PPL by Weeks for Mothers

 80

 70

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

  0
        Health       Retail                Mfg       Finance & Ins    Information      Prof & Tech

                              < 12 weeks     12 < 18 weeks    18 weeks +



B. Fraction with Any Paid Family Leave: EBS for 2017

 50

 45

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

  5

  0
        Health       Retail                Mfg       Finance & Ins   Information      Prof & Tech

                                            < 100   >= 100




                                                                                    Version of: 12/31/19 26
(Figure 2, continued)

Sources: Expanded GPTW Dataset. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data. See text for EBS sample.

Notes: The firms in part A are in the seven BLS industrial sectors that harmonize with those
in the EBS. There are 686 firms across the seven sectors and 808 in the full sample with
information on paid parental leave for mothers. We use 2017 in the EBS for consistency
with our information for the separate firms. Note that all firms in Part A have some paid
parental leave for mothers.




                                                                    Version of: 12/31/19 27
Table 1: Summary Statistics on Paid Parental Leave (PPL) in Days for Mothers and Fathers
by Industry, c. 2017

A. Analysis Sample, from Table 2, cols. (1) and (2)

                                (1)        (2)         (3)     (4)        (5)         (6)
                                     Days PPL, Mothers              Days PPL, Fathers
 Industry                       Raw       Wted     (# Firms)   Raw       Wted     (# Firms)
 Health Care & Social Assist.   32.9       34.9       (19)      9.1       7.5        (12)
 Retail                         49.6       50.4       (14)     19.5      29.3        (11)
 Manufacturing                  47.0       56.3       (33)     22.3      28.6        (28)
 Finance & Insurance            42.3       62.5       (60)     23.8      34.1        (48)
 Information                    52.9       62.0       (47)     30.2      38.9        (47)
 Professional & Technical       47.6       66.6      (133)     25.0      35.4       (128)
 Industry not categorized       41.9       25.2       (78)     19.1      14.7        (62)
 Sample means                   45.6       53.9                23.5      30.1
 Total number of firms                               (384)                          (336)

B. Expanded GPTW Dataset

                                (1)        (2)         (3)     (4)        (5)         (6)
                                     Days PPL, Mothers              Days PPL, Fathers
 Industry                       Raw       Wted     (# Firms)   Raw       Wted     (# Firms)
 Health Care & Social Assist.   34.3       36.5       (20)     13.0      12.7        (13)
 Retail                         51.6       52.6       (48)     28.8      26.1        (28)
 Manufacturing                  51.4       53.9       (59)     23.2      27.8        (50)
 Finance & Insurance            48.7       62.6      (123)     24.9      33.8        (96)
 Information                    58.2       77.5       (70)     32.4      40.7        (68)
 Professional & Technical       61.6       83.7      (320)     29.1      46.4       (278)
 Industry not categorized       47.6       45.5      (107)     23.7      33.3        (82)
 Sample means                   55.0       68.6                27.3      38.9
 Total number of firms                               (747)                          (615)

Source: Expanded GPTW Dataset. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data.

Notes: The sample in Part A is primarily the GPTW data and includes firms with
information on fraction female and the age distribution of employees. These are the firms
in the Table 2, cols. (1) and (2) regressions. The sample in Part B is the Expanded GPTW
Dataset and includes only firms with positive levels of PPL and non-missing firm size
(number of employees). We give the "raw" numbers, which are unweighted, and those that
weight by the number of employees for comparability with the EBS estimates. The EBS data
implicitly weight.



                                                                     Version of: 12/31/19 28
Table 2: Correlates of Private-Sector Firm Paid Parental Leave (PPL): c. 2017

                      (1)          (2)                                (3)            (4)
                     Sample with PPL > 0                              Sample with PPL  0
 Variables        PPL in Days    PPL in Days   Variables            Lawyers,    Lawyers, Days
                  for Mothers    for Fathers                        Days for     for Fathers
                                                                    Mothers
 Mean of dept                                  Mean of dept
 variable:            45.6          23.5       variable:              66.4          25.0

 % Female           -0.755*       -0.786*
                     (-1.98)       (-2.44)
 % Female2          0.00709      0.00984**
                     (1.90)        (3.09)
 Ln(Employ.)         1.586*       2.035**      # Lawyers            0.00619       0.00648*
                     (2.11)        (3.03)                            (1.43)         (2.04)
 % Millennials       0.370*        0.357*      % Total Assoc.       0.910***       0.477**
                     (2.39)        (2.53)                            (4.31)        (3.09)
 % Gen X'ers         0.359         0.413*      % Tot Equity Part.    -0.519        0.111
                     (1.60)        (2.00)                           (-1.71)        (0.50)
 CA                 13.54**       9.511**      CA                    5.908         -2.410
                     (3.29)        (2.71)                            (0.66)        (-0.37)
 DC                  -1.406        3.731       DC                    25.64*         6.509
                     (-0.10)       (0.34)                            (2.50)        (0.87)
 MA                   0.734        2.034       MA                    10.60         0.0595
                     (0.08)        (0.27)                            (0.89)        (0.01)
 NJ                  -9.205        8.085       NJ                    -19.45        14.91
                     (-0.94)       (1.01)                           (-0.86)        (0.90)
 NY                  9.786*        9.619*      NY                    3.005         -3.005
                     (2.19)        (2.51)                            (0.39)        (-0.53)
 WA                  12.85         9.931       WA                    -8.131        -11.26
                     (1.34)        (1.32)                           (-0.36)        (-0.69)
 Industry f.e.     2-digit SIC   2-digit SIC
 Constant            18.79         -12.64      Constant              30.09*        -3.803
                     (0.98)        (-0.73)                           (2.19)        (-0.38)

 R2 (adjusted)       0.125         0.0981      R2 (adjusted)         0.277         0.0839
 Number of                                     Number of
 observations         384           336        observations           147           147

* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001


                                                                     Version of: 12/31/19 29
Sources: Expanded GPTW Dataset. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data.

Notes: Employment is the number of US employees for the firm with the stated policy. Some
firms may be subsidiaries of others but have different benefits. t-statistics are in parentheses.

Cols. (1) and (2): Firm employment data are from Dun & Bradstreet. Post Millennials are
birth years post-2000s; Millennials are 1980-2000; Gen X'ers are 1965-79. Omitted
generation is those born before 1965, mainly Baby Boomers (1946-1964). Post-millennials
are not listed since they are a small group and the coefficients are small and insignificant.
Only firms with positive benefits are included. Industry fixed effects at the two-digit SIC
level are included. Our results are fairly robust to using the four-digit SIC codes and the
more aggregated NAICS codes.
Cols. (3) and (4): The ALM Intelligence Legal database is the main source that provides
information on the number of lawyers per firm as well as their distribution by sex and level
(e.g., equity partners, associates). Firms with no PPL are included. Approximately 18% of
the law firms in this sample offer no PPL to mothers, which is approximately the same as in
the total sample of law firms (see Table 3). In addition, 28.5% offer no PPL to fathers.




                                                                       Version of: 12/31/19 30
Table 3: Distribution of PPL (for Mothers) in Three Sectors: c. 2017


                       Law                     Accountancy                     Finance
 Days of PPL   Number of % of Firms       Number of % of Firms         Number of % of Firms
 for Mothers     Firms                      Firms                        Firms
 No PPL            32       18.5              49         50.5              35          21.7
 1 to 20           5         2.9              16         16.5              28          17.4
 21 to 30          1         0.6              4           4.1              19          11.8
 31 to 40          4         2.3              12         12.4              13           8.1
 41 to 50          2         1.2              4           4.1              7            4.4
 51 to 60          25       14.5              3           3.1              20          12.4
 61 to 70          1         0.6              3           3.1              9            5.6
 71 to 80          9         5.2              2           2.1              18          11.2
 81 to 90          77       44.5              3           3.1              6            3.7
 91 to 100         13        7.5              0            0               3            1.9
  101+             4         2.3              1           1.0              3            1.9
 Total            173      100.0              97        100.0             161          100.0




Sources: Expanded GPTW Dataset. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data.

Notes: "No PPL" means that no information was found on websites and/or no information
was provided during a call to a member of the HR team. It should be noted that this sample
contains firms that are not in the regression sample in Table 2, cols. (1) and (2) because
information on the other variables was not available.




                                                                       Version of: 12/31/19 31
Table 4: Paid Time Off (PTO) Days by Industry: c. 2017

                                      (1)                    (2)                    (3)
 Industry                        Mean PTO Days       Fraction Firms with     Total Number of
                                                      "Unlimited" PTO             Firms
 Health Care & Social Assist.         19.87                 0.038                   82
 Retail                               20.35                  0.115                  26
 Manufacturing                        24.35                  0.085                  47
 Finance & Insurance                  25.36                  0.110                  82
 Information                          24.94                  0.485                  66
 Professional & Technical             25.45                  0.301                  183
 Industry not categorized             21.80                  0.052                  135
 Total                                                                              621

Source: Expanded GPTW Dataset. See Appendix: Firm-Level Data.

Notes: All the firms in this table are from the GPTW list since only those had information on
fully paid discretionary days off. Col. (1) gives the number of fully-paid PTO days listed by
the firm excluding those listing "unlimited." When firms had a short-term disability policy
with no stated number of weeks, we assumed the firm provided 35 days, or seven weeks,
since that is the average for short-term disability taken for maternity leave. Some firms did
not list a number but stated that they had a policy or that the number of days was
"unlimited." Col. (2) gives the fraction of firms with "unlimited" PTO. Col. (3) gives the total
number of firms in each industry listing a benefit of fully-paid PTO days off.




                                                                       Version of: 12/31/19 32
                                 Appendix: Firm-Level Data

1. GPTW Dataset

        We use multiple sources of both publicly available and proprietary (or subscription-
based) data to collect information on parental leave policies in private US firms. We briefly
describe the process of collecting and verifying data for a sample of 1,135 private firms. See
also Appendix Tables 1 and 2. The main industries covered include (using the NAICS
classifications): health (care & social assistance), retail, manufacturing, finance &
insurance, information, and professional & technical. Firms that are not in these six
industries are classified as "Industry not categorized."

        Multiple websites and magazines report information on the "family friendliness" of
workplaces. The website "Great Place to Work" (GPTW) partners with companies to
document and certify their workplace practices and employee benefits, and maintains a
large, detailed company-level "database" on these certified companies by sector and
geographic area. 45

       We used the GPTW website to obtain: 1) Total days of job protected leave for new
mothers and fathers, 2) Total days of partially- or fully-paid leave for new mothers and
fathers, 3) Total days of paid leave for personal use ("Paid Time Off"), and 4) the
demographic composition of the workforce such as percent female and the age
distribution. 46 To supplement and verify the information from GPTW, we collected similar
data from other on-line sources, including the Working Mother Magazine's Best 100
Companies annual listings and other aggregator websites such as Glassdoor, Indeed, Fairy
God Boss, Law Crossings, and the Paid Leave for the United States (PL+US) campaign. Our
research assistants scoured the web for information and cold-called hundreds of firms.

      When we identified conflicting data for a company, we gave priority to the
information from the firm's website-benefits page. To maintain comparability across firms,
we used the following guidelines.

       First, we focused on explicitly-stated maternity and paternity leaves applicable to
birth mothers and birth fathers respectively. Many firms, especially recently, provide paid




45Great Place to Work website is https://www.greatplacetowork.com/.
46The dataset provides information on the proportion of workers who were born between
1925 and 1945 (Silent Generation), 1946 to 1964 (Baby Boomers), 1965 to 1979 (Gen X), 1980
to 2000 (Millennials), and post-2000 (Post-Millennials).


                                                                     Version of: 12/31/19 33
parental leave that can be used by mothers and fathers alike. In such cases, we assign the
same number of days off to both mothers and fathers.

       Second, some firms offer leaves for "primary caregivers" and "secondary
caregivers." In those cases, we apply primary caregiver leaves to birth mothers and
secondary caregiver leaves to birth fathers. A sex discrimination case against JPMorgan
Chase was recently settled in favor of the plaintiff, a father (argued as a class action case).
This case may alter our interpretation of benefits going forward.

       Third, we do not consider leaves or monetary benefits offered to adoptive parents in
the current analysis, although many provide them. Fourth, many websites note that short-
term disability (STD) leave is available but do not provide further details. Because the usual
amount of STD is 6 to 8 weeks (six for normal delivery and up to eight for delivery by C-
Section), and can be used to fund maternity leave, we added 35 days of leave for birth
mothers in firms that provide the benefit.

        Many firms will require their workers to exhaust other paid leaves, such as vacation
and sick days, before taking parental leave. We do not include vacation or other paid days
off (e.g. sick leave or personal days) in our estimate of maternity and paternity leave. We
include those days under the "Paid Time Off" category. 47

      For each firm in our sample, we obtained data on its NAICS and SIC industry codes
and employment from the Dun and Bradstreet company database, where available.

2. Expanded GPTW Dataset

        Because the information we have collected comes from aggregators that are created
to applaud the family-friendly policies of firms, we also sought to obtain fuller information
for certain industries in which the top 100 to 200 firms by number of employees are clearly
known. We have done that for three major professional fields: accounting, finance, and law.

       To define the "universe" of top firms in these sectors we used the Accounting
Todays' list of the 100 largest accounting firms in 2018, Internet Legal Research Group's
America's Largest 150 Law Firms (as of 2015), and various lists of firms offering specific
types of financial services (including US Federal Reserve's list of large commercial banks,



47 Some firms have replaced separate categories of leave such as vacation and sick days with

an aggregate category called "Paid Time Off," which can be taken whenever employees need to
and can often be banked. We cannot be certain whether the number of days for PTO in our
dataset is inclusive or exclusive of other types of leaves.


                                                                        Version of: 12/31/19 34
Broker-dealer firms based on assets under management, insurance firms, wealth
management firms, and largest banks in the US by assets according to Wikipedia).

       We searched for the parental leave policy for each of these firms by first visiting the
benefits and career page on their websites and noting whether they mentioned having a
parental leave program. If they did, we collected the details of the program. If the firm
mentioned having a paid parental leave program without providing any additional details,
we assumed a provision of 15 days, or 3 weeks, of paid time off for mothers (equal to the
25th percentile of days available for mothers in our dataset). If a firm's website simply
mentioned that it "Complies with FMLA," we coded the firm as having no paid days off for
parental leave.

       Once again, for each firm in our sample, we obtained data on its NAICS and SIC
industry codes and employment from the Dun and Bradstreet company database, where
available.

     Additional details about data construction by sector are provided below. A
summary of the number of firms in each of these areas is given in the following table:

                                                   Number of Firms
 Industry                 GPTW+      Expanded      With Total      With PPL         With %
                                      Sample      Employment     Information        Female
                                                                   > 0; >= 0
 Accountancy                 12         98            93            41; 98            12
 Finance & Insurance         88         162           159          119; 158           81
 Law                         9          177           151          145; 173           140

Notes: GPTW+ is the original sample from GPTW and other sources. Expanded Sample is
described below for each of the three industries but also includes the group in GPTW+.
With Employment means that we have obtained reliable information on the number of
employees. PPL is the existence of information on Paid Parental Leave for mothers; > 0
means that these are the firms that listed positive PPL. With % Female means that the firm
had information on the fraction of its workforce that is female. In the case of Law Firms, the
employees are all lawyers. The number of firms is given with information on each variable.

   a. Law Firms Dataset

       We have used the ALM Intelligence Legal database for information on the total
number of lawyers in each firm, and the numbers in each of the various lawyer categories
(associate, equity partner, non-equity partner, and other lawyer) by gender. We searched
websites and called the law firms to ascertain their level of PPL benefits. We assigned a
zero level to firms whose benefits we could not reasonably find and learn of in other ways.


                                                                      Version of: 12/31/19 35
        We began with the Internet Legal Research Group's America's Largest 350 Law
Firms (as of 2015). We obtained ALM data on 177 firms of which 173 had sufficient
information to determine their PPL policies and 147 had complete information on lawyers
by staff level in the firm.

   b. Accounting Firms Dataset

        Similar to the law firm dataset, we began with a known list of firms and then
searched websites and called firms to learn of their PPL policies. We began with Accounting
Today's list of the 100 largest accounting firms in 2018, and we obtained information on
employment for 97 of them (11 were already in the GPTW data). As, in the case of the law
firms, if no information could be reasonably gathered on their PPL policies, we allocated
the firm a zero.

   c. Financial Firms Dataset

       Financial firms can be of many types and have different functions. These include
commercial banks, investment banks, insurance companies, brokerage firms and non-bank
financial institutions such as credit unions. We assembled lists of each group and then
searched for information on them. We assembled data in 163 firms and were able to assign
PPL levels, including zeros, to 160 of them.




                                                                   Version of: 12/31/19 36
Appendix Table 1: Availability of Data for Birth Mothers and Fathers

         Analysis Sample              Expanded GPTW Sample                    Full Dataset
 Data available on the following   Data found through Google       Data available on at least one of
 variables:                        search to expand coverage of    the following variables:
 · Total days of partially or      firms in Law, Finance &         · Total job guaranteed days
     fully paid days off for       Insurance, and Accounting           off for mothers (1,131 non-
     mothers and fathers (only     industries with available           missing)
                                   information on:
     firms with positive leave                                     · Total days of partially or
                                   · Total days of partially or
     are included)                                                     fully paid days off for
                                       fully paid days off for
 · Employment                                                          mothers (960 non-missing)
                                       mothers and fathers (> 0)
 · Percent female                                                  · Total job guaranteed days
                                   · Employment
 · Age (% workforce in Silent                                          off for fathers (968 non-
                                   · State where the US head
     Generation (born between                                          missing)
                                       office is located
     1925-1945), Baby Boomers                                      · Total days of partially or
     (1946-1964), Gen X (1965-                                         fully paid days off for
     1979), Millennials (1980-                                         fathers (710 non-missing)
     2000), and Post-Millennials
     (2000 onwards)
 · State where the U.S. head
     office is located

       Mothers: 384 firms               Mothers: 747 firms                Total: 1,135 firms
       Fathers: 336 firms               Fathers: 615 firms




                                                                         Version of: 12/31/19 37
Appendix Table 2: Number of Firms in Sample for Birth Mothers (Fathers) by Industry

 Industry                       Analysis Sample   Expanded GPTW         Full Dataset
                                                      Sample
 Health Care & Social Assist.       19 (12)           20 (13)                90

 Retail                             14 (11)            48 (28)               75

 Manufacturing                      33 (28)            59 (50)               73

 Finance & Insurance                59 (48)           123 (96)              162

 Information                        47 (47)            70 (68)               81

 Professional & Technical         133 (128)           320 (278)             447

 Industry not categorized           78 (62)           107 (82)              207

 Total                            384 (336)           747 (615)            1,135




                                                                  Version of: 12/31/19 38
Appendix: Two-Period Model of Paid Parental Leave (PPL)

       We consider a two-period model (Pt, t = 1, 2), where each period is normalized to one.

        A continuum of firms (i = 1, ... , N) exists and each firm has a productivity factor, ( ),
that determines the minimum level of firm-specific investment ( ) required of a worker in firm
i. Firms can operate with workers who exceed the minimum, but not with workers who have less.

       In addition, a continuum of male and female workers, (M, F), exists on the unit interval
each with a baseline productivity of . Men and women sort into firms by their (firm-specific)
investment levels. Investment is determined as follows.

       In P1, each worker chooses whether to invest and, if so, the fraction of the first period to
spend in firm-specific investment, denoted by  . Workers who invest  are paid:

                                          (1 -  )              = 1
                                   = 
                                           + (1 + )            = 2

where r is the rate of return to human capital investment P1. The only pecuniary cost of the
investment is foregone earnings in P1. Workers also face an investment effort cost,  , which is
known and identically distributed across genders according to the cumulative distribution
function, . Workers who do not invest receive a wage  =  in both periods.

       Each male and female worker has a newborn, between P1 and P2 , with probability p, and
each takes a fraction, , of P2 as fully-paid leave, if it is offered by the firm. All workers in firms
without paid leave take a minimum amount of unpaid leave, denoted as , if they have a birth.

       At the end of the leave period, parents choose whether or not to return to work. They do
so only if their P2 wage, 2 (, ), over the remainder of the period, (1 - ), exceeds the value of
time with their child,  , which is a random variable revealed to the worker only after the birth.

       The only difference between men and women is the distribution function of  . That for
men,  (), is stochastically dominated by the distribution for women,  (). That is,  ( ) 
 ( )  , with strict equality over some interval. Women are, ex-ante, willing to pay more than
are men for the paid family leave benefit because they have a higher value of nonmarket time (in
expectation). Note, however, that a worker's investment choice occurs prior to knowing the
value of time with their newborn,  .

       Formally, a worker (M, F) with investment effort cost  chooses firm-specific investment,
, in P1 to maximize:




                                                                            Version of: 12/31/19 39
       ; , , ,  , ,  = 1 ( ) + 2 (, ) -   +

                    (1 - ) 1 - , 2 (, ) |  2 ( , ) - 2 (, )

        The first line of the equation is the (net) return of P1 investment in the absence of P2
children. The second line is the (net) opportunity cost of the investment in P2. That value is the
difference between the gained (conditional) expected utility and the foregone investment income
(in expectation) if, at the end of the leave, the worker exits the firm. The higher the investment,
, and the higher the rate of return, r, the more likely is the worker to return to the firm at the end
of the leave period. This the PPL demand-side of the model.

         The assumption that women have a higher expected value of nonmarket time (   )
implies that, all else being equal, a lower fraction of women will choose a positive investment.
Moreover, at any   the fraction of women whose cost of effort is low enough, according to the
distribution function ( ), is smaller than that of men, since they are less likely to return to the
                                                          
firm if they have a birth. Formally, define F(  ) =  (     ) and M(  ) =  (      
                                                                                  ) as the shares,
respectively, of women and men who invest  , F( < M( The higher the   , the lower the
                                                       )          ).

share of women who will be willing to invest. Ordering the N firms by their required firm-
specific investment and denoting by  the minimum required amount, we also have that (1 ­
F( )) > (1 - M( )). That is, women are more likely to be found in no-investment firms
(those with flat wage profiles). We assume that no-investment firms do not offer paid leave, but
that all of their workers with a birth take  without pay.

        Since there is a continuum of firms ordered by the minimum  requirement, workers sort
into them based on their investment decisions. We assume that employers are subject to
antidiscrimination laws and hire men and women based only on their period one training. There
is no separating equilibrium whereby women would like to enter a firm but are barred.

       Profit maximizing firms effectively "offer" a wage profile over the two periods (which
depends on  and ) and the benefit PPL = , to satisfy workers' incentive compatibility
constraint (that is, the solution from the worker's problem above) subject to a free entry
condition. We assume that all firms offer (or have) the same  and that  is pinned down by the
"zero profit" condition, which means that workers as a group pay for their leave. Formally:

       (1 - )2 (, ) + (1 - ), 2 (, )2 (, ) +  -

                                           
                                                           2 (, ) - (1 -  ) = 0
                              (1-)+(1-)1-, 2 ()




                                                                           Version of: 12/31/19 40
where the first line is expected gain to the firm over the two periods and the second line is
expected cost. This is the PPL supply-side of the model.

        The properties of the reduced form equilibrium condition of our model--the implicit
function ()--depend on two different constraints. First, since workers as a group effectively
pay for their leave, the more workers remain at the firm in P2, the less costly is the benefit to all
workers. This mechanism implies that firms requiring higher  would offer higher . The second
condition is the incentive compatibility constraint. The slope of ( ) resulting from the worker's
first-order condition will depend on the properties of the G distribution function. Using a Pareto
                           1                            
distribution,  ( ) = 1 -  with  > 1 and  ( ) = -1 , the first-order condition becomes:

                                                  -2
                               2      2
                                            1
                 =  -  + (1 - ) (1 + )               =0
                                         + (1 + )

Define the above function as Z(, ). Using the implicit function theorem, by total differentiation
we can show that () = -Z /Z  0 for 1 <   2 and () < 0 for  > 2.

        In the first case, (1 <   2), ( )> 0 for any  , as given in Appendix Figure 1a. The
relationship between  and  is monotonic and  is strictly increasing in . This case occurs
when the expected value of being home is relatively high. In the second case ( > 2), the
equilibrium curve could exhibit a U-shape, as given in Appendix Figure 1b. This case means that
the G distribution is more concentrated around low values of . (The expected value is between 1
and 2.) Therefore, more employees will go back to their firm at the end of their leave.

Appendix Figure 1: PPL, Firm-Specific Investment ( > 0) and Percent Female ()

Panel a:




                                                                           Version of: 12/31/19 41
Panel b:




           Version of: 12/31/19 42
