                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES OF LOSS-FRAMED PERFORMANCE INCENTIVES

                                          Lamar Pierce
                                         Alex Rees-Jones
                                         Charlotte Blank

                                       Working Paper 26619
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26619


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The authors are grateful to Maritz, LLC for making possible the natural field experiment in this
paper, and to Meghan Busse and Florian Zettelmeyer for help with initial design of the
experiment. Pierce and Rees-Jones accepted no compensation from any party for this research.
Blank served as Chief Behavioral Officer of Maritz, LLC during the conduct of this research. For
helpful comments, we thank Greg Besharov, Jon de Quidt, Alex Imas, Ian Larkin, Ted
O'Donoghue, and seminar participants at the AEA annual meetings, Cornell, the University of
Chicago, the University of Maryland, the Society for Judgment and Decision Making Annual
Meeting, and the Institutions and Innovation Conference. The opinions expressed in this paper are
solely the authors', and do not necessarily reflect the views of any individual or institution listed
above, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lamar Pierce, Alex Rees-Jones, and Charlotte Blank. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives
Lamar Pierce, Alex Rees-Jones, and Charlotte Blank
NBER Working Paper No. 26619
January 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. D03,D81,J22,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

Behavioral economists have proposed that incentive contracts result in higher productivity when
bonuses are "loss framed" prepaid then clawed back if targets are unmet. We test this claim in a
large-scale field experiment. Holding financial incentives fixed, we randomized the pre- or post-
payment of sales bonuses at 294 car dealerships. Prepayment was estimated to reduce sales by
5%, generating a revenue loss of $45 million over 4 months. We document, both empirically and
theoretically, that negative effects of loss framing can arise due to an increase in incentives for
"gaming" behaviors. Based on these claims, we reassess the common wisdom regarding the
desirability of loss framing.

Lamar Pierce                                     Charlotte Blank
Olin Business School                             Maritz
Washington University in St Louis                1375 North Highway Drive
One Brookings Drive Box 1133                     Fenton, MO 63026
Saint Louis, MO 63130                            charlotte.blank@maritz.com
pierce@wustl.edu

Alex Rees-Jones
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
Department of Business Economics and Public Policy
3rd Floor, Vance Hall
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
alre@wharton.upenn.edu
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

       Worker incentives commonly feature bonuses for exceeding a production target. Behav-
ioral economists have advised that the benefits of such incentives can be raised by prepaying
the bonus with a threat of clawback if the target is not met.1 If workers are loss averse and
if prepayment makes failure to earn the bonus to be perceived as a loss, then intuitively this
intervention may induce an endowment effect (Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler, 1991) that
makes hitting the target seem more important. Greater effort and productivity could then
arise.
       In this paper, we report the results of a field experiment where a car manufacturer
applied this advice and experienced negative consequences. In this field experiment, random
assignment of the prepayment of bonuses was estimated to cause a substantial reduction in
sales productivity. This finding is surprising when viewed through the lens of the conventional
wisdom on the effects of loss aversion, and when considered in the context of a purely rational
model.2 Empirically, it appears that this negative effect was largely driven by loss framing's
exacerbation of perverse incentives that arise in multitasking environments. Motivated by
these empirical results, we theoretically explore the positive and negative consequences of loss
framing, and establish that an important negative consequence is exacerbation of "gaming"
incentives more broadly.
       This project began when the car manufacturer became aware of the behavioral economics
literature on loss-framed incentives. This literature, and its prescriptions, appeared directly
   1
      This idea and advice was initially presented in Hossain and List (2012). This initial demonstration
motivated follow-up studies in both the lab and the field. Focusing first on the field, Hong, Hossain and List
(2015) deployed several types of loss-framed incentives to teams in an innovation contest, and found mixed
results: loss framing influenced relative, but not absolute, measures of productivity. Fryer Jr et al. (2012)
deployed gain- and loss-framed incentives to teachers, and found some evidence supporting a relative benefit
of loss framing. Brownback and Sadoff (2020) find loss-framed incentives effectively motivated community
college instructors compared to an incentive-free control, but do not compare the efficacy of loss-framed vs.
gain-framed incentives. Lab studies of the impact of loss framing are more numerous, but have more mixed
results, with studies reporting positive, negative, and null findings on productivity (see, e.g., Brooks, Strem-
itzer and Tontrup, 2012; Imas, Sadoff and Samek, 2016; de Quidt et al., 2017; de Quidt, 2017; DellaVigna
and Pope, 2018; Chung and Narayandas, 2017; Ahrens, Bitter and Bosch-Rosa, 2020). Furthermore, the
primary theoretical consideration that has been proposed as an explanation of mixed results--selection--is
not supported in papers devoted to formally testing for it (Imas, Sadoff and Samek, 2016; de Quidt, 2017). In
light of this progress of the literature, we believe there is clear need for the type of empirical and theoretical
examinations that we provide, despite the common perception that the efficacy of loss-framing is a settled
question.
    2
      In a purely rational model, from the perspective of car dealers, the effect of early payment is simply the
provision of additional liquidity. If liquidity constraints do not bind, this should be irrelevant for productivity,
and if liquidity constraints do bind then prepayment could enable productivity-enhancing investment.


                                                         2
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

relevant: the manufacturer provides monthly targets to car dealers to sell two groups of
cars (which we will refer to as model groups ) and pays a large bonus for exceeding each
target. Based on results like those of Hossain and List (2012), the manufacturer believed
that increased dealer effort might be induced by changing their existing post-payment scheme
to a prepaid one. Toward that end, they recruited one of the authors of this paper to help
with implementation.
   Due to concerns about both the efficacy and desirability of loss framing, the author
recommended that this policy be tested in an RCT prior to implementation. While many
"nudge" interventions are extremely low-cost and may therefore be productively adopted
even if their impact is low (Benartzi et al., 2017), this intervention differs: prepayment of
incentives is in effect an interest-free loan, the costs of which are substantial given the scale
of the bonus program. To directly test if the benefits of prepayment merit these costs, 294
car dealerships--with monthly sales of approximately 15,000 vehicles and monthly revenue
of $600 million--had $66 million in bonuses randomized to pre- or post-payment. Except
for the difference in timing, financial incentives were identical across treatment groups.
   In this RCT, the loss-framed prepayment scheme resulted in lower total sales. Our initial
analyses are based on a difference-in-differences design, in which we compare the sales path
of pre- and post-paid dealers in the four months before and after the timing of payments was
randomized. Across the 140 dealerships who faced the prepayment scheme, we estimate a
5% reduction in unit sales, ultimately resulting in over $45m of lost revenue. Applying our
estimates to the entire dealer network, we forecast that the nationwide deployment of this
policy would have resulted in an annual revenue loss of over one billion dollars.
   Our estimates suggest that the negative total-sales effect of prepayment was driven by a
decline in sales in one of the two model groups. This model group had substantially lower ex
ante average sales volume, commensurate with a smaller bonus and thus a smaller potential
loss. Moving forward, we will refer to this model group as the small-bonus model group. The
model group with higher sales volume, which has a larger bonus and thus a larger potential
loss, is estimated to have a near-zero and statistically insignificant change in monthly sales.
Moving forward, we will refer to this model group as the large-bonus model group.
   Of course, average effects can at times mask potentially important heterogeneity. Most


                                               3
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

importantly, the behavioral response to these incentives is naturally predicted to depend
on proximity to the performance target. If loss framing leads a dealer to care more about
exceeding the target, then a dealer who would otherwise fall just short of his target would
be highly motivated to find a way to sell one more car. In contrast, a dealer who would
otherwise substantially over- or under-shoot his target should be minimally influenced by
this intervention.
   To assess these predictions, we present a modification of the standard difference-in-
differences approach that estimates the impact of treatment on a distribution rather than
a mean. This approach, which we call difference-in-kernel-density-differences or DKDD, es-
timates the location of missing or excess mass in a distribution by comparing the pre- and
post-treatment distribution in the treatment group to the pre- and post-treatment distribu-
tion in the control group.
   Applying this technique, we examine the effect of the switch to the prepaid incentives on
the distribution of monthly sales of each model group. Consistent with our earlier estimate
of an average reduction in the small-bonus model group's sales, we find that the distribution
of this model group's sales is generally shifted from higher to lower values. More interest-
ingly, we find that the previously reported null effect on average sales for the large-bonus
model group was masking substantial and statistically detectable changes to the distribution.
Dealers became significantly less likely to end the month with large-bonus model group sales
narrowly below the target. Instead of ending the month having just barely triggered a loss,
some dealers increased their sales over the target. Other dealers decreased their sales, with
some evidence that they attended to selling the small-bonus model group instead. Taken
together, these two groups lead to offsetting average effects, demonstrating why the initial
difference-in-differences estimates yielded a null effect on average large-bonus model group
sales despite statistically detectable changes in their behavior.
   The patterns of results that we document suggest that the negative average effect of
loss framing arose due to multitasking incentives. When multiple dimensions are separately
incentivized, as is the case for our two model groups, agents may benefit by "gaming" the
incentive system by inefficiently neglecting one dimension to attend to another with higher
private returns. This issue is well understood and documented in the economics literature


                                               4
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

(see Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1991, and the many papers that it has motivated). However,
to our knowledge, the manner in which these gaming incentives interact with the loss-framing
interventions suggested by Hossain and List (2012) has not been previously explored.3 These
issues led us to conduct a theoretical reexamination of the predicted role of loss framing.
       To study this issue theoretically, we model a principal incentivizing an agent's acceptance
of private costs of production through bonuses based on ex-post performance, potentially
across multiple measured dimensions. We model agents as having a set of possible production
strategies available, with each strategy characterized by its induced joint distribution of
dimension-specific production and private costs. In this environment, we study how the
desirability of different strategies changes when loss framing is applied.
       In this environment, strategies that are incentivized by loss framing are straightforward
to characterize. Loss framing increases the perceived incentive to avoid strategies that are
high in a particular measure of exposure to loss. This means that, in fully general envi-
ronments, loss-framing does not have an unambiguously signed effect on productivity. If
there are strategies available that reduce this measure of exposure to loss while also de-
creasing expected performance, such strategies have their incentives for pursuit increased.
These strategies include, but are not limited to, standard ways of inefficiently gaming a
multidimensional contract.
       Our model differs from those previously used to study loss-framed incentives in more
ways than just including multiple dimensions. To facilitate comparisons to prior research,
we next reevaluate the nested unidimensional case to see if the prevailing wisdom holds there.
In the most general unidimensional case, we again find that the performance impact of loss
framing remains ambiguous and determined by the measure of exposure to loss. However,
we illustrate a special case of broad relevance in which loss framing can be understood to be
unambiguously helpful: the case where the agent's choice of distributions of output induced
by his strategy can be ordered by first-order stochastic dominance. When this property holds,
loss framing is predicted to weakly increase expected productivity. When this property does
   3
     A partial exception to this claim is Balmaceda (2018), which presents results on multitasking incentives
in the expectations-based reference dependence model of K     oszegi and Rabin (2006). This model features
loss aversion, but does not have scope for a framing effect induced by prepayment because reference points
are endogenously determined by expectations.



                                                     5
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

not hold, effects are ambiguous. The key insight driving this distinction is that loss framing
not only steepens incentives, but also modifies risk tolerance. If actions can be taken that
reduce risk4 at the cost of expected production, loss framing incentivizes such actions. When
outcome distributions are ordered by first-order stochastic dominance, there is no risk-reward
tradeoff and the worry is eliminated. When outcome distributions are not so ordered this
tradeoff becomes important.5
       In both the uni- and multi-dimension cases, a simple intuition drives our results: inducing
loss aversion through loss framing motivates loss avoidance. While this insight borders
on tautology, notice that its different than the typical claim that inducing loss aversion
motivates effort. In cases where agents' only means to protect themselves from losses is
to increase the distribution of productivity (whether through effort or other means), then
loss framing is unambiguously predicted to steepen the incentives to take those actions.
If, however, more elements of the agent's approach (such as risk tolerance or multitasking
strategy) can be modified to influence the probability of losses, then steepening incentives
will also influence those decisions. Gaming of incentive schemes through such modifications is
commonly undesirable from the perspective of a principal, and this influence on incentives to
game ultimately is the negative consequence of loss framed performance incentives. These
findings help explain the rarity of loss-framing and penalty contracts in practice (Baker,
Jensen and Murphy, 1988; Lazear, 1991).
       The remainder of this article proceeds as follows. In section 1 we describe the setting,
design, and results of our field experiment. In section 2 we present a theoretical examination
of the positive and negative consequences of loss-framed incentives. Section 3 concludes, and
the online appendix contains a variety of additional analyses.
   4
    Or, formally, reduce the probability of a loss.
   5
    This explains the discrepancy between our findings and propositions in Imas, Sadoff and Samek (2016)
and de Quidt (2017), who prove that loss framing is predicted to be productivity enhancing (absent selection
concerns). The models considered in these papers involve agents facing unidimensional productivity decisions
that do not involve risk/reward tradeoffs.




                                                     6
                The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

1         An RCT on Loss Framing in Automobile Sales
In this section we present our field experiment. We begin by providing institutional details
necessary for understanding the market, followed by a detailed description of the experi-
ment that was deployed. We then analyze the effect of prepayment on average sales before
proceeding to examine its effect on the distribution of sales.


1.1        Setting

Our empirical setting is the new automobile market--a market governed by extensive con-
tracting between automobile manufacturers and automobile dealers.
        State laws in the United States significantly restrict manufacturers from directly selling
vehicles to consumers, effectively forbidding vertical integration. As a result, manufacturers
sell vehicles to independent dealers, who then sell or lease vehicles to consumers. Dealers are
organized into designated market areas (DMAs) such as St. Louis, Missouri or Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, within which multiple independent dealers typically compete.6 The sales
activity of these dealers is our topic of focus in this paper.
        Independent dealers are operated under franchise agreements that significantly shape the
automobile market. Existing franchise laws restrict a manufacturer's ability to open or close
dealers, heavily limiting manufacturer's ability to control interbrand competition or react to
changes in demand. Such laws also highly limit the ability of manufacturers to treat dealers
differently, limiting the means by which they may present tailored sales incentives through
dealer-specific prices (and more broadly limiting ability to price discriminate).
        Although many of the approximately 17,000 new vehicle dealers in the United States are
now being consolidated by private equity and publicly traded corporations such as Autona-
tion and Lithia, the industry has historically been fragmented for several reasons (Roberts,
2018). First, manufacturers have typically blocked dealer sales that put multiple competing
dealers under common ownership. Second, many franchise laws prohibit owning more than
a certain number of dealerships per state. With the lack of entry and exit and the limits
    6
    See Lafontaine and Scott Morton (2010) or Murry and Schneider (2016) for detailed information on
the history and function of car dealership franchises. Murry (2018) explains why competition among these
dealers leads to underinvestment in advertising.


                                                   7
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

on consolidation, the dealers for any given manufacturer represent a wide mix of ownership
that includes public and private national corporations, private equity, family-owned dealers
and groups, and other independently owned dealers. Across these disparate players, there
are substantially varying managerial approaches and degrees of efficiency.
       As a consequence of this market structure, manufacturers must use somewhat indirect
means to influence dealers' sales incentives. Franchise laws discussed above constrain manu-
facturers to sell vehicles to dealers for a fixed invoice price.7 Dealers then have discretion to
price the vehicles independently before selling to consumers at a negotiated price (Bennett,
2013; Busse and Silva-Risso, 2010). Since manufacturers rarely change published retail and
invoice prices within a given year, other mechanisms are used to affect prices and quanti-
ties within their dealer network. Manufacturers provide cash incentives to both dealers and
customers in order to effectively reduce vehicle price if there is excessive inventory (Busse,
Silva-Risso and Zettelmeyer, 2006). Similarly, they subsidize loans and leases through cap-
tive finance arms (Pierce, 2012). To motivate sales volume, manufacturers typically use
direct incentive programs that reward units sold. These programs are intended to partially
address misaligned incentives for dealers to sell lower volume at higher prices, since the man-
ufacturer benefits from volume but cannot capture value from higher prices in a given year
(Busse, Silva-Risso and Zettelmeyer, 2006).8 These direct incentive programs are the policy
of interest in this paper.
       The car manufacturer that we study has multiple vehicle models sold at over a thousand
dealers across all fifty states. Since our access to data is governed by a non-disclosure
agreement, we will refer to this manufacturer as CarCo.9 Like many manufacturers, CarCo
uses incentive programs for specific vehicle models to motivate sales volume at the majority
of its dealers. The specific program considered in this paper has two separate incentive
schemes, each focused on particular set of models. We refer to these sets of models as the
large-bonus model group and the small-bonus model group, as described in the introduction.
   7
     See Cachon and Olivares (2010) and Olivares and Cachon (2009) for discussions of the challenges of
managing inventory under this system.
   8
     This incentive misalignment is also partially mitigated by the profits from servicing cars they have sold,
which is ultimately influenced by sales volume.
   9
     Our legal agreement allowed CarCo to correct the paper for factual accuracy and anonymity, but we
had full rights to publish regardless of our results and conclusions.



                                                      8
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Both groups are typically, but not always, retailed together at the same dealerships: 88% of
dealers in the 2017 program sold both model groups. Dealers in the focal incentive program
sell over 90% of all vehicles in the two model groups.
       Like most dealer incentive programs, CarCo's program rewards dealers for reaching
monthly goals.10 These quota-based systems are common across industries, with varia-
tion in the number of targets and the time period allowed to reach those targets (Chung,
Narayandas and Chang, 2019; Misra and Nair, 2011; Chung, Steenburgh and Sudhir, 2013).
Dealers receive specific monthly sales goals for each model group based on their average sales
in that calendar month in the previous four years. All vehicles that are sold to consumers
count toward the target, with all vehicles of that model group counting equally.11
       Figure 1 illustrates CarCo's incentive program. Dealers selling below their monthly target
earn no bonus. Dealers selling between 100% and 110% of their monthly target receive $100
for each vehicle sold in that month. Dealers selling 110% or more receive $700 per vehicle for
the large-bonus model group or $800 per vehicle for the small-bonus model group (despite
the per-vehicle bonus being larger in the small-bonus model group, average total bonuses
are indeed smaller due to smaller sales volume). Bonus qualification operates separately for
each model group, such that a dealer could qualify for one or both group-specific bonuses.
Because the per-vehicle bonuses apply to all vehicles from that group sold in that month--
not just marginal vehicles over the target--exceeding the 110% threshold conveys a large
fixed bonus.12 To illustrate, applying the average targets reported in Table 1, selling the
single vehicle on the margin of the 110% threshold would yield $22, 300 or $12, 000 in a
given month in the large-bonus and small-bonus model groups, respectively. For the largest
dealers, this marginal car can be worth over $200, 000.
       Participation in this program is voluntary and requires payment of a fixed monthly fee,
but the vast majority of dealers choose to participate.13 The almost universal participation
  10
     For an illustrative example of how these shape policies and behavior at one dealer (not necessarily a
CarCo franchisee), listen to Episode 513 of This American Life at https://www.thisamericanlife.org/513/129-
cars.
  11
     Historically, certain models have received "double points" toward the target, but this did not happen
during our time period.
  12
     Interviews with dealers consistently indicated that they view the 100% goal as mostly irrelevant, or a
small consolation prize for missing the key 110% level.
  13
     Most non-participants are very small dealers. The program contract operates on an annual basis, such



                                                    9
              The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


                   Figure 1: Dealer Incentive Plan for the Two Model Groups




Notes: This figure shows the bonus structure for both model groups. Each monthly model-group bonus is
earned independently. Targets are set based on the dealer's average sales over the previous four years in
that calendar month, determining the "100%" target indicated in the figure. If sales exceed 110% of that
target, a large fixed bonus is conveyed along with additional marginal incentives. To help illustrate the
typical application of this bonus system, we have plotted this figure applying the the average targets taken
from Table 1.



in this program is largely due to the often intense price competition between dealers in the
same DMA. As one dealer explained, a competitor will price below invoice, hoping to make
all their profit off the monthly incentive program. A non-participating dealer thus cannot
compete on price without losing money.
    Although exogenous variation in demand plays a large role in target achievement, car
dealers have multiple ways in which they can increase sales that can be broadly categorized
as "effort." First, they can increase managerial oversight or incentives for salespeople. Sec-
ond, they can increase their advertising spending. Third, they can price more aggressively,
accepting lower (and often negative) margins to close deals. Fourth, they can work more
aggressively to qualify buyers for financing, which effectively lowers the vehicle price.14
that incentive structure or features cannot be changed within a calendar year. CarCo will occasionally offer
optional features (e.g., model-specific bonuses) within the year that some dealers will choose to accept.
  14
     Note that this final option is not desirable if it exposes a captive lender to undue default risk because of
misrepresentation of creditworthiness, or if it ruins the credit of customers with strong brand loyalty, thereby
barring them from future new car purchases.


                                                       10
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

   Dealers also have several ways in which they can react to monthly sales targets that
involve "gaming" the incentive system (Larkin, 2014; Oyer, 1998; Courty and Marschke,
2004). First, dealers can attempt to move customers across calendar months. If the dealer
is near the crucial 110% threshold, they can attempt to accelerate the purchase decision
of a customer by offering a lower price or prioritizing the paperwork and financing. If a
given sale is irrelevant for target attainment, dealers can attempt to delay its closing until
after the month-end so it helps towards next-month's target attainment. Second, dealers can
potentially influence the types of cars they sell by either directing customers to particular
models or prioritizing customers with a preference for particular models. This may manifest
by dealers attempting to advance a specific model group due to its current incentives. It
may also manifest by dealers attempting to sell specific cars within a model group based
on an assessment of their ease of sale (to earn volume bonuses) versus their mark-up (to
yield direct profits). Although these gaming behaviors might mitigate the risk of missing the
large payoffs from hitting thresholds, they can be costly to the manufacturer due to their
risk of driving customers to other manufacturers' cars. More directly, increased gaming is
undesirable for the manufacturer because it is aimed to increase bonus payments without
necessarily increasing sales volume.


1.2    Experimental Design

The experiment in this paper originated with a CarCo brand manager's interest in using loss
framing to increase the efficacy of their dealer incentive program. Several CarCo executives
had been discussing launching a version of their incentive program in which they manipu-
lated the timing of bonus payments to induce loss framing. Monthly bonus payments had
historically been paid in the month following the incentivized sales, allowing the program
manager time to validate the qualification of each vehicle reported as sold. As an alterna-
tive, CarCo considered giving dealers a large up-front bonus each month, then clawing back
any unearned money at the end of the month. CarCo leaders expected this front-loaded
payment to be both highly appealing and motivational for dealers, who would appreciate
the advanced cash flow and work hard to retain it. The brand managers thus proposed to
change the incentive plan to universally implement advanced payments.

                                             11
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

   The researchers, working in conjunction with the brand managers, proposed an RCT that
would guide whether this modification should be deployed. Control dealers would keep their
existing post-payment system, and treated dealers would change to prepayment. Although
there were reasons to believe loss-framing might improve performance, several considerations
raised doubts. First, the goal of advanced payment is to motivate additional marginal effort
to hit the monthly target. However, given the existing extreme motivations to hit the
target, it was possible that most cost-effective marginal activities were already incentivized.
Second, there were concerns that increased incentive gaming might substitute for effort at
the margin. Incentive gaming is widely recognized as a concern in contracts of this nature
(Oyer, 1998; Steenburgh, 2008; Larkin, 2014; Benson, 2015; Ederer, Holden and Meyer, 2018),
particularly those with non-linear returns to performance. Finally, given the heterogeneity of
organizational forms, management style, and sophistication, it was unclear how many dealers
would respond "behaviorally." If enough firms viewed prepayment as free capital with no
associated motivational effects, and if that free capital did not enable productivity-enhancing
investments, then the loss-framed contracts would be inherently costly to CarCo.
   The initial experimental concept involved the random assignment of all dealers, which
are shown in Figure 2 (the figure excludes Alaska and Hawaii). Randomization would be
conducted by DMA to avoid dealers in direct competition facing different incentive schemes.
Anticipating our use of a difference-in-differences design, we randomized the treatment status
of DMAs in a manner that guarantees similar sales pre-trends. We first calculated DMA-
specific sales trends using logged unit sales data between January, 2014 and February, 2017.
We followed Athey and Imbens (2017) in stratifying by region and DMA size and then using
a bipartite matching procedure to generate the set of matched pairs that minimized the sum
of distances between mate sales trends (Lu et al., 2011). Mates were then randomly assigned
to the two conditions.
   Several aspects of the franchise agreement forced adjustments in the research design.
First, we were required to ensure that each participating dealer received equal treatment.
Consequently, participants were randomly assigned to treatment or control for an initial
four-month treatment window, and then conditions were flipped for a second four-month
treatment window. We believe that the comparison between these two groups in the initial


                                              12
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


                         Figure 2: Block Assignment of Dealers by DMA




Notes: This figure shows all program dealers in the lower 48 states with their block-assigned treatment
group. Clear spaces reflect DMAs without program dealers.



four months provides a clean estimate of treatment effects. In contrast, the comparison
between groups after treatments are flipped may be influenced by their prior experimental
assignment. In the text of this paper, we focus attention on treatment effects estimated in the
initial treatment window, and when we refer to the "treatment" or "control" group we refer to
assignment in that period. Analysis of the second window is relegated to the online appendix
(but provides similar evidence of negative treatment effects when appropriate control groups
are formed).
    Second, CarCo asked us to change the group assignment of two DMAs due to concerns
about competition spreading between contiguous DMAs in the same state. In both cases, we
exchanged the requested DMA with a DMA from the other group that most closely matched
the pre-trends in the region.
    Finally, shortly before implementation, CarCo attorneys determined that the franchise


                                                    13
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

agreement required that any change to the incentive program for a given dealer necessitated
dealer approval. We therefore created an opt-in process after assigning DMAs to condition,
but without revealing that assignment to the dealers. Dealers were initially invited to par-
ticipate via postings on the program tracking website. The postings described the program
and asked them to either opt-in or opt-out of the pilot program. The posting explained
that participating dealers would be randomly assigned to receive prepayment either for four
months starting in May, 2017 or September, 2017. Dealers opting out would would remain
in the existing post-payment system. Multiple reminders were posted before CarCo regional
sales directors attempted to directly contact the dealers in person or by phone. Of the 1,226
dealers in the incentive program, 294 (24%) chose to participate. Additionally, 335 explicitly
opted out of the program, while 597 failed to respond. Extensive analysis of selection into
the study is presented in Appendix A.3.
      The resulting 294 dealers represented 116 DMAs in 47 states. Of the 294 dealers, 140
from 55 DMAs were assigned to the treatment group, while 154 from 61 DMAs were assigned
to the control group.15 All but 29 of these deals sold both model groups: 18 sold only the
large-bonus model group and 11 sold only the small-bonus model group. Collectively, these
dealers represent monthly sales of over 15,000 vehicles and $600 million in revenue.
      The experiment initiated on May 1, 2017, with all treatment group dealers receiving the
bonus that would be earned if their 110% target were achieved. At the end of the month,
total sales for each dealer were calculated to determine the actual earned monthly bonus. If
the dealer sold less than the 110% target for a given model group, the excess prepayment
was debited directly from their account. If the dealer sold strictly more than that target, an
additional payment was made. Despite researcher concerns, no dealer during our study was
unable to repay unearned prepayments due to overspending and insufficient cash-on-hand. In
addition, no dealer asked to be removed from the program, so each dealer fully participated
for the eight-month span.
 15
      See Appendix A.1 for the density of dealers within DMAs across conditions.




                                                    14
                The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


  Figure 3: Pre-treatment Monthly Sales (Relative to Target) by Treatment Assignment




Notes: This figure shows the distribution of monthly sales in the four months prior to the experiment,
expressed as a percentage of the assigned sales target. Model group results are included separately for each
dealer-month. The two vertical lines represent the discrete bonus thresholds at 100% and 110%.



1.3        Response to Pre-treatment Incentives

Before proceeding to analysis of the effects of our program, we document dealers' behavior
in the presence of the baseline, post-paid incentive scheme.
       Figure 3 shows the distribution of monthly sales in the four months prior to the ex-
periment. This figure clearly demonstrates the importance of the 110% target in driving
sales. The incentive contracts shown in Figure 1 feature a large discontinuity in both levels
(a "notch") and slopes (a "kink") occurring at the target, with both features leading to a
prediction of excess mass in the vicinity of the target.16 Such excess mass is starkly visible in
this figure, with substantial asymmetries in mass observed around both the 100% and 110%
target. Note that, in the pre-period data examined in this figure, there is no statistically
  16
       See Kleven (2016) for a thorough review of bunching-based identification strategies.


                                                       15
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

detectable difference in either average sales or in the distribution of sales across treatment
and control groups (T-test: p = 0.487, Kolmogorov-Smirnov: p = 0.176).


1.4       Summary Statistics

We now begin analysis of the sales activities in both the pre-treatment and post-treatment
windows. Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on the monthly number of vehicles sold,
target levels, and the rate of attaining given targets. While our ultimate analyses will be
somewhat more sophisticated than the mere comparisons of means presented in this table,
our results are foreshadowed by such comparisons.
       Turning attention first to the large-bonus model group data for monthly vehicles sold,
we note that the control group saw a modest increase in sales when comparing the pre-
and post- treatment windows (39.19 vs. 41.05, an increase of 1.86). For comparison, the
treatment group saw effectively the same increase (29.52 vs. 31.41, an increase of 1.89;
difference-in-differences: 0.03). An analogous comparison of the rate of achieving the 110%
target suggests that treatment increases the chance of earning the large fixed component of
the bonus by 1 percentage point.17 In short, simple comparisons of means suggest that the
treatment was associated with quite modest increases in the large-bonus model group's sales
and bonus-condition attainment.
       Turning attention next to the small-bonus model group data for monthly vehicles sold,
we note that the control group again saw a modest increase in sales when comparing the
pre- and post- treatment windows (17.22 vs. 18.80, an increase of 1.58). For comparison,
the treatment group saw a decrease in sales (15.14 vs. 14.16, a decrease of 0.98; difference-
in-differences: -2.56). An analogous comparison of the rate of achieving the 110% target
suggests that treatment decreases the chance of earning the large fixed component of the
bonus by 8 percentage points.18 In short, a simple comparison of means suggests a com-
paratively large negative effect of loss framing for the small-bonus model group's sales and
bonus-condition attainment.
  17
     Control: 0.64 vs. 0.50, a decrease of 0.14. Treatment: 0.56 vs. 0.43, a decrease of 0.13. Difference-in-
differences: 0.01.
  18
     Control: 0.64 vs. 0.48, a decrease of 0.12. Treatment: 0.64 vs. 0.44, a decrease of 0.20. Difference-in-
differences: -0.08.


                                                     16
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives




                               Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                 LARGE-BONUS MODEL GROUP
                 Treatment Group           Control Group   By Participation Status
              Pre       Post       Total       Pre       Post      Total       In         Out        All
Vehicles     29.52      31.41      30.46      39.19      41.05     40.12      35.45      27.26      29.25
  Sold      (21.44)    (23.72)    (22.61)    (52.55)    (52.13)   (52.33)    (41.02)    (29.18)    (32.65)

Target       26.98      32.15      29.57      31.38      38.59     34.98      32.36      27.26      28.50
  Sales     (19.36)    (22.03)    (20.89)    (33.30)    (41.69)   (37.88)    (30.96)    (24.65)    (26.41)

Hit 110%      0.56       0.43       0.50       0.64      0.50       0.57       0.54       0.46       0.48
  Target     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.48)    (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)

Hit 100%      0.62       0.48  0.55   0.69    0.55     0.62 0.59     0.53      0.54
  Target     (0.49)     (0.50)(0.50) (0.46) (0.50) (0.49) (0.49) (0.50) (0.50)
                                  SMALL-BONUS MODEL GROUP
                 Treatment Group          Control Group     By Participation Status
              Pre       Post       Total       Pre       Post      Total       In         Out        All
Vehicles     15.14      14.16      14.65      17.22      18.80     18.01      16.37      11.07      12.35
  Sold      (14.07)    (13.47)    (13.78)    (20.64)    (25.19)   (23.03)    (19.16)    (11.68)    (14.04)

Target       12.39      14.69      13.54      13.81      16.86     15.34      14.46      10.88      11.74
  Sales      (9.91)    (11.92)    (11.02)    (13.37)    (17.00)   (15.36)    (13.45)     (9.90)    (10.96)

Hit 110%      0.64       0.44       0.54       0.64      0.48       0.56       0.55       0.48       0.50
  Target     (0.48)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.48)    (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)

Hit 100%      0.70       0.50       0.60       0.70      0.53       0.62       0.61       0.56       0.57
  Target     (0.46)     (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.46)    (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.49)     (0.50)     (0.49)

Notes: Summary statistics of monthly sales performance by model group, treatment, and participation
status. Means and standard deviations presented in all cells. The first two rows present monthly sales and
monthly target thresholds. The rows below summarize the probability of hitting earning the larger fixed
bonus for exceeding the 110% threshold, the smaller fixed bonus for exceeding the standard target
threshold. The seemingly identical pre-period Model Group B percentages for the two participant groups is
due to rounding, and they are slightly different at the third decimal point.




                                                   17
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


             Figure 4: Histogram of Monthly Car Sales by Treatment Assignment




Notes: This figure shows histogram of average monthly sales (summing across both model groups) in the
four-months prior to the experiment. Five of the six largest dealers are in one DMA (and thus are
block-assigned). This block assignment accounts for the unbalanced right-tail of control group observations.



    Examination of this table also illustrates two key issues that will need to be accommo-
dated in formal analysis.
    First, even prior to treatment, the means of key variables (e.g., sales) are significantly
different between the treatment and control groups. These differences may generate some
concern about systematic problems with random assignment, but they can be attributed
entirely to the presence of a small number of influential outliers in the control group. Five
of the six largest dealers, who sell over five times the monthly volume of the average dealer,
are in one DMA and thus block-assigned. The exclusion of this one DMA renders the two
groups statistically indistinguishable in pre-period monthly sales. The largest dealer, which
has ten times monthly sales of the average dealer, was by chance also assigned to the control

                                                    18
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

group. Figure 4 shows the distribution of average dealer monthly sales in the window prior
to experimental intervention, illustrating broadly similar distributions with the exception
of these outliers. These issues motivate our inclusion of dealer fixed effects in some of our
analyses, and lead us to conduct robustness analyses in Section A.4 to confirm that our main
results persist with these outliers excluded.
   Second, sales and target attainment show clear trends in the control group. This non-
stationarity is expected due to the significant seasonality in automobile sales, and illustrates
the importance of our difference-in-differences design.


1.5    Impact of Loss Framing on Average Sales

In this section we examine the average effect of loss framing during the first four months of
the experiment, when the 140 treatment group dealers received the prepayment treatment
while 154 control group dealers retained the pre-existing post-payment scheme. To do so,
we present OLS regressions of units sold on dummy variables for the treatment group, the
treatment period, the interaction, and potentially additional controls. All standard errors
are clustered at the DMA level.
   Table 2 presents results for the change in total sales. Columns 1­3 present results for
total sales across both model groups. The first column includes no controls. The second
column incorporates month dummies to control for flexible time trends, which absorbs the
post-treatment variable. The third column incorporates dealer fixed effects, which absorbs
treatment group. Columns 4­6 and 7­9 present these same regressions restricted to the
large-bonus and small-bonus model groups, respectively.
   The average treatment effect in columns 1­3 implies that 2.3 fewer cars were sold per
month under loss framing relative to the control group--a 5% decrease in total unit sales
relative to the pre-treatment monthly average of 48.5. Note that, due to the comparatively
few clusters in our analysis arising from DMA-level block assignment, these estimates are not
extremely precise. Despite this imprecision, the null hypothesis of no effect can be rejected
at reasonable (but not conservative) -levels (p-values range from 0.06 to 0.08).
   To help assess the parallel-trend assumptions that are central to difference in differences



                                                19
                              Table 2: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Treatment Effect on Sales
                                                    (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)    (5)      (6)      (7)                            (8)       (9)
            Treatment Period X Assigned Prepay      -2.3     -2.3     -2.3     0.0    0.0      0.0     -2.6                            -2.6      -2.6
                                                   (1.25) (1.25) (1.33) (0.90) (0.90) (0.96) (1.31)                                   (1.31)    (1.40)

            Treatment Period                                   3.2                              1.9                           1.6
                                                             (0.96)                           (0.72)                        (1.23)

            Assigned Prepay                                   -9.6       -9.6                  -9.7      -9.7                -2.1      -2.1
                                                             (9.38)     (9.40)                (6.54)    (6.55)              (3.61)    (3.62)




20
            Constant                                          53.0   45.5           40.9   39.2          34.6      29.9      17.2      13.9      12.9
                                                             (8.42) (8.84)         (1.02) (5.97)        (6.47)    (1.14)    (3.11)    (2.99)    (0.63)
            Model Group                                      Pooled Pooled         Pooled L-B            L-B       L-B       S-B       S-B       S-B
            Month Fixed Effects                                       X               X                   X         X                   X         X
            Dealer Fixed Effects                                                      X                             X                             X
            Observations                                      2352       2352       2352   2264         2264       2264     2216      2216       2216
            R2                                                0.010      0.015      0.961 0.014         0.019     0.956     0.009     0.017     0.912

     Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the prepayment intervention on total vehicles sold. The dependent variable
     is the month-specific number of vehicles sold at the dealer level. The first three columns present analysis pooling the two model groups together,
     whereas the next two groups of three columns present analysis of large-bonus model group (L-B) or small-bonus model group (S-B), respectively.
     Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                                                                                                                                                                  The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives
                The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


                Figure 5: Monthly Trends in Sold Vehicles for Participating Dealers




Notes: This figure shows average total dealer sales by month for both dealer groups. The vertical line marks
the first month of the treatment period. Horizontal dashed lines represent the average monthly sales across
each four month period. Note that the period specific averages do not equal the sum of model-specific
averages in Table 1 because some dealers only carry one model-group. For additional variants of this figure,
including model-group-specific figures and analogous figures for non-participants, see Appendix A.2.



designs, Figure 5 shows time-paths of sales over the first eight months of 2017.19 This
window includes the four-month pre-treatment window and the four months during which
the treatment group was prepaid.
       Several patterns are evident from this figure. First, the observable pretrends in both
groups are encouragingly similar. Second, the estimated treatment effect is evident in the
larger gap between groups in months 5-8. We believe this figure provides some reassurance
that our attempt to match pre-trends with our randomization procedure was successful, and
some initial assurance that the treatment effects we study are clearly apparent in minimally
  19
       Similar figures by model group and by participation status are presented in Appendix A.2.



                                                      21
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

processed data.
   We next examine the differential effect this policy had on the two model groups under
consideration. Note that in columns 4­6 of Table 2, we find no effect of the policy on sales
for the large-bonus model group. Estimates suggest an impact of 0.03 car sales per month,
with this effect being statistically indistinguishable from zero. In contrast, the estimated
treatment effect for the small-bonus model group is -2.6 cars sold per month--a reduction
of 17% relative to the pre-treatment average (p-values range from 0.05 to 0.07).
   These findings provide support for the concern that cross-dimension gaming might con-
tribute to a negative impact of loss framing. In our data, the overall negative effect on joint
sales is driven by a large reduction in small-bonus model group sales, with a small (and not
meaningfully offsetting) gain in large-bonus model group sales. This pattern will be more
fully explored in the following section.


1.6     The Impact of Loss Framing on Distribution of Sales

Having established that loss framing was associated with an average decline in overall sales,
we now turn to assessing how this intervention affected each model group's distribution of
sales. Examination of the changes in these distributions sheds light on how dealers change
their behavior in the presence of loss framing.


1.6.1   Difference in Kernel Density Differences Estimation (DKDD)

In order to infer the patterns of excess and missing mass induced by loss framing, we develop
a methodology for density estimation closely related to standard difference-in-differences ap-
proaches. Conceptually, this approach may be thought of in two steps: (1) estimating the
evolution of the distribution of final sales between the pre-period and the treatment window,
and (2) estimating the difference in such evolutions between the treatment and control group.
Under a generalization of the typical parallel-trend assumption--now requiring parallel evo-
lution of full distributions rather than means--this provides an estimate of the causal impact
of treatment on the distribution of final sales achieved.
                                                             (g,t)
   Formally, consider a univariate, independent sample {xn }nN . In this notation, sub-



                                              22
              The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

script n denotes the observation (out of a total set of N ), the superscript g denotes two
groups, and the superscript t denotes two time periods. This variable is distributed ac-
cording to group-and-time-specific unknown densities f (g,t) . Let the group-and-time-specific
number of observations be denoted by N (g,t) .
   In the absence of group-specific intervention, densities are assumed to evolve in a manner
that satisfies the assumption f (g,2) - f (g,1) = f  for all groups g . f  thus denotes the manner
in which mass is shifted in the density function over time. However, if treatment is applied
to one group (denoted T, with the other denoted C for control), the distribution that arises
is represented as f (T,2) = f (T,1) + f  + f T . The term f T denotes an additional redistribution
of mass induced by the treatment, and estimation of this term is the goal of this exercise.
   Given these assumptions, a close analog to the common difference-in-differences estimator
for means immediately arises:


                            f T = (f (T,2) - f (T,1) ) - (f (C,2) - f (C,1) ).                        (1)


   Conceptually, we may examine the impact of treatment by examining how the distribu-
tion in the treatment group changed over time, differencing out the changes that may be
attributable to the mere passage of time as inferred by the changes occurring in the control
group.
   Our formal estimate of f T arises through the application of the analog principle (Gold-
berger, 1968; Manski, 1986), substituting finite-sample estimates of these densities for the
population densities themselves. Given a Kernel function K and a bandwidth h, define the
                                                                           (g,t)
                               ^(g,t) (x) =                N (g,t)
kernel density estimator to be f                    1
                                                 N (g,t)   i=1       K ( x-x
                                                                           h
                                                                            n
                                                                              ). Given these definitions,
the Difference in Kernel Density Differences (DKDD) estimator of f T , evaluated at point x,
is given by


                              ^(T,2) (x) - f
                    ^T (x) = (f
                    f                      ^(T,1) (x)) - (f
                                                          ^(C,2) (x) - f
                                                                       ^(C,1) (x)).                   (2)
                      h         h            h              h            h



   The consistency of equation 2 as an estimator for f T follows immediately from the well-
known consistency of the individual Kernel estimators, combined with Slutsky's theorem.
   In the next section, we apply this method to infer f T as induced by loss framing. When-

                                                   23
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

ever presented, confidence intervals will be generated through a bootstrap procedure, recal-
         ^(g,t) (x) from 1,000 simulated samples generated by sampling by DMA cluster (with
culating f
replacement).


1.6.2      DKDD Estimates of the Distributional Impact of Loss Framing

Figure 6 presents our estimates of the treatment effect of loss framing on the distribution
of final sales achieved. These figures illustrate how mass was redistributed relative to the
threshold necessary that would avoid bonus clawback.20
       The first panel of the first column presents the DKDD estimate for the small-bonus
model group. Results are clearly in line with the earlier estimate of a negative impact of
loss framing on average sales. Two patterns are particularly notable. First, mass shifts from
comparatively high to comparatively low sales amounts, increasing the probability of having
final sales amounts in the range that triggers clawback. Second, there is a decline in the
probability that dealers chose to continue pursuing sales after passing the threshold to avoid
clawback.
       The second panel of the first column presents results for the large-bonus model group.
Recall that we reported a null effect of loss framing on average sales for this model group. In
this figure, we see that the previous null finding was masking statistically significant effects
across the distribution of sales. Most notably, there is a large decline in the probability the
dealers ended the month in the region just under the clawback threshold. The redistribution
of mass indicates that dealers who would otherwise have just triggered a clawback changed
their behavior in one of two ways. Some dealers proceeded in a manner that resulted in more
cars being sold, resulting in the observed excess mass of sales amounts just over the bonus
threshold. This is consistent with these dealers directing more attention, effort, or resources
to these sales to avoid trigger the loss of the large bonus. However, some dealers proceeded
in a manner that resulted in fewer cars being sold, resulting in the observed excess mass of
sales amounts substantially below the bonus threshold. In this figure, these two groups are
approximately equally sized, demonstrating why they average to a null effect when combined
  20
    To avoid confusion, we emphasize that the prepaid bonus was associated a target determined by hitting
110% of their past-average monthly sales, but the x-axis in this figure is scaled to this target threshold: i.e.,
the clawback threshold in the figure is denote 100%, not 110%.


                                                       24
                                           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


                                            Figure 6: The Impact of Loss Framing on the Distribution of Sales

                                        Small-Bonus Model Group (SB)                       SB Conditional on High LB Sales
   DKDD Estimate of Effect on Density




                                                                                   DKDD Estimate of Effect on Density
                                   .4




                                                                                                            .2     .4
                           .2




                                                                                                   0
                  0




                                                                                          -.2
         -.2




                                                                                    -.4
   -.4




                                        0%      100%      200%     300%     400%                                         0%      100%      200%     300%     400%
                                        Cars Sold Relative to Clawback Threshold                                         Cars Sold Relative to Clawback Threshold


                                        Large-Bonus Model Group (LB)                                              SB Conditional on Low LB Sales
                                                                                                                   1.5
   DKDD Estimate of Effect on Density




                                                                                    DKDD Estimate of Effect on Density
                                   .4




                                                                                                               1
                            .2




                                                                                                         .5
                    0




                                                                                   -1.5 -1 -.5     0
     -.4    -.2




                                        0%      100%      200%     300%     400%                                         0%      100%      200%     300%     400%
                                        Cars Sold Relative to Clawback Threshold                                         Cars Sold Relative to Clawback Threshold




Notes: This figure shows difference-in-kernel-density-differences estimates of the impact of loss framing on
the distribution of sales achieved. The x-axes show the amount of sales relative to clawback threshold. The
first column contains estimates derived from each model group. The second column contains estimates
derived from the small-bonus model group, conditioning on whether that months sales of the large-bonus
model group were comparatively high (over 50% of the clawback threshold) or low (under 50% of the
clawback threshold). Standard errors are generated by conducting 1,000 bootstrap iterations, resampling
by DMA. Kernel: Epanechnikov; Bandwidth: 10%.




                                                                               25
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

in the earlier difference-in-differences analysis.
   What can explain the behavior of dealers who sold fewer large-bonus model group vehi-
cles? One natural explanation involves to redeployment of attention, effort, or resources to
the sales of the other model group once it becomes clear that the large-bonus model group's
bonus will be clawed back. This possibility is supported in the second column of Figure
6. This column reproduces the analysis of the impact of loss framing on small-bonus model
group sales, but conditions on high- or low- amounts of large-bonus model group sales. When
large-bonus model group sales were comparatively high (defined as over 50% of the amount
needed to avoid clawback), this analysis suggests that loss framing led to a shift of the dis-
tribution to lower values. This is consistent with the unconditional results discussed above.
In contrast, when large-bonus model group sales were comparatively low, this analysis looks
quite different: dealers were less likely to end the month with small-bonus model group sales
well below the threshold, and more likely to end the month with small-bonus model group
sales over the threshold.


1.7    Summary and Interpretation of Empirical Results

Taking stock, we have shown that the overall effect of introducing loss framing was a re-
duction of average monthly sales. This negative effect was driven by a reduction of average
sales for the small-bonus model group, whereas no effect was detected for the large-bonus
model group. However, examining the manner in which distributions of sales changed, we
observe that dealers facing loss framing were significantly less likely to end the month hav-
ing narrowly missed avoiding clawback of the bonus for the large-bonus model group. Some
of these dealers are estimated to have instead sold more vehicles from this model group,
consistent with increasing or diverting effort and resources towards this model group's sale.
Other dealers are estimated to have sold fewer vehicles from this model group, and when
this occurs it is has positive sales consequences for the other (small-bonus) model group.
   These results suggest that a primary consequence of loss framing was a rebalancing of
effort and resources across the two model groups. On average, the model group with the
smaller potential loss was neglected, potentially due to effort or resources being directed to
help avoid the larger potential loss, and with this pattern reversing when the large potential

                                                26
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

loss is unavoidable. In Section 2, we present and analyze a model that illustrates this
possibility.


1.8     Robustness Considerations and Additional Results

In the Appendix, we assess a variety of robustness considerations and present additional
supporting results. These include the assessment of the correlates of opting-in to the exper-
iment (see Appendix A.3); the demonstration that our primary estimates are robust to the
exclusion of the influential outliers documented in Figure 4 (see Appendix A.4); examination
of the estimated treatment effects in the second treatment window (see Appendix A.5); a
summary of results from post-experiment interviews and surveys (see Appendix A.6); and
an assessment of the timing of sales (see Appendix A.7). Ultimately, none of these analyses
contradict the summary of results presented above, but at times they offer additional context
and illustration of underlying dealer behavior.



2     A Theoretical Examination of Loss Framing
In this section we present a model that clarifies how inducing loss-averse evaluation of in-
centives through loss framing can help or hinder productivity.
    In our model, an agent sells items on behalf of a principal. The principal benefits from
the agent's sales, and the agent faces private costs (or benefits) from sales activities. To
mitigate the divergence in incentives, and in particular the incentive to under-invest in sales
activities due to private costs, the principal has provided the agent with a bonus contract
that yields direct payments for the amount of sales completed. There are potentially multiple
dimensions of sales activity, each with its own incentive contract.
    Using this model, we consider the wisdom of applying loss framing, which we assume
operates by inducing loss aversion relative to a target level of sales. We characterize suf-
ficient conditions for cases in which alternative sales approaches will be made desirable as
compared to the choice made in the absence of loss aversion. As we will illustrate, the al-
ternative strategies that are incentivized can reduce expected sales under relatively common
conditions.

                                              27
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

   While we use the terminology of "sales" to be explicit about the link to worker activities
in the empirical section of our paper, note that this labeling is in no way essential. This
theory can be understood to apply to broad notions of (observable) performance that a
principal aims to motivate among his workers.


2.1    Seller's Decision Problem

The agent, or seller, has a window of time over which outcomes are evaluated (e.g., one
month). During this window, the seller completes sd sales and incurs cd in private costs of
sales activity for each dimension d  D. Let s and c denote the vectors of these values across
all dimensions.
   When assessing each dimension of sales activity, the seller's ex-post utility is determined
by ud (d (sd ), cd ), where d (sd ) denotes the payment received for completing sd sales and cd
denotes the net private costs that the seller incurs in the sales process. The incentive scheme
d (sd ) is meant to promote the pursuit of sales, so d (sd    d d        d    d
                                                         1 )   (s2 ) if s1 > s2 . Utility is

assumed to be increasing in payments (d (sd )) and decreasing in costs (cd ).
   Over the window of time considered, the seller faces a long sequence of individual decisions
of how to manage the sales process. The seller's decision is the choice of a selling strategy,
which constitutes a complete contingent management plan over the window in question.
Denote an individual selling strategy as  , and the (finite) set of possible selling strategies as
. The decision-relevant consequences of the choice of a selling strategy is the determination
of the joint distribution of sales (s) and private costs (c). Denote this joint distribution by
f (s, c| ), and marginal distributions by, e.g., f (s| ).
   The seller's decision problem is therefore to choose    to maximize expected utility,
given by E[U | ] =    U (s, c) df (s, c| ), where U (s, c) =   dD   ud (d (sd ), cd ).


2.2    Introducing Loss Framing

The principal considers a modification to the incentive contract that introduces loss fram-
ing (e.g., through a clawback scheme). We assume that the consequence of introducing
loss framing is to induce loss aversion relative to a dimension-specific target level of sales


                                                28
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

(Rd ). If loss aversion is induced, the seller's utility function is modified to be U  (s, c) =

   dD     ud (d (sd ), cd , z d ) - (d (Rd ) - d (sd )) · I ((sd ) < (Rd )). I denotes the indicator
function, taking a value of 1 if the statement in parentheses is true and 0 otherwise. In this
utility specification, for cases when the target is exceeded--a gain--utility is identical to the
prior formulation, but for cases when the target is not met--a loss--an additional cost pro-
portional to the lost incentive is imposed. The magnitude of this additional cost is governed
by the excess weight placed on losses,   R+ . This specification arises from the movement
of reference points from 0 to Rd under the assumption of piecewise-linear gain/loss utility.21
       In order to assess the impact of loss framing, we will consider how its introduction
influences choices between two selling strategies. Before presenting our result, we begin with
a simple example that helps illustrate the potential for negative consequences.


2.2.1      Example 1: Reducing Sales to Avoid a Loss

In this example, consider a seller who sells two types of goods, referred to as good 1 and
good 2. Both goods are subject to the same incentive contract, (s) = s, and the same
dimension-specific utility function u((sd ), cd ) = (sd ) - cd . Throughout this example, we
will assume there are no private costs of sales: c = 0 for all dimensions and in all strategies.
       In this example, the seller has two potential selling strategies. Strategy 1 yields 10 sales
of each good. Strategy 2 yields 9 sales for good 1 and 12 sales for good 2.
  21                                                                  d d d
    Formally, assume dimension-specific utility is governed by f1       ( (s ), cd ) + f2 d d d
                                                                                           ( (s ) - d (Rd )), with
 d d d
f2 ( (s )      d     d         d d      d   d                  d d
           -  (R )) = ( (s ) -  (R )) + ( - 1) · ( (s ) -  (R )) · I ( (s ) < d (Rd )). This model
                                                                        d   d        d d
                                                           d                                                      d
includes arbitrary "standard" utility represented by f1      , augmented with the additional consideration of f2
allowing for a piece-wise linear version of prospect theory. In this formulation, the coefficient of loss aversion
is  and the decision-weight placed on prospect theory is  . Translating this model into the version in text,
define ud (d (sd ), cd ) to incorporate both standard utility as well as utility derived from gains/loss evaluation
                                           d d d
without excess weighting of losses: f1      ( (s ), cd ) +  (d (sd ) - d (Rd )). Defining  =  · ( - 1), the
equivalence of the models then follows. Note that in this formulation, we have assumed that gains and losses
are evaluated with respect to the difference in payments relative to reference level. Some applications of
prospect theory would instead assume that gains and losses are evaluated with respect to the utility difference
relative to the reference level. In practice, this assumption will matter little for our results: conceptually
similar results can be generated under the alternate assumption. An advantage of the current approach is
that, by assuming that the magnitude of loss is influenced by lost payments as opposed to lost utility, we
need not impose much structure on the direct utility function u. In contrast, if utility evaluations served as
an input to gain/loss evaluation, substantially more structure would need to be imposed.




                                                        29
              The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

      Absent loss framing, the seller's utility is higher pursuing strategy 2:


                       U (s1 , c1 ) = 10 + 10 = 20 < 21 = 9 + 12 = U (s2 , c2 )


      Now consider the consequence of the principal applying loss framing relative to a sales
target of 10 for each good. Further assume that  = 2. This modifies the utility evaluation
to:


                  U  (s1 , c1 ) = 10 + 10 = 20 > 19 = 9 + 12 -  · 1 = U  (s2 , c2 )


      In this example the expected-sales maximizing strategy is chosen in the absence of loss
framing, but is not chosen when loss framing is introduced. Choosing strategy 2 over strategy
1 effectively entails trading the opportunity to sell 1 unit of good 1 for the opportunity to sell
2 units of good 2. For the purposes of maximizing expected sales, this is a desirable trade.
However, when framed as a loss, forgoing that 1 unit of good 1 is viewed as more costly. For
a sufficiently loss averse seller, trading a one unit loss for a two unit gain is undesirable.
      This simple example captures the core intuition that arises in the theory to come. Stated
most simply, applying loss framing incentivizes the seller to avoid losses. If strategies are
available that avoid losses at the cost of expected sales, then applying loss framing increases
the incentives to pursue those strategies.


2.3      Characterizing the Impact of Loss Framing

In order to formalize the claims made in interpreting the previous example, we require a
means of characterizing when strategies assist in avoiding losses. Define the loss exposure of
strategy  as


                 L( ) =          (d (Rd ) - d (sd )) · I (d (sd ) < d (Rd )) df (s, c| ).        (3)
                            dD


In words, the loss exposure of a strategy is the expected magnitude of dimension-specific
losses that arises from the distribution of outcomes that the strategy induces, summed across



                                                   30
                The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

dimensions.
    Using this definition, we may completely characterize the types of strategies that are
incentivized by loss framing. When characterizing the strategies that are incentivized, we
will refer to loss aversion making strategy 1 more attractive relative to 2 if E[U  |1 ] -
E[U  |2 ] > E[U |1 ] - E[U |2 ]. For ordinal evaluation, we say that strategy 1 is preferred
to strategy 2 if E[U |1 ] > E[U |2 ], with the relevant definition of individual utility (U or
U  ) applied.

Proposition 1 (The impact of inducing loss framing). Consider two selling strategies, 1 and
2 . Inducing loss framing makes 1 more attractive relative to 2 if and only if L(1 ) < L(2 ).
Furthermore, for sufficiently large values of , 1 is preferred to 2 if L(1 ) < L(2 ) and
only if L(1 )  L(2 ).

Proof. Note that expected utility with loss framing may be expressed as E[U  | ] = E[U | ] -
 · L( ). From this formulation, it follows immediately that the difference in expected utility
resulting from 1 and 2 is E[U  |1 ] - E[U  |2 ] = (E[U |1 ] - E[U |2 ]) - (L(1 ) - L(2 )). The
first term of this expression is simply the utility difference experienced absent loss aversion,
and the second term is the difference in exposure to losses scaled by the excess weight on
losses. This second term is positive if and only if L(1 ) < L(2 ), establishing the first claim
of the proposition.
    We next establish the claim that, for sufficiently large , 1 is preferred to 2 if L(1 ) <
L(2 ). Consider an arbitrary pair of strategies drawn from , denoted i and j , and
assign labels such that L(i ) < L(j ). Note that E[U  |i ] > E[U  |j ] if and only if  >
E[U |i ]-E[U |j ]
  L(i )-L(j )
                     Ti,j . Thus, if we define "sufficiently large" to mean  > maxi,j Ti,j , for
                                                       E[U |i ]-E[U |j ]
arbitrarily drawn pairs we are assured that  >           L(i )-L(j )
                                                                           and thus that i is preferred
to j . The claim then follows.
    The final claim, that for sufficiently large  1 is preferred to 2 only if L(1 )  L(2 ),
follows immediately from the claim just proved.

    Proposition 1 fully characterizes the impact of inducing loss aversion in performance in-
centives. When loss aversion is induced, incentives to reduce exposure to losses are increased.
If a given strategy has a lower degree of loss exposure, a sufficiently loss-averse seller can

                                                  31
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

be motivated to choose it if the principal imposes loss framing. In situations where the
set of strategies involve tradeoffs between loss exposure and expected sales, this drives the
potential for negative consequences like those illustrated in the leading example above.


2.4     Reassessing Unidimensional Results

The results of the prior section establish that, in a relatively minimalist and general model,
the performance effects of loss framing can be negative. This finding may be viewed as
surprising in light of existing literature. It is in opposition to commonly applied intuitions
regarding loss framing, and it would seem to contradict some formal results. This begs the
question: what feature of our modeling approach drives these differences in conclusions?
Since prior works have focused on unidimensional environments, and given our focus on
the exacerbation of incentives for inefficient multitasking, one might be tempted to infer
that the inclusion of additional dimensions is purely responsible for the differences. In this
section we will document, however, that conceptually similar results arise in unidimensional
environments.


2.4.1   Example 2: Reduced Sales in Unidimensional Stochastic Setting

In this example, a seller is considering his approach to selling a single type of good. As in
Example 1, assume that the incentive contract is (s) = s utility function u((s), c) = (s)-c
(with superscript d surpressed in this unidimensional case). Again assume that  = 2.
   The seller has two potential strategies. Strategy 1 yields 10 sales with certainty. Strategy
2 results in an amount of sales drawn from the integers 7-14, each with an equal probability
of occurring. This yields an expectation of 10.5 sales. Both strategies require the seller to
incur 5 units of effort costs.
   Absent loss framing, the seller's utility is higher pursuing strategy 2:


                E[u((s1 ), c1 )] = 10 - 5 = 5 < 5.5 = 10.5 - 5 = E[u((s2 ), c2 )]


   If the principal imposes loss framing relative to a sales target of 10, this modifies the



                                               32
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

utility evaluation to:


   E[u ((s1 ), c1 )] = 10 - 5 -  · L(1 ) = 5 > 4 = 10.5 - 5 -  · L(2 ) = E[u ((s2 ), c2 )]


Note that strategy 1 has no loss exposure, so L(1 ) = 0. Strategy 2, however, has the poten-
tial for losses of size 3, 2, or 1 if the realization of sales is 7, 8, or 9, respectively. Weighting
each of these losses by its probability of occurring ( 1
                                                       8
                                                         ) yields L(2 ) =        6
                                                                                 8
                                                                                   ,   generating the
inequality above. The worker would therefore choose strategy 1 with loss aversion induced.
   In this example, loss framing again leads the seller to pursue a strategy that does not
maximize expected sales. As with Example 1, the strategies available involve a tradeoff
between loss exposure and expected sales. In Example 1, avoidance of loss exposure was
pursued through "gaming" of sales pursuit across dimensions. In this example, avoidance of
loss exposure was pursued through "gaming" of tolerated risk. This illustrates that similar
concerns described above can extend into the unidimensional environments considered in the
literature as long as risk/reward tradeoffs are present.


2.5      A Modified Statement of the Conventional Wisdom

Example 2 demonstrates that the conceptual issues considered in this paper extend even to
unidimensional environments that have been the focus of this literature. The element that is
essential for a potential of negative consequences of loss framing is not multidimensionality,
but rather the presence of strategies that trade off greater loss exposure for greater expected
productivity. In the unidimensional environment, this leads us to a proposition that we
believe provides an accururate but qualified refinement of the prevaling wisdom regaring loss
framing.

Proposition 2 (Motivation of dominant sales strategies). Consider two (unidimensional)
strategies, 1 and 2 . Assume that f (s|1 ) first-order stochastically dominates f (s|2 ). In-
ducing loss framing cannot make 2 more attractive relative to 1 , and for some potential
reference values inducing loss framing makes 1 more attractive relative to 2 . For those ref-
erence values, 1 is preferred to 2 if the additional weight placed on losses  is sufficiently
large.

                                                 33
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Proof. The assumption that f (s|1 ) first-order stochastically dominates f (s|2 ) implies that
L(1 )  L(2 ), with the inequality strict for some potential reference values. The claims
therefore follow immediately from Proposition 1.

    Proposition 2 implies that loss framing is predicted to have an unambiguous (weakly) pos-
itive effect on productivity when the available strategies are ordered by first-order stochastic
dominance. This aligns exactly with the intuitions just described: when strategies are so
ordered, there exists no tradeoff between loss exposure and expected sales.
    Proposition 2 additionally helps to reconcile our results with existing theoretical claims.
For example, Prediction 1 of Imas, Sadoff and Samek (2016) and Prediction 1 of de Quidt
(2017) both establish unambiguously positive effects of loss framing, and the environments
modeled in these papers involve effort choices where greater effort would indeed induce a
first-order stochastically dominant outcome distribution.
    Beyond demonstrating the ways in which this past literature is correct, however, this
analysis also demonstrates ways in which past literature has been limited. By focusing
on environments where the only way to avoid losses is to increase effort, past literature has
directed attention to cases where the channels for negative consequences do not exist. In more
complex contracting environments, with agents potentially trading off productivity against
a variety of other considerations, the potential for negative productivity consequences like
those we have documented can rise to first-order importance, as it did in our field experiment.



3     Discussion
In recent years, the findings of behavioral economics have been broadly disseminated to the
general public. This surge of public engagement has contributed to a wave of interest in
designing organizational policies optimized for behavioral agents. While the potential for
using loss framing in sales incentives has received a great deal of attention, formal field
evaluation of such programs is currently limited to a small number of cases (e.g., Hossain
and List, 2012; Fryer Jr et al., 2012; Chung and Narayandas, 2017). Furthermore, formal
theoretical examination of the effect of these incentives has been limited to their application
to somewhat narrow and stylized circumstances.

                                              34
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

       In this paper, we have sought to critically assess the desirability of loss framing for or-
ganizations. In an unusually large field experiment, in which $66 million in bonus payments
was subject to random assignment of loss framing, we have demonstrated that organizations
are not wrong to suspect that loss aversion might influence the incentives' efficacy. We have
also demonstrated, however, that organizations would be wrong to expect this to always be
a desirable outcome. Our estimates imply that loss framing caused a loss of $45 million in
revenue generated by the treatment group during the 4-month treatment window. Further-
more, despite common claims to the contrary, we have shown that such negative results are
not theoretically unexpected.
       These findings serve as a demonstration of two tenants of field experimentation. First,
they clearly illustrate the the fundamental need for experimentation prior to the deployment
of unvetted policies. Recall that, prior to the researchers' intervention, the car manufacturer
studied in this paper had considered deploying the clawback policy nationwide. If this had
occured, the problems that we highlight would not have been detected. This policy was rolled
out during a period of growth in car sales, and thus a simple pre/post comparison would
have suggested that the deployment of the policy was associated with increased sales (see
Figure 5). That analysis misleadingly paints a brighter picture than ours: our difference-in-
differences estimates imply that system-wide adoption of loss framing would have resulted
in an annual revenue loss of over one billion dollars.
       Second, our findings clearly illustrate a position summarized in Card, DellaVigna and
Malmendier (2011): that field experiments can often benefit from the development of guiding
theory, even ex-post. The initial experimental findings of Hossain and List (2012) served as
a motivating force for the consideration of loss framing. However, in papers that followed,
some researchers faced difficulties when attempting to generate similar positive treatment
effects.22 Through a formalized reexamination of the underlying conceptual premise of this
literature, we are able to make better sense of why these seemingly inconsistent results arise,
and are able to make more precise predictions about the situations in which loss framing
may be ineffective or counterproductive.
  22
     And indeed, the original work of Hossain and List (2012) did not find unambiguous positive effects in
all situations studied.



                                                   35
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

       Although we have emphasized that our results suggest that the presence of loss aversion
is undesirable in our setting, we note that this does not undercut the demonstration that
loss aversion is present. Until relatively recently, demonstrations of loss aversion were largely
restricted to lab settings, allowing reasonable researchers to question the field-relevance of the
phenomenon. More recently, perhaps due to the increase in data availability, demonstrations
of loss aversion in fundamentally economic field environments have begun to proliferate. Loss
aversion has now been shown to influence job search behavior (DellaVigna et al., 2017), labor
supply (Camerer et al., 1997; Fehr and Goette, 2007; Farber, 2008; Crawford and Meng,
2011; Thakral and T^
                   o, 2019), house prices (Genesove and Mayer, 2001), tax compliance
(Engstr¨
       om et al., 2015; Rees-Jones, 2018), and more (for a thorough review, see O'Donoghue
and Sprenger, 2018). We add to this growing list of field applications, and provide an
demonstration with an unusually large estimated financial impact.
       Because the dealers that we study are self-contained businesses themselves, an impor-
tant novelty of our results is our demonstration that behavioral models apply not only to
individual workers, but also to firms. While it is often argued that the experience, stakes,
and competitive forces present among market actors should eliminate the role of behav-
ioral considerations (List, 2002, 2003, 2004a,b), our results clearly demonstrate that this is
not so in one large and important market. This applicability may be partially explained
by the largely private ownership structure of car dealerships that is particularly dominant
in our focal manufacturer's dealer network (98%). Due to the small management team of
many dealerships, they may operate more like individuals than the abstract ideal of a firm.
Furthermore, franchising laws heavily limit entry and consolidation in this market, limiting
some of the competitive pressure that is often assumed to discipline behavioral tendencies.
Despite these caveats, we note that the ownership characteristics and competitive frictions in
our setting are common in much of the world (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Bloom, Sadun
and Van Reenen, 2012), and that some frictions to idealized competition exist in many other
markets. We therefore view our paper as strongly suggesting that behavioral considerations
apply to the analysis of firms in quantitatively important ways.23
  23
    For additional papers emphasizing the role of loss aversion in corporate settings, see Loughran and
McDonald (2013); Ljungqvist and Wilhelm Jr (2005); Baker, Pan and Wurgler (2012); Dittmann, Maug and
Spalt (2010). See Malmendier (2018) for a review of the behavioral corporate finance literature.


                                                  36
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. "Synthetic control
  methods for comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of Californias tobacco control
  program." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490): 493­505.

Ahrens, Steffen, Lea Bitter, and Ciril Bosch-Rosa. 2020. "Loss contracts do not help
  coordination (but gender does)." Working Paper.

Athey, Susan, and Guido W Imbens. 2017. "The econometrics of randomized experi-
  ments." In Handbook of Economic Field Experiments. Vol. 1, 73­140. Elsevier.

Baker, George P, Michael C Jensen, and Kevin J Murphy. 1988. "Compensation
  and incentives: Practice vs. theory." The Journal of Finance, 43(3): 593­616.

Baker, Malcolm, Xin Pan, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2012. "The effect of reference point
  prices on mergers and acquisitions." Journal of Financial Economics, 106(1): 49­71.

Balmaceda, Felipe. 2018. "Optimal task assignments with loss-averse agents." European
  Economic Review, 105: 1 ­ 26.

Barnatchez, Keith, Leland D. Crane, and Ryan A. Decker. 2017. "An assessment of
  the National Establishment Time Series (NETS) database." Opportunity Inclusive Growth
  Institute: System Working Paper, 17­29.

Benartzi, Shlomo, John Beshears, Katherine L. Milkman, Cass R. Sunstein,
  Richard H. Thaler, Maya Shankar, Will Tucker-Ray, William J. Congdon,
  and Steven Galing. 2017. "Should governments invest more in nudging?" Psychological
  Science, 28(8): 1041­1055. PMID: 28581899.

Bennett, Victor Manuel. 2013. "Organization and bargaining: Sales process choice at
  auto dealerships." Management Science, 59(9): 2003­2018.

Benson, Alan. 2015. "Do agents game their agents behavior? Evidence from sales man-
  agers." Journal of Labor Economics, 33(4): 863­890.


                                            37
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and explaining management
  practices across firms and countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351­
  1408.

Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2012. "The organization
  of firms across countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4): 1663­1705.

Brooks, Richard R. W., Alexander Stremitzer, and Stephan Tontrup. 2012. "Fram-
  ing contracts: Why loss framing increases effort." Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
  Economics, 168(1): 62­82.

Brownback, Andy, and Sally Sadoff. 2020. "Improving college instruction through in-
  centives." Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2006. "$1,000 cash
  back: The pass-through of auto manufacturer promotions." American Economic Review,
  96(4): 1253­1270.

Busse, Meghan R, and Jorge M Silva-Risso. 2010. ""One discriminatory rent" or "dou-
  ble jeopardy": Multicomponent negotiation for new car purchases." American Economic
  Review, 100(2): 470­74.

Cachon, G´
         erard P, and Marcelo Olivares. 2010. "Drivers of finished-goods inventory
  in the US automobile industry." Management Science, 56(1): 202­216.

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler. 1997.
  "Labor supply of New York City cabdrivers: One day at a time." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 112(2): 407­441.

Card, David, Stefano DellaVigna, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2011. "The role of theory
  in field experiments." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3): 39­62.

Chung, Doug J, and Das Narayandas. 2017. "Incentives versus reciprocity: insights
  from a field experiment." Journal of Marketing Research, 54(4): 511­524.



                                             38
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Chung, Doug J, Das Narayandas, and Dongkyu Chang. 2019. "The effects of quota
  frequency: Sales performance and product focus." Harvard Business School Working Paper
  No. 17-059.

Chung, Doug J, Thomas Steenburgh, and K Sudhir. 2013. "Do bonuses enhance
  sales productivity? A dynamic structural analysis of bonus-based compensation plans."
  Marketing Science, 33(2): 165­187.

Courty, Pascal, and Gerald Marschke. 2004. "An empirical investigation of gaming
  responses to explicit performance incentives." Journal of Labor Economics, 22(1): 23­56.

Crawford, Vincent P, and Juanjuan Meng. 2011. "New York City cab drivers' labor
  supply revisited: Reference-dependent preferences with rational-expectations targets for
  hours and income." American Economic Review, 101(5): 1912­32.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Devin Pope. 2018. "What motivates effort? Evidence and
  expert forecasts." The Review of Economic Studies, 85(2): 1029­1069.

DellaVigna, Stefano, Attila Lindner, Balzs Reizer, and Johannes F. Schmieder.
  2017. "Reference-dependent job search: Evidence from Hungary." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 132(4): 1969­2018.

de Quidt, Jonathan. 2017. "Your loss is my gain: a recruitment experiment with framed
  incentives." Journal of the European Economic Association, 16(2): 522­559.

de Quidt, Jonathan, Francesco Fallucchi, Felix K¨
                                                olle, Daniele Nosenzo, and Si-
  mone Quercia. 2017. "Bonus versus penalty: How robust are the effects of contract
  framing?" Journal of the Economic Science Association, 3(2): 174­182.

Dittmann, Ingolf, Ernst Maug, and Oliver Spalt. 2010. "Sticks or carrots? Optimal
  CEO compensation when managers are loss averse." The Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2015­
  2050.

Ederer, Florian, Richard Holden, and Margaret Meyer. 2018. "Gaming and strategic
  opacity in incentive provision." The RAND Journal of Economics, 49(4): 819­854.

                                           39
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Engstr¨
      om, Per, Katarina Nordblom, Henry Ohlsson, and Annika Persson. 2015.
  "Tax Compliance and Loss Aversion." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  7(4): 132­164.

Farber, Henry S. 2008. "Reference-dependent preferences and labor supply: The case of
  New York City taxi drivers." American Economic Review, 98(3): 1069­82.

Fehr, Ernst, and Lorenz Goette. 2007. "Do workers work more if wages are high?
  Evidence from a randomized field experiment." American Economic Review, 97(1): 298­
  317.

Fryer Jr, Roland G, Steven D Levitt, John List, and Sally Sadoff. 2012. "Enhanc-
  ing the efficacy of teacher incentives through loss aversion: A field experiment." NBER
  Working Paper No. 18237.

Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer. 2001. "Loss aversion and seller behavior:
  Evidence from the housing market." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1233­
  1260.

Goldberger, A.S. 1968. Topics in Regression Analysis. Macmillan.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. "Multitask principal-agent analyses: In-
  centive contracts, asset ownership, and job design." Journal of Law, Economics, Organi-
  zation, 7: 24­52.

Hong, Fuhai, Tanjim Hossain, and John A. List. 2015. "Framing manipulations in con-
  tests: A natural field experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior Organization, 118: 372
  ­ 382. Economic Experiments in Developing Countries.

Hossain, Tanjim, and John A List. 2012. "The behavioralist visits the factory: Increas-
  ing productivity using simple framing manipulations." Management Science, 58(12): 2151­
  2167.

Imas, Alex, Sally Sadoff, and Anya Samek. 2016. "Do people anticipate loss aversion?"
  Management Science, 63(5): 1271­1284.

                                           40
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler. 1991. "Anomalies:
  The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias." Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 5(1): 193­206.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen. 2016. "Bunching." Annual Review of Economics, 8(1): 435­
  464.

Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. "A model of reference-dependent prefer-
  ences." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1133­1165.

Lafontaine, Francine, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2010. "Markets: State franchise laws,
  dealer terminations, and the auto crisis." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3): 233­50.

Larkin, Ian. 2014. "The cost of high-powered incentives: Employee gaming in enterprise
  software sales." Journal of Labor Economics, 32(2): 199­227.

Lazear, Edward P. 1991. "Labor economics and the psychology of organizations." Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 5(2): 89­110.

List, John A. 2002. "Testing neoclassical competitive market theory in the field." Proceed-
  ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(24): 15827­15830.

List, John A. 2003. "Does market experience eliminate market anomalies?" The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 118(1): 41­71.

List, John A. 2004a. "Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory: Evidence from the mar-
  ketplace." Econometrica, 72(2): 615­625.

List, JohnA. 2004b. "Testing neoclassical competitive theory in multilateral decentralized
  markets." Journal of Political Economy, 112(5): 1131­1156.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William J Wilhelm Jr. 2005. "Does prospect theory
  explain IPO market behavior?" The Journal of Finance, 60(4): 1759­1790.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald. 2013. "IPO first-day returns, offer price revisions,
  volatility, and form S-1 language." Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2): 307­326.


                                             41
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Lu, Bo, Robert Greevy, Xinyi Xu, and Cole Beck. 2011. "Optimal nonbipartite
  matching and its statistical applications." The American Statistician, 65(1): 21­30.

Malmendier, Ulrike. 2018. "Behavioral corporate finance." In Handbook of Behavioral
  Economics. Vol. 1, , ed. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano Dellavigna and David Laibson. Else-
  vier.

Manski, Charles F. 1986. "Analog estimation of econometric models." In Handbook of
  Econometrics. Vol. 4, , ed. R. F. Engle and D. McFadden, Chapter 43, 2559­2582. Elsevier.

Misra, Sanjog, and Harikesh S Nair. 2011. "A structural model of sales-force com-
  pensation dynamics: Estimation and field implementation." Quantitative Marketing and
  Economics, 9(3): 211­257.

Murry, Charles. 2018. "The effect of retail competition on relationship-specific invest-
  ments: evidence from new car advertising." International Journal of Industrial Organiza-
  tion, 59: 253­281.

Murry, Charles, and Henry S Schneider. 2016. "The economics of retail markets for
  new and used cars." Handbook on the Economics of Retailing and Distribution, 343.

O'Donoghue, Ted, and Charles Sprenger. 2018. "Reference-dependent preferences."
  In Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations and Applications 1. Vol. 1, , ed.
  B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna and David Laibson, 1 ­ 77. North-Holland.

Olivares, Marcelo, and G´
                        erard P Cachon. 2009. "Competing retailers and inventory:
  An empirical investigation of General Motors' dealerships in isolated US markets." Man-
  agement Science, 55(9): 1586­1604.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. "Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The effect on busi-
  ness seasonality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 149­185.

Pierce, Lamar. 2012. "Organizational structure and the limits of knowledge sharing: In-
  centive conflict and agency in car leasing." Management Science, 58(6): 1106­1121.



                                            42
           The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

Rees-Jones, Alex. 2018. "Quantifying loss-averse tax manipulation." The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 85(2): 1251­1278.

Robbins, Michael W, Jessica Saunders, and Beau Kilmer. 2017. "A framework
  for synthetic control methods with high-dimensional, micro-level data: evaluating a
  neighborhood-specific crime intervention." Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
  tion, 112(517): 109­126.

Roberts, Adrienne. 2018. "Car dealerships face conundrum: Get big or get out." Wall
  Street Journal.

Steenburgh, Thomas J. 2008. "Effort or timing: The effect of lump-sum bonuses." Quan-
  titative Marketing and Economics, 6(3): 235.

Thakral, Niel, and Lihn T^
                         o. 2019. "Daily labor supply and adaptive reference points."
  American Economic Review, Forthcoming.




                                           43
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

A     Appendix

A.1     Group Assignment

Figure A.1 shows the distribution of the number of participants in the DMAs assigned to
each group. The outlier is the same control group DMA referenced in the discussion of
Figure 4, containing the unusually large dealers.

               Figure A.1: Distribution of DMA Dealer Count By Condition




A.2     Additional Time Trends

Figures A.2 and A.3 present variants of Figure 5 constructed by model group. We plot
average dealer unit sales by month for both the control and treatment group as well as each
group's sales average across both the pre- and post-treatment periods. Figures A.4­A.6
compare trends for participants and non-participants.




                                             44
The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


Figure A.2: Participant Time Trends for Large-Bonus Model Group




Figure A.3: Participant Time Trends for Small-Bonus Model Group




                              45
  The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


    Figure A.4: Non-Participant Sales Time Trends for Total Sales




Figure A.5: Non-Participant Time Trends for Large-Bonus Model Group




Figure A.6: Non-Participant Time Trends for Small-Bonus Model Group




                                 46
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

A.3        Assessment of Selection

In this paper, we have focused on the negative effects of loss framing conditional on par-
ticipation in our experiment. While prior research has assumed that such effects should be
positive, several papers have emphasized the potential for negative effects arising by select-
ing who participates (Imas, Sadoff and Samek, 2016; de Quidt, 2017). To the extent that
treatment assignment was random conditional on participation, these concerns should not
confound our estimated treatment effects, although they do influence our interpretation of
who is averaged in average treatment effects.
       For comparability to prior research and to completely examine existing accounts of the
negative effects of loss framing, we now examine the predictors of selection into our experi-
ment.
       Despite the manufacturer's initial belief that this program would be highly desirable
to dealers (due to providing early cash flow), comparatively few dealers opted into our
experiment: 294 dealers opted in, 335 actively opted out, and 598 opted out through non-
response. This low rate of opt-in could potentially be interpreted as prima facie evidence
that dealers did in fact anticipate loss aversion, and thus avoided a situation that might
induce it. While we do believe that this is a partial explanation, we note that several
alternative explanations of the low participation rate are present. First, dealers may have
failed to participate purely because they did not know of this opportunity. However, given
the manner in which the opportunity was advertised, we believe this was unlikely to be a
major factor.24 Second, dealers may have feared that they would be unable to make the
necessary clawback payments if targets were not met. In practice, several fail-safes ensured
that dealers would face relatively few severe negative consequences if this situation arose, but
lack of knowledge of those fail-safes or remaining concerns could possibly drive behavior.25
Third, dealers may have been averse to accepting the administrative costs that a change in
  24
      Multiple emails were sent to the incentive program's contact at each dealer. CarCo regional dealer rep-
resentatives indicated that dealers almost certainly read at least one of the multiple invitation emails. Since
the incentive program is crucial for their sales profits, program communications are high priority. In addition,
CarCo's regional dealer representatives followed up with non-respondents to encourage participation. Based
on these considerations, we believe effectively all non-respondents knowingly defaulted to non-participation.
   25
      Based on the researcher's concerns about the negative consequences of failure to repay, CarCo agreed to
automatically unenroll any dealer failing repayment. Among participating dealers, this condition was never
triggered.


                                                      47
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

accounting practices would require.26 In sum, while the low rate of participation is consistent
with the concern that loss-averse agents will select out of loss framed contracts, we cannot
firmly establish that this is this is the mechanism driving nonparticipation.
       To examine how selection into the experiment influences the composition of our sample,
we began by testing for differences between the three groups of dealers (opt-in, opt-out, and
non-respondent) across the variables available in CarCo's internal data.
       To begin, we emphasize that we find no statistically distinguishable differences in treat-
ment group assignment across the three participation groups (2 = 3.00, p = 0.223). Treat-
ment was assigned to 48.3% of participants, 54.0% of opt-outs, and 48.6% of non-respondents.
       Among CarCo's internal data, we see evidence of selection on observables across several
dimensions. First, as emphasized in the discussion of our difference-in-differences results,
pre-period sales volume is notably associated with treatment assignment. Although partici-
pants and opt-out dealers had statistically indistinguishable monthly sales volume (48.8 vs.
43.3, p = 0.17), non-respondents had substantially fewer sales (31.1, p < 0.01).27 Second,
and consistent with these volume differences, there are significant cross-group differences
in whether or not the dealers carry both model groups (2 = 10.50, p = 0.005). Non-
respondents (86%) are less likely to do so than both participants (90%) and opt-out dealers
(93%). Third, we find substantial differences across regions in participation rates, and par-
ticularly in the rate of opt-outs through non-responses (2 = 101.88, p = 0.000). Although
we can only speculate why this is the case, a likely possibility is that CarCo's regional sales
representatives used different strategies to encourage participation after the standardized
initial email solicitations. Despite these regional differences in participation, there are no
differences in treatment group assignment by region (2 = 1.25, p = 0.870).
       These differences reject the hypothesis that dealers' willingness to be exposed to loss-
framing through participation in our experiment is completely random conditional on ob-
servables. While the random assignment of treatment preserves the validity of estimated
treatment effects within this group, we sought to collect more dealer-level data to help us
  26
     Regional dealer representatives informally indicated that many of the dealers claimed that their lack of
participation was due to avoidance of what they viewed as an accounting "headache," combined with little
need for the early cash flow.
  27
     These averages do not equal the sum of model-group average sales in Table 1 because some dealers carry
only one model group.


                                                     48
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives




      Table A.1: Group Means by Participation Status for Dealers with NETS Data
                                  Selection Group                Group Difference Test
                     Participants Opt-Out Non-Respondents
  Year Founded         1976.49     1976.69        1974.24              F = 0.99
                       (27.16)      (27.81)       (27.37)               [0.371]
  Employees                  55.13          50.95            51.93                  F = 0.72
                            (46.70)        (45.35)          (40.25)                  [0.488]
  2015 DUNS Score             2.47          2.41              2.41                  F = 0.84
                             (0.60)        (0.52)            (0.56)                  [0.431]
  Has DUNS Score              0.70          0.62              0.66                  2 = 2.80
                             (0.46)        (0.49)            (0.47)                 [0.246]
  2015 Min Paydex            73.16         74.20             73.19                  F = 1.24
                             (8.73)        (6.35)            (9.58)                  [0.291]
  Has Paydex Score            0.81          0.75              0.80                  2 = 2.09
                             (0.39)        (0.43)            (0.40)                 [0.351]
  Publicly-Held               0.00          0.02              0.02                  2 = 3.78
                             (0.06)        (0.14)            (0.14)                 [0.151]
  Part of Group               0.18          0.23              0.26                  2 = 5.73
                             (0.39)        (0.42)            (0.44)                 [0.057]

Notes: Summary statistics are presented for three groups: those who chose participation, those who
opted-out, and those who did not respond and therefore were non-participants by default. Means with
standard deviations in parentheses for each group. F-statistics from ANOVA are presented for continuous
variables. Chi-squared tests are for dichotomous variables. P-values are in brackets. Each line only
includes those dealers with a populated NETS field.




                                                    49
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

better understand the features of the dealers who selected into our study.
       We generate our dealer-level data by combining CarCo's sales and incentive records with
supplemental data from the National Establishment Time Series (NETS). NETS aggregates
data on most establishments in the United States (Barnatchez, Crane and Decker, 2017),
including car dealers, providing data on ownership structure, employment, and financial
strength data from Dun & Bradstreet.28 We successfully matched 877 non-participants
and 276 participants via phone, address, name, and ownership data. We then examined
differences in sales, ownership, age, employment, and financial health.29
       Table A.1 presents group means and statistical tests of differences across the three groups
for the 1,153 dealers with NETS data. We see few observable differences between the three
groups. In particular, no statistical differences are detected in the age or size of the firm, in
the Dun & Bradstreet measures of financial health, in the Paydex measures of reliable bill
payment, or in publicly-held status. One potential difference is seen in the "Part of Group"
variable. Participants are more likely to be stand-alone dealers (18%) than opt-out (23%)
or non-respondents (26%). These differences could arise if dealers that were part of larger
organizations were less likely to have autonomy to change accounting systems or rules.
       In summary, we see relatively modest evidence of observable selection into participation
in our experiment. We acknowledge that we cannot rule out perhaps interesting unobservable
differences in dealers by participation status, but we note these would be very unlikely to
bias our treatment estimates given our random assignment procedure.


A.4        Robustness to Outliers

As discussed in Section 1.4, notable differences exist in the average pre-intervention sales
between the treatment and control groups. As we argued in our discussion of Figure 4,
this difference can be attributed to the random assignment of an outlier DMA. A single
DMA contained five of the six largest participating dealers, each with average monthly sales
several multiples of the average of other dealers. Due to the natural concern that these
  28
     CarCo did not share internal data on dealership financial or ownership structure with us for legal reasons.
  29
     The NETS data fields have varying levels of completeness. Employment data, for example, is complete
for approximately 90% of the matched dealers. Dun & Bradstreet data, however, is complete for only about
two-thirds.


                                                      50
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

influential outliers meaningfully drive results, we reestimate our difference in differences
model excluding this DMA. With its exclusion, average sales in the pre-period are statistically
indistinguishable (p = 0.451), with means of 43.5 and 45.5 for the treatment and control
group, respectively. Regression results are presented in Table A.2. Average monthly sales
decrease by 1.6 vehicles per month--4% relative to pre-intervention averages--with nearly all
losses coming from the small-bonus model group. The smaller coefficient is largely reflected
by the smaller nominal increase in sales coming from the smaller average sales in a control
group without most of the largest dealers.


A.5        Treatment Effect in Second Treatment Window

As described in Section 1.2, an "equal treatment" requirement led us to design our interven-
tion so that all experimental participants faced four months in treatment condition and four
months in the control condition. We have focused our attention on the estimated impact of
treatment in the first four-month treatment window, prior to conditions being flipped. Con-
ceptually, we believe that analysis of treatment effects in the first window have the cleanest
interpretation. When examining the second window, the prior treatment of the control group
is expected to affect results, leading to a confounding of a difference-in-differences design.
For completeness, we attempt to estimate treatment effects in this window using synthetic
control methods (Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller, 2010; Robbins, Saunders and Kilmer,
2017).
       The aim of our synthetic control analysis is to compare the sales among dealers receiving
treatment in the second window to that of comparable dealers who did not participate in
the experiment. We constructed the synthetic control group by matching on dealer size (in
units sold), dual-dealer status, and the pre-trends in sales that were used in our algorithm
for random assignment. The estimated model, represented in Figure A.7, shows a treatment
effect of loss framing of -12% (p = 0.019)30 --substantially larger than our estimate of -5%
in our primary analysis. For comparison, Figure A.8 applies this method to compare the
dealers treated in the first window to a synthetic control formed from control-group dealers,
  30
    All estimates are derived using the R package microsynth, with p-values generated through the permu-
tation method with 10,000 permutations applied.


                                                  51
                             Table A.2: Difference-in-Difference Estimates Excluding the Outlier DMA
                                                   (1)       (2)      (3)    (4 )    (5)     (6)   (7)               (8)      (9)
           Treatment Period X Assigned Prepay     -1.6      -1.6     -1.6    -0.4    -0.4   -0.4   -1.4              -1.4     -1.4
                                                 (1.05) (1.06) (1.13) (0.84) (0.84) (0.90) (0.68)                   (0.69)   (0.73)

           Treatment Period                           2.5                         2.3                        0.4
                                                    (0.69)                      (0.64)                     (0.53)

           Assigned Prepay                           -2.0      -2.0              -4.7     -4.7               0.9      0.9
                                                    (6.04)    (6.05)            (4.59)   (4.59)            (2.33)   (2.33)

           Constant                                  45.5   37.4        36.4   34.2       28.9     26.5     14.3     11.1     11.5
                                                    (4.38) (4.18)      (0.94) (3.74)     (3.53)   (0.73)   (1.44)   (1.39)   (0.47)




52
           Model Group                              Pooled Pooled      Pooled L-B         L-B      L-B      S-B      S-B      S-B
           Month Fixed Effects                               X            X                X        X                 X        X
           Dealer Fixed Effects                                           X                         X                          X
           Observations                              2296     2296      2296   2208      2208      2208    2160     2160      2160
           R2                                        0.001    0.009     0.957 0.005      0.012    0.954    0.001    0.014    0.890

     Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the prepayment intervention on total vehicles sold
     for the sample excluding the outlier DMA in control group that included five of the six largest dealers by volume. Two other
     dealers were dropped from this DMA, resulting in 287 remaining. See Figure 4 for details. The dependent variable is the
     month-specific number of vehicles sold at the dealer level. The first three columns present analysis pooling the two model
     groups together, whereas the next two groups of three columns present separate analysis of two model groups. Standard errors
                                                                                                                                          The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives




     are clustered at the DMA level.
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


Figure A.7: Synthetic Control Estimates of Treatment Effect in Second Treatment Window




Notes: This figure shows results from a synthetic control model, estimating the impact of the control group
recieving the loss-framing treatment in months 9­12. The vertical axes represent the total monthly sales
across the treatment and synthetic control groups. The synthetic control group is built from
non-participants in the treatment group and matches on dealer size (in units sold), dual-dealer status, and
pre-treatment sales trends. The model estimates a treatment of -12%.



This analysis yields an estimated treatment effect of -4% (p = 0.009)--generally comparable
with our difference-in-differences estimate.
    In short, though we believe our difference-in-differences estimates are conceptually prefer-
able to these synthetic control estimates (as they do not require comparisons to a group that
has endogenously opted out of treatment), we note that both methods provide evidence of
a negative effect of loss framing.




                                                    53
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


Figure A.8: Synthetic Control Treatment Estimates of Treatment Effect in First Treatment
                                        Window




Notes: This figure shows results from a synthetic control model of the treatment effect on the treatment
group in months 5­8. The vertical axes represent the total monthly sales across the treatment and
synthetic control groups. The synthetic control group is built from participants in the control group and
matches on dealer size (in units sold), dual-dealer status, and pre-treatment sales trends. The model
estimates a treatment of -4%.



A.6      Interview and Survey Evidence

In this paper, we have focused on the observed reaction to the treatment using objective
sales data. As a complement to this evidence, we conducted informal interviews and formal
surveying of participants after the experiment. Fourteen dealers were interviewed, and sixty-
two dealers (21%) responded to the online survey.
    Overall, the interviews and surveys suggested reasonably universal perceived importance
of the incentive program, but more heterogeneous reactions to the loss framing treatment.
Some dealers indicated perceptions that were clearly in line with loss-averse evaluation, while


                                                    54
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

others provided assessments of the program more in line with neoclassical considerations.
The interviews also indicated both awareness of, and efforts directed towards, the need to
optimize efforts across the two model groups, consistent with the exacerbation of multitasking
issues that we have discussed.


A.6.1    Interview Evidence

The interviews were conducted over the phone in May, 2018, with either the general manager
or principal (owner) of 14 participating dealers. Dealer interviews were arranged by CarCo
with a mix of targeted regions and experimental conditions. Participation was not random
nor representative of the dealers as a whole. The interviews, which lasted 20 to 30 minutes,
were relatively unstructured, but focused on five key questions: 1. "How do the [program]
targets influence formal policies or managerial attention in a given month for both you or
other dealers?" 2. "How do you think about the two separate brands and respective targets,
both before and after achieving the targets?" 3. "When you received the prepayments,
did this affect any of your policies or attention, and how was the cash used?" 4. "How
do you imagine other dealers might deal with these prepayments, and do you see them as
generating potential benefits or problems for these other dealers?" 5. "What do you see as
the immediate strengths and weaknesses of the current setup, where 110% has such a large
immediate payoff?"
   The interviews revealed relatively consistent views on the role of the incentive program in
dealer strategy and policy. Respondents universally emphasized that the incentive program
represents the majority of their sales profits. One dealer noted that "you gotta get there.
If you don't hit the 110 number, your operating profit is next to nothing." Another stated
that "it's critical to reach those plateaus for achieving profitability." They also consistently
noted how the program dominates their sales strategy. "It's an integral part of how we shape
and process just about everything." Another dealer explained that "(the incentive plan) is
running our business. It's the most important thing. Financially, it's crucial--55-65% of
operating profit." Several dealers also noted that hitting the objectives early changed their
behavior, saying "it allows us to start focusing on margin," while also noting that it makes
them "relaxed." Dealers also explained that the incentive program is tightly tied to the

                                              55
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

incentives of the sales managers and salespeople.
   Many indicated that they carefully track progression toward the targets throughout the
month, adjusting resources and pricing based on the likelihood of hitting the target. One
dealer reported that "if we don't hit a fast start, then we back off. If we're close, we use
incentives to get there." This resource and attention allocation also applied across brands.
A dealer noted that "if we're cruising on (large-bonus model group), we'll put attention to
(small-bonus model group). If we get to the 20th of the month, we'll focus on the one closest
to the 110% target." One dealer noted that "we think about (the brands) entirely separately,
until we're close. Then I'll move people." Another explained that "mid-month, when it looks
likely to hit one more than the other, we allocate resources accordingly." Another dealer
noted the difference between the brands. "We make a lot more money off (large-bonus model
group) so we focus there. We're not going to take a (large-bonus model group) buyer and
put them in (small-bonus model group)."
   Although dealers were reluctant to discuss attempts to move customers across months and
brands, several indicated that they had some ability to do so, and many more explained that
they "know there are dealers who play that game," or opaquely explained "if we're having
a slow month, we think about next month." Some dealers also indicated the importance
of having smooth earnings across months. "You can't have peaks and valleys in your sales
year. You need to be consistent."
   The interviewed dealers indicated a mix of responses to the prepayment condition. One
mentioned that "the reason I signed up was for an interest-free loan," with some other dealers
expressing similar sentiments. Another mentioned that "this is simply cash up front, and
we put it in a separate account," explaining that "my sisters are very accounting oriented."
Others, however noted the motivational effect it had on their business. One dealer noted
that "nobody wanted to give it back." Another explained that "it's like giving my son
$100--it's going to be spent. Your back's in the corner so you've got to produce." Another
also mentioned that "nobody wanted to give it back," referring to it as "a little extra spice
in the stew," and explaining that he "didn't want to have that conversation with the owner."
One successful dealer explained that the prepayment did not impact their behavior during
the experiment because "I knew I would hit my goals. I would be hesitant to do it this


                                             56
            The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

year, because I don't want it yanked back from me." Another stated that it "always felt like
there was a lot more pressure. It changed the intensity." Two dealers also noted that the
prepayment did help with cash flow.


A.6.2    Post-Experiment Survey

The post-experiment survey was conducted in July, 2018, and was distributed to the primary
contacts at all 294 participating dealers. The survey asked about the use of the advanced
funds as well as the respondent's perception about how the advanced funds changed behavior
throughout the month. Follow-up emails were used to attempt to increase participation,
resulting in sixty-two dealers (21%) completing the survey.
   Only 13 dealers reported distributing advanced funds to employees, with all but two
focusing this loss-framing on the general manager or sales manager. One respondent freely
responded to this question by answering "ARE YOU CRAZY?" The majority of respondents
(44) reported setting the funds aside until the end of the month. Twenty-two dealers reported
that they agreed that the advanced funds increased pressure and motivation to meet program
goals. Eighteen dealers also reported that they increased their emphasis on meeting program
targets under the prepayment condition, while 16 indicated that the prepayment condition
made them more closely track progress toward the monthly targets.
   Fourteen dealers reported that the prepayment condition changed their approach to the
two brands, with 11 reporting that it increased their focus on whichever brand was closest
to the target.
   Sixteen dealers believed that the prepayment system increased their sales, while one
believed it slightly decreased them. Finally, 26 dealers would prefer advanced funds moving
forward, while 24 would prefer end-of-the-month and 10 were indifferent.
   Collectively, the interviews and survey indicate that for a select set of dealers, the pre-
payment condition changed behavior and mind-frame in many dealers while having little
effect in others. This is consistent with there being a variety of management practices across
car dealers resulting from both franchise law protections and other sources of heterogeneity.
We draw several important conclusions from these self-reported data. First, the prepayment
condition was salient enough to successfully treat some dealers with loss-framing. Second,

                                             57
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives


          Figure A.9: Pre-treatment Daily Sales Timing by Treatment Assignment




Notes: This figure shows the percentage of monthly sales occurring on each day of the month in the four
months prior to the experiment. We correct for days when dealers are closed (Sundays and the New Year's
holiday) by inverse-weighting sales by the number of open days during the four month period.



this loss-framing was not universal, which deflates any average treatment effects estimated
from the study. Third, the responses of some treated dealers align closely with the gaming
behaviors we discuss in our theoretical treatment of loss framing.


A.7      Timing of Sales

Another commonly considered "gaming" behavior among car dealers is attempting to shift
sales not across model groups, but across time periods of evaluation. Ultimately, we are
unpowered to provide interesting tests of this channel for potential gaming in our experiment,
but we present some attempts to examine this here.
   Figure A.9 shows the distribution of sales by day-of-the-month in each group during the
pre-period, demonstrating some daily responsivity to the intertemporal incentives induced

                                                  58
               The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives

by these contracts.31 As previously noted in, e.g., Larkin (2014), high-powered incentives
measured over discrete time windows can result in high effort to close sales at the end
of the window of measurement. Consistent with this consideration, we see that sales are
particularly concentrated at the end of the month. Also consistent with Larkin (2014), we
see increased sales at the beginning of the month, likely from when dealers delayed closing
deals at the end of a month where the target was unreachable. As with our analysis of within-
month responsivity to direct incentives, there is no statistically detectable difference in means
between treatment and control groups (T-test: p = 0.692). There is a small distributional
difference that is statistically distinguishable because of the large number (57, 005) of daily
observations (Kolmogorov-Smirnov: p = 0.033).
       To test for the possibility that loss framing influenced the incentives to sell cars on
particular days (e.g., at the beginning or end of the month), we re-estimated regressions (6)
and (9) from Table 2, restricting the data to each possible number of days until the end
of the month. Results are presented in Figure A.10. As seen in the figure, we do not find
evidence that treatment effects operate at a specific time of the month; however, given that
the average dealer sells fewer than one car of either brand per day, on average, the size of the
confidence intervals in this figure illustrate that we are underpowered to rule out substantial
intertemporal effects.




  31
    Each day-of-the-month is inverse-weighted by the number of days during the four-month period when
dealers were open. Nearly all dealers were closed January 1-3 and on Sundays.


                                                 59
             The Negative Consequences of Loss-Framed Performance Incentives




             Figure A.10: Day-Specific Estimated Treatment Effects on Cars Sold




Notes: This figure shows the estimated treatment effect from regressions (6) and (9) in Table 2, with the
sample restricted to include only the day of the month indicated on the X-axis.




                                                    60
