                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


    THE IMPACT OF BEQUEST MOTIVES ON RETIREMENT BEHAVIOR IN JAPAN:
                A THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

                                     Charles Yuji Horioka
                                      Emin Gahramanov
                                         Aziz Hayat
                                         Xueli Tang

                                      Working Paper 26621
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26621


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020

The empirical work undertaken in this paper utilizes micro data from the Preference Parameters
Study of Osaka University's 21st Century Center of Excellence (COE) Program "Behavioral
Macrodynamics Based on Surveys and Experiments" and its Global COE Project "Human
Behavior and Socioeconomic Dynamics." We acknowledge the program/project's contributors
Yoshiro Tsutsui, Fumio Ohtake, and Shinsuke Ikeda. We are also grateful to Young Jun Chun,
Shoshana Grossbard, Nobuaki Hamaguchi, Tetsushi Homma, Shinichiro Iwata, Young Lee, Colin
McKenzie, Oleksandr Movshuk, Jan Ondrich, Steven Stern, Midori Wakabayashi, other
participants at the Annual Meeting of the Society of Economics of the Household, the Family
Economics Workshop in Kyoto, the Kobe University-Nanyang Technological University-
Hanyang University Joint Symposium in Economics, and seminars at ADA University
(Azerbaijan), the American University of Sharjah, the Bank of France and l'Ecole des Hautes
Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Monash University, Toyama University, the University of Western
Australia, and especially Clémence Berson, Soungman Kang, Yoko Niimi, and Keunkwan Ryu
for their valuable comments and discussions. This work was supported by a grant to Hayat from
the faculty research scheme (FRGS), Department of Finance, Deakin University (2018-19) and
JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) KAKENHI Grant Numbers 15H01950 and
18H00870 and a project grant from the Asian Growth Research Institute to Horioka. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Charles Yuji Horioka, Emin Gahramanov, Aziz Hayat, and Xueli Tang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Bequest Motives on Retirement Behavior in Japan: A Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis
Charles Yuji Horioka, Emin Gahramanov, Aziz Hayat, and Xueli Tang
NBER Working Paper No. 26621
January 2020
JEL No. D15,D64,J14,J22,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we conduct a theoretical and empirical analysis of the impact of bequest motives on
the work and retirement behavior of households in Japan using micro data from the Preference
Parameters Study of Osaka University. Our empirical findings are consistent with our theoretical
model and show that respondents with an altruistic or strategic/exchange bequest motive work
more at the intensive margin than those without any bequest motive but that respondents with a
strategic or exchange bequest motive work less at the extensive margin (i.e., retire earlier) than
those without any bequest motive. Our findings for the strategic or exchange motive suggest that
respondents with such a motive tend to work harder than others before they retire so that they can
earn more, leave a larger bequest to their children, and elicit more care from them but that they
tend to retire earlier than others so that they can start receiving care for themselves and their
spouses from their children sooner. A policy implication of our findings is that the exchange of
bequests for the care of parents by children may be very sensitive to the inheritance tax
framework.

Charles Yuji Horioka                            Aziz Hayat
Research Institute for Economics                Deakin Business School
 and Business Administration                    Deakin University
Kobe University                                 Burwood, VIctoria 3125
2-1, Rokkodai, Nada                             Australia
Kobe 657-8501                                   abdul.hayatmuhammad@deakin.edu.au
JAPAN
and NBER                                        Xueli Tang
horioka@rieb.kobe-u.ac.jp                       Deakin University
                                                Department of Economics
Emin Gahramanov                                 Burwood, Victoria 3125
American University of Sharjah                  Australia
Department of Economics                         xueli.tang@deakin.edu.au
P.O. BOX 26666, Sharjah
United Arab Emirates
egahramanov@aus.edu
1. Introduction

Parents and children are connected in various ways, and one of the most important ways in
which they are connected is through intergenerational transfers (i.e., bequests and inter vivos
transfers) from parents to children. The desire to leave bequests and other intergenerational
transfers to one's children is likely to affect the economic behavior of parents in many ways.
In other words, it is quite possible that parents planning to leave a bequest to their children will
behave very differently from those not planning to leave a bequest to their children. For
example, it is quite possible that parents planning to leave a bequest to their children will save
more than those not planning to leave a bequest to their children because they need to save not
only to finance their own retirement needs but also to leave a bequest to their children. Indeed,
many previous studies have examined the impact of bequest motives on saving and wealth
accumulation behavior, and most of them have found that parents planning to leave a bequest
to their children do, in fact, save more than those not planning to leave a bequest to their
children (see, for example, Horioka et al. (1996), Horioka et al. (2002), and Niimi and Horioka
(2018); see Hurd (1990) for a comprehensive survey).

By the same token, it is quite possible that parents planning to leave a bequest to their children
will work more at the intensive margin (i.e., work more hours per day and/or more days per
year) and/or at the extensive margin (i.e., work longer and retire later) than those not planning
to leave a bequest to their children so that they can increase their lifetime incomes and thence
the amount that they can bequeath to their children. Moreover, work-related outcomes at both
the intensive and extensive margins may differ by the nature of bequest motives (for example,
by whether they are motivated by altruistic or strategic/exchange considerations). Surprisingly,
however, no research has been done on the bequest-work relationship of parents that
differentiates between those with different bequest motives. This paper intends to fill this gap
in the literature.

The impact of bequest motives on the work-related outcomes of parents may be especially
pronounced in the case of Japan where bequest motives are relatively strong. As Table 2 shows,
34.0 percent of respondents have a strong bequest motive, 47.3 percent have a weak bequest
motive, and only 18.7 percent have no bequest motive at all. 1 Moreover, the social norm in
Japan has traditionally been for children (especially the eldest son) to provide care to elderly
parents, and until a public long-term care insurance program was introduced in 2000, the
elderly in Japan had to rely on their children to provide care or to pay the full cost of hiring
professional care workers. Furthermore, even today, the financial burden of elderly care falls
largely upon the elderly themselves because the public long-term care insurance system has a
co-payment of 10 percent or more and also has strict eligibility requirements, as a result of
which only care services that are concomitant with one's care needs are covered by insurance.
Thus, it seems likely that a substantial proportion of Japanese has an interest in inducing their
children to provide care during old age and in using bequests for this purpose (see Horioka, et
al. (2018) for corroboration of this point).

In this paper, we conduct a theoretical and empirical analysis of the impact of bequest motives
on the work and planned retirement decisions of households in Japan. We first do a theoretical
analysis of the impact of altruistic and exchange bequest motives on work-related outcomes at

1
  However, Horioka (2014) finds that bequest motives are even stronger in India and the United States than in
Japan although they are of roughly comparable strength in China and Japan. Thus, if we find bequest motives to
have a significant impact on work-related outcomes in Japan, their impact is likely to be even greater in India and
the US, where bequest motives are even stronger..
                                                        1
the intensive and extensive margins. We then test our theoretical model's predictions
empirically using micro data from the Preference Parameters Study (Kurashi no Konomi to
Manzokudo ni tsuite no Chousa) of Osaka University. Consistent with our theoretical model's
predictions, we find that respondents with an altruistic or strategic/exchange bequest motive
work more (empirically measured by individual's working hours per week) at the intensive
margin than those without any bequest motive but that respondents with a strategic or exchange
bequest motive work less at the extensive margin (i.e., retire earlier, empirically measured by
planned/desired retirement age) than those without any bequest motive. Our findings for the
strategic or exchange bequest motive are entirely plausible because respondents with such a
motive may want to work harder than others before they retire so that they can earn more, leave
a larger bequest to their children, and elicit more care from them but that they may want to
retire earlier than others so that they can start receiving care from their children sooner.

Moreover, our findings suggest that the altruistic bequest-work relationship in Japan is driven
by relatively young respondents (those aged less than 40 years), which suggests that altruistic
respondents decide their work behavior at a relatively young age. Interestingly, the strategic or
exchange bequest-work relationship is driven primarily by the married male sample. A possible
explanation for this finding is that married males have a greater demand for care from their
children because they as well as their wives are potential care recipients.

We employ a battery of robustness checks to show that our empirical findings concerning the
bequest-work relationship are highly robust, remaining significant and consistent with the
predictions of our theoretical model even when (i) we use a dummy variable for full-time work
in lieu of the number of hours worked per week as an alternative measure of the intensive
margin, (ii) we include a large number of control variables relating to individual- and
household-specific factors to ensure that the bequest-work relationship is free from the
endogeneity bias arising from omitted variable(s), (iii) we ensure that our results are free from
reverse relationship bias, and (iv) we add a number of proxies for wealth to eliminate the
possibility that bequest motives are merely acting as a proxy for wealth, as we discuss in more
detail in section 3.

We make an original contribution to the literature in at least four respects. First, it is one of the
first papers to conduct a theoretical and empirical analysis of the impact of bequest motives on
the work and retirement behavior of parents at both the intensive and extensive margins. Many
studies have analyzed the impact of time and monetary transfers from parents on the recipients'
(children's) work behavior (see, for example, Holtz-Eakin et al. (1993), Joulfaian and Wilhelm
(1994), Wolff (2006), Dustman et al. (2009), Gong (2009), Brown et al. (2010), Dimova and
Wolff (2011), Elinder et al. (2012), Blau and Goodstein (2016), and Doorley and Pestel (2016)
for studies for other countries and Sugano and Matsuyama (2017) and Niizeki and Hori (2019)
for studies for Japan), and most of these studies find that the receipt of bequests and inter vivos
transfers reduces the work behavior (the workforce participation, the number of hours worked,
and the retirement age) of recipients (the so-called "Carnegie conjecture"). However, we have
not been able to find any papers that analyze the impact of bequest motives on the work
behavior of bequest givers (parents). The only related paper of which we are aware is Brown
et al. (2015), which finds that Croatian retirees are more likely to opt for a larger but deferred
stream of pension benefits if they have a stronger bequest motive. To the extent that those who
choose to defer are more likely to continue working, this result implies that bequest motives
have an impact on retirement behavior. Second, to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the
first to conduct an analysis of the impact of bequest motives on work and retirement behavior
for the case of Japan. Third, this paper uses micro data from the Preference Parameters Study,

                                                 2
which reports an exhaustive list of bequest motives along with respondent's detailed attributes,
such as wage, family income, full-time vs part-time, number of hours worked per week, and
planned retirement age, pension, etc. Fourth, this paper distinguishes between different bequest
motives (e.g., altruistic, strategic/exchange motives, etc.), as discussed in more detail later.

Our findings have important policy implications for policymakers in Japan. Since individual
work behavior can be altered by changing inheritance taxes, it is very important for
policymakers to realize that the bequest-work relationship exists but that it varies by bequest
motive in Japan. In the case of a strategic or exchange bequest motive, which affects parents'
work behavior as well as retirement decision, inheritance tax policy should be set taking
account both the increased work effort at the intensive margin as well as the induced retirement
effect of this motive. In the case of the altruistic bequest motive, by contrast, there does not
seem to be any need to worry about the induced retirement effect, meaning that lowering
inheritance taxes will unambiguously increase labor supply by encouraging individuals to leave
bequests.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents the theoretical model of
the impact of bequest motives on work and retirement behavior, section 3 provides empirical
evidence by using micro data from the Preference Parameters Study of Osaka University to test
the predictions of our theoretical model about the impact of bequest motives on work behavior
(e.g., employment status, working hours, and planned retirement age), and section 4 is a
concluding section.


2. The Theoretical Model

In this section, we present a theoretical model that shows the impact of bequest motives on
work and retirement behavior. In subsection 2.1, we present the basic setup of the model; in
subsection 2.2, we consider the case of altruistic bequest motives; in subsection 2.3, we
consider the case of strategic or exchange bequest motives; and in subsection 2.4, we
summarize our findings.


2.1. Basic Setup

Dynamic optimization models resulting in closed-form solutions to endogenous consumption,
saving and labor supply are, to our knowledge, rare. They are often used in quantitative finance
and related economics literature to investigate decision-making under uncertainty. For example,
Rogers (2013, p. 110) augments a standard infinite-horizon Merton problem with the intensive
margin of labor supply and numerically simulates the solutions. Similarly, Rogers (2013, p.
99) presents a Merton-type model with endogenous retirement and presents an explicit solution
to the critical value of wealth that would trigger retirement. Farhi and Panageas (2007)
endogenize risky investment with endogenous retirement choice only. This allows the authors
to focus on closed-form solutions. Our model abstracts from risky investment and focuses on
closed-form solutions pertinent to both margins of labor supply in the context of parent-
offspring transfers. The dynamic quantitative-theoretical literature with labor supply is large.
The interested reader might refer, for instance, to Bagchi's (2015) study that numerically
simulates the effect of the U.S. Social Security system on different margins of labor supply in
an environment with mortality and labor income risk and also cites many studies that look at
dynamic pension reforms and labor supply distortions.

                                               3
Our model features a standard bounded optimal control framework in which we focus on
closed-form solutions by explicitly taking into account the time constraint on leisure. Most
standard theoretical studies with closed-form solutions consider an interior solution with
respect to labor supply (e.g., Bütler 2001) for ease of exposition, but we follow the approach
developed in Gahramanov and Tang (2016a; 2016b) for deriving the optimal age of retirement
and hours worked. In addition, under various assumptions, we are able to provide analytic
solutions for the optimal inheritance level.

Our model is set in continuous time, and time itself is denoted by . To derive closed-form
solutions, we attempt to keep the environment as simple as possible. The main decision-maker
(the "agent" or "parent") enters the workforce at birth ( = 0) and exits the model by age  =
 > 0. The time endowment is normalized to unity. The retirement age ( ) must be chosen
optimally. For each unit of labor endogenously devoted to market work at date , exogenously
determined efficiency units ( ()) are supplied to production. The wage per labor efficiency
unit is  > 0 . All wage income not consumed flows into the individual's financial asset
account (), which grows at rate . The main decision-maker starts the life cycle with a
given amount of bequest received from her own parent (   0), and she finishes the life cycle
with some assets  (determined endogenously) that she will bequeath to her offspring at time
 = .

Suppose that culture and social norms help to shape the care level a person might devote to her
parent (and possibly to others, such as other family members). The overall amount of care
requires a sacrifice of time and is a strictly increasing function of the bequest received (see
subsection 2.2 for more discussion of this.)

Remark 1. From here on in, we assume that the main decision-maker starts her life with no
assets (   = 0 ), and provides no care to her own parents. This assumption is innocuous
because at the start of the model,   and the resulting care-to-own-parents will be
exogenously given by assumption and will be mainly driven by the decisions of the parents of
the main decision-maker. Setting these values to zero allows us to state our forthcoming
solutions in a more compact way and to focus exclusively on the interaction between the main
decision-making agent and her children.

The agent enjoys (derives utility from) private consumption ( ()) and personal leisure ( ()).
Note that the agent's hours of work (1 -  ()) are endogenous since  () is a choice variable.
In what follows, we consider two separate cases--the case of an altruistic bequest motive and
the case of a selfishly motivated strategic or exchange bequest motive.


2.2. Case 1: Altruistic Bequest Motives

When modeling the case of altruistic bequest motives, we assume that the bequest left by the
parent increases her utility because it increases the present value of resources available to her
child and thus by implication the child's ultimate consumption. By contrast, Wilhelm (1996),
Kopczuk (2010), and especially Laitner and Ohlsson (2001) have in mind Barro-type recursive
altruism models in which the parent cares about the consumption and therefore the well-being
of her children, grandchildren, and more distant descendants. These models assume that the
inheritance provided by the parent directly influences the consumption available to the child
(see eq. 1 on p. 208 in Laitner and Ohlsson, 2001). Laitner and Ohlsson (2001, p. 210) and
                                               4
Kopczuk (2010, p. 6) differentiate our formulation from the altruism model and refer to it as
the "egoistic model" or the "joy-of-giving model," and indeed the two formulations have very
different implications for public policy. However, since we are not concerned about Ricardian
equivalence or tax considerations, we can presume that this fine distinction in the parent's
motivations is not important for our purposes and that our Case 1 corresponds in broad terms
to the "altruistic bequest motive" setting. Wilhelm (2010, pp. 880-881) makes a similar
argument (see also Arrondel and Masson, 2006, and Laferrere and Wolff, 2006).

The objective in our altruism model is to maximize
                                         
                                 =   - (1 ln[()] + 2 ln[ ()])
                                        0
                                                                                                     (1)
                                                         -
                                                   +          ln[(())],

where 1 , 2 ,  are positive constants, and  is nonnegative.

Remark 2. Let function  summarize the present value of economic resources available to
the child over the latter's lifetime as seen from the perspective of the decision-making parent.
We assume that the parent believes that if her offspring is given a larger bequest, this will
                                                                          
increase the present value of resources available to the latter; that is, () > 0. 2

Observe from (1) that a function of the terminal stock () is added to the integral, and this
"scrap value function" has the standard economic interpretation (e.g., Léonard and Van Long,
1992, pp. 226-229). In other words, the parent attaches some positive value to what she leaves
behind at time  because she has an altruistic bequest motive.

The optimization problem is subject to the dynamic budget equation, control constraints, and
the endpoint conditions given in (2)-(5):

                                        ()
                                           = () +  ()(1 -  ()) -  (),                                        (2)
                                        
                                              0   ()  1,                                                     (3)
                                                (0) = 0,                                                     (4)
                                               () = free.                                                    (5)

Equation (4) is consistent with Remark 1. Note that the chosen utility function allows us to
ignore the additional control constraint on (). Further, given (5), the solution to the problem
can be obtained by using a transversality condition for a free endpoint with scrap value that
would essentially equate the marginal benefit of an increase in the terminal asset level to the
associated marginal cost over the entire time interval. For ease of exposition, however, we
proceed with the two-step procedure outlined in the remark below when deriving the solution.

Remark 3. Here we adapt the two-step solution strategy as follows: (i) solve the optimization
problem treating () as fixed (i.e., () is arbitrarily fixed at some amount of   or



2
  In principle, it is possible that a larger bequest would discourage, say, work effort and ultimately leave the child
financially worse off (or no better off), but we assume that the parent rules out such a possibility when making a
decision.
                                                          5
"bequest given"), and then (ii) solve for the optimal value of   given that consumption and
labor supply are chosen optimally for every possible   value. 3

In the first step, we thus define the Hamiltonian function

                         1 =  - (1 ln[ ()] + 2 ln[ ()]) + ()(() +  ()(1
                                                                        (6)
                                    -  ()) -  ()),

where  () is a dynamic multiplier. Optimal controls must satisfy the following conditions:

                               ()   1
                                  =    = () +  ()(1 -  ()) -  (),                                    (7)
                                    ()
                                     ()    1
                                        =-    = -(),                                                 (8)
                                           ()
and

                                                         max     1 
                                                  {1-()0,()}


                                     max       {2                                                    (9)
                                {1-()0, ()}
                                                  =  - (1 ln[ ()] + 2 ln[ ()])
                                                  + ()(()(1 -  ()) -  ())}.

A necessary condition is that there exists a dynamic multiplier ()  0 such that if the
Lagrangian of the Hamiltonian

                          =  - (1 ln[()] + 2 ln[ ()]) +  ()(()(1 -  ())
                                                                                                     (10)
                                   -  ()) + ()(() - 1),

then (11)-(14) hold:

                                        
                                           = 1  -  ()-1 -  () = 0,                                   (11)
                                        ()
                                 
                                     = 2  - ()-1 -  ()() + () = 0,                                   (12)
                                  ()
                                           ()(() - 1) = 0,                                           (13)
                                             1 - ()  0.                                              (14)

We focus our attention on standard labor supply behavior. Let there be some internal point in
time   (0, ) (to be determined) on or after which the agent stops working, and hence
 () = 1. Thus,

                                               () < 1for  [0,  ),                                    (15)

                                              () = 1for  [ , ].                                      (16)



3
  Furthermore, since the solution to such dynamic problems can still easily become cumbersome, we will assume
that the discount rate and the interest rate are equal in order to facilitate the analysis.
                                                     6
The complementarity condition implies that if () = 0 , then  () < 1 , and we have the
following system of equations:

                               ()    () + ()(1 -  ()) -  ()
                                   =                                                     (17)
                               ()          -()

for  [0,  ).

If, on the other hand, () < 0, then  () = 1, and we have the following system of equations:

                                        ()     () -  ()
                                             =                                           (18)
                                         ()    -()

for  [ , ]. Hence, the optimal solution can be found by joining together the solutions of
(17)-(18). Note that the function  () is defined over the entire planning interval, and from
(17) and (18) we see that it obeys the same law of motion. Since the function is continuous, we
obtain

                                        () =  - for  [0, ],                              (19)

where  is a constant to be determined.

From (11), we obtain

                                            () = 1  - /().                               (20)

Now, note that if () = 0, then  () < 1. Hence, (12) leads to

                                () =  - = 2  - ()-1 (1/()).                              (21)

Recall that  ( ) = 1. Substituting this into (21) (and recalling that  = ), we can express
the constant  in terms of  as

                                        ( ) = 2 /(( )).                                  (22)

Thus,

                                    () = ( ) - for  [0, ].                               (23)

Substituting (23) into (20), we obtain from (18)

                                         ()         1
                                            = () -     ,                                 (24)
                                                   ( )

for   [ , ].

Using (5) for an arbitrarily fixed terminal stock value   , we derive the solution to (24) as



                                               7
                                       1
                               () =        1 -  (-)  +    (-) ,                          (25)
                                       ( )

for   [ , ].

Evaluating (25) at  =  , we obtain

                        ( )  1 ( )
                                            1                                            (26)
                                       =        1 -  (-)  +    ( -) .
                                            (
                                              )

Next, substituting (23) into (11) and (12) and considering the () = 0 case (recall that  =
), we solve for the optimal consumption and leisure paths as functions of  :

                                                           1
                                                  () =        ,                          (27)
                                                          ( )

                                                        2
                                             () =            ,                           (28)
                                                       ( )()

for   [0,  ).

Remark 4. Note from (28) that for the agent to retire before exiting the model, it is necessary
that the labor productivity profile,  (), decline sufficiently rapidly after some point in time.

Substituting (27) and (28) into (17), we obtain

                         ()                 2       1
                            = () +  () 1 -       -     ,                                 (29)
                                           ( )()   ( )

for   [0,  ). Using (4), the solution to (29) is
                                              
                                         
                                                               2
                               () =    () 1 -                       
                                             0                ( )()
                                                                                         (30)
                                                    1
                                                 -       - ,
                                                   ( )

for   [0,  ). Expression (30) implies that

                         ( )   2 ( )
                                                      
                                                                      2
                                        =                  () 1 -          
                                                      0              ( )()               (31)
                                              1
                                        -         - .
                                             ( )

Hence, for a given bequest amount   ,  is the solution to the following equation:

                                            1 ( ) =  2 ( ).                              (32)


                                                  8
Remark 5. It is clear from (32) that even a simple dynamic model can easily lead to a
cumbersome solution, and it might be impossible to derive a closed-form solution. To obtain a
tractable, closed-form solution, we introduce additional simplifying assumptions. First, we
assume that the interest rate  = 0 (an assumption that is quite reasonable in the case of
Japan). Also, we assume that  () = 1 - (1/).

Consequently, recalling (22), we obtain

                                              ( -  )2 1
                                   lim 1 ( ) =   +        ,                                (33)
                                 0               2
                                           ( (21 + 2 ) - 21 )
                             lim  2 ( ) =                     .                            (34)
                             0                 22

Thus, setting (33) equal to (34), we can solve for the optimal retirement age for a given bequest
amount. Under the assumption of both roots being real, a positive root takes the form

                                                        -1 + /                             (35)
                                         ( ) =                 ,
                                                           2

where

                                    (2  2 2 + 1 (1 + 22 )).                                (36)


Remark 6. It is clear from (36) that an exogenous increase in the amount of the bequest given
  would raise the age of retirement. However, the next task is to find the optimal bequest
amount. For that purpose, we need to specify the form of the  function.

For the sake of simplicity, let us assume that the parent believes that a one-unit increase in the
bequest given increases the lifetime well-being of her offspring by  > 0 units, where  can
be sufficiently small. Let

                                         (  ) =   .                                 (37)

Recalling that  =  = 0, using (22), (27)-(28), (35), and (37), let us rewrite (1) as

                                              1 + 2 ,                               (38)

where

                                
                                          1
                   1  1               ln        
                             0            (  )
                                             
                                                          2                         (39)
                                   + 2               ln         
                                          0              ( )()
                         +  ln[  ],
                                           
                               1
                 2  1    ln           + 2    ln[1] .                                (40)
                              ( )           


                                                 9
The optimal bequest amount   is the one that solves

                                      1   2
                                        +   = 0.                                 (41)
                                         
                                                                
Under the assumption of real roots, the optimal bequest amount ( = () ) is


                            
                                    (1 + 2 ) +  - 1 
                             =             2         ,                           (42)
                                         2

where

                            1  (1 + )(1 + 22 + ).                                (43)
                                                                   
Substituting (42) into (35), we obtain the optimal retirement age ( ) as follows:

                                      1
                            = -         1 - 2 - 21 .                             (44)
                                      2

where

                      2  2 2 + 2(1 + 2 ) +  2 1 (1 + 22 ).                       (45)

Analogously, we can find the optimal leisure profile (() ), and ultimately the optimal labor
supply (() ) during the working life as follows:


                                               1 + 2 - 2 - 21                    (46)
                   (   )     1 -  (   )    =                               .
                                                       ( - )2

The optimal consumption profile takes the form


                                        (1 + 2 ) - 2 - 21
                                                                                 (47)
                         () = 1                     2                 .
                                                    2

Notice that

                     
                          1 -  - (1 + 2 ) 1 - 
                      = -                      .                                 (48)
                                 2 2
                                     1

The term 1 is strictly less than ( + (1 + 2 ), while 1 is strictly greater than .
Therefore, (48) is strictly positive in sign, indicating that the more the parent cares for her
child's financial well-being, the larger the bequest she intends to leave. Similarly,



                                               10
           ()
              
             4 2 + 6(1 + 2 ) + 2 2 1 (1 + 22 ) - (4 + 2(1 + 2 ))1 (49)
           =                                                     .
                          2( - )2 1 2 - 21

The denominator of (49) is negative since up to the age of retirement,  < . The numerator
is negative since the term (4 + 2(1 + 2 ))2 1 exceeds the term (4 2 + 6(1 +
                                                        2
2 ) + 2 2 1 (1 + 22 ))2 by a positive amount 4 3 2        (2 (1 + 2 ) + 1 (1 + 22 )).
Thus, an increase in the strength of the altruistic bequest motive increases the number of
working hours.

Finally,
                                   
                                      ()
                                    =    ( - ).                                        (50)
                                      

Since (49) is positive, so is (50), implying that an increase in the strength of the altruistic
bequest motive delays retirement. Thus, we conclude with

Remark 7. An increase in the strength of the altruistic bequest motive will cause parents to not
only work more hours per week but also to work longer and retire later, as shown by equations
(49) and (50).


2.3. Case 2: Strategic or Exchange Bequest Motives

In this subsection, we assume that parents leave a bequest to elicit care and/or attention from
their children. This is the so-called strategic or exchange bequest motive discussed by Laitner
and Ohlsson (2001, p. 211) and Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985). Some questions arise
immediately. Suppose a child took good care of her elderly parents by sacrificing time and
resources. How can he/she be sure that her parents will reward him or her properly and will not
renege on their implicit or explicit promise? By contrast, even if parents gave the promised
reward to their child, the latter might still fail to carry out her duties as promised. After all, if
intra-household gifts and exchanges are based on purely selfish motives to begin with, selfish
individuals might consider breaking their promises whenever they felt like it.

Real life is more complex, however. Even if it is in an individual's self-interest to break an
agreement, often a society develops social customs and rules to minimize such deviant
behavior, and such social customs might be easier to enforce between members of one family
(who tend to be bound by intra-household trust and affection) than between total strangers.
Moreover, another way to ensure that both parents and children hold up their end of the bargain
is for them to draw up and sign a legally enforceable contract (or at least an implicit or verbal
contract).

To proceed with our technical analysis simply, we need to specify a quid pro quo bequest/care
function. Note that care to parents can take many forms. We assume that care takes the form
of a time sacrifice on the part of children (e.g., when they spend time interacting with, and
entertaining, their parents or running errands for them). Certainly, it is not necessary to assume

                                                 11
that parents and children are expected to always spend time together as nothing prevents an
arrangement whereby, for example, a child paints her parent's fence while the latter is at work
or on vacation elsewhere, but to simplify the analysis, we assume in our model that care always
takes the form of spending time with parents. Fundamentally, even though spending time with
parents entails various opportunity costs, the reward is a bequest.

Remark 8. Let us introduce the "care function" (, (), ) , where  is the vector of
functions, and assume that the care function is known and shaped by social customs and
traditions. In line with the mathematical theory of optimal processes, let function  be
continuously differentiable in all of its arguments, none of which is a derivative. Assume that
                                   (,(),)
0  (, (), ) < 1 and that                      > 0 . Hence, we assume that a ceteris paribus
                                      ( )
increase in the bequest amount () increases the amount of care time the child spends with
her parent.

Note that time might enter function  in the sense that, before some age, the expected care
from one's child might be minimal since the parent is presumably healthy and busy at work
but that it might increase rapidly with time as the parent ages and children mature. Vector 
might include, among other things, the child's bargaining power and outside opportunities (that
is, a child with better outside options would need to be promised a larger bequest to exert the
same amount of care effort).

For any given bequest amount, the parent expects her child to spend (, (), ) fraction of
time with the parent. For example, consider a parent who promises to bequeath () =
$10,000. Suppose that, at a certain point in time, the parent enjoys nine hours of non-sleep
time as leisure, while social customs require that, in this case, the child spend one hour with
the parent (i.e., (, (), ) = 1/9) . Thus, the parent enjoys eight hours of leisure alone
(away from the child) and one hour with the child. If the promised bequest amount increases
to $20,000, the child would promise to spend, say, an hour and a half with the parent
((, (), ) = 1/6) at time . In this case, the parent enjoys seven and a half hours of leisure
alone, and an hour and a half with the child.

Let the lifetime utility function of the main decision-maker now be
                               
                         =   - (1 ln[()]
                              0                                                      (1)
                                        + 2 ln[(1 - (, (), ))()]
                                        + 3 ln[(, (), ) ()]).

Remark 9. We assume that the parent derives utility not only from leisure spent alone but also
from leisure spent with her child. Note from (1) that when the parent leaves a larger bequest
to her child (() is greater), she ends up buying more joint time with the child, and thus, by
definition, spends less time alone. There is a trade-off between leisure enjoyed privately and
leisure enjoyed jointly with the child. Note, moreover, that the parent does not derive any utility
directly from the amount of her bequest or the consumption of her child because she is not
altruistic. The parent's bequest increases her utility only by increasing the amount of time she
can spend with her child.

Let us for clarity of exposition denote terminal capital stock  () as   . We now consider
two separate assumptions about the care function, the first one being
                                                12
Assumption 1. Care is given by (,   , ) = 0   , where 0 is positive yet small.

Under Assumption 1, we consider a truly simplistic case, where the care level is simply
proportional to the amount of the assets bequeathed to the child. This greatly facilitates the
analysis, yet leads (as will be seen shortly) to one-sided results. Following the same steps as in
subsection 2.2, we can re-state the analogue of (12) as the first-order necessary condition for
leisure:

                         
                             = (2 + 3 ) - ()-1 - ()() + () = 0.                            (12)
                          ()

Hence, the analogues of (22) and (28) are

                                     ( ) = (2 + 3 )/(( )),                                 (22)

and

                                                      2 + 3
                                             () =           ,                              (28)
                                                     ( )()

for   [0,  ), respectively. We can thus rewrite (31) as

                          ( )   2 ( )
                                                       
                                             
                                                                       2 + 3
                                        =                  () 1 -            
                                                    0                 ( )()                (31)
                                           1
                                        -       - .
                                          (
                                             )

Taking the limit of (31) as   0, and equating the resulting expression with the analogue of
(33) (where 2 is replaced with 2 + 3 ), we solve for the retirement age as follows:

                                                        -1 + 3 /                           (35)
                                        ( ) =                    ,
                                                         2 + 3

where

                         3  (2  (2 + 3 )2 + 1 (1 + 2(2 + 3 ))).                            (36)


Thus, under Assumption 1, the optimal bequest amount can be computed as in Case 1, this time
rewriting (1) as (and recalling that  =  = 0)

                                            1 + 2 ,                                 (38)

where




                                               13
                1
                            
                             1
                 1      ln         
                    0        (  )
                       
                             2 + 3                                             (39)
                + 2     ln            (1 - (,   , )) 
                    0        (   ) ()
                            
                               2 + 3
                + 3            ln        (,   , ) ,
                      0         (   ) ()
                          
                                   1
                    2  1    ln          
                                 (  )
                                         
                                  + 2             ln1 - (,   , )               (40)
                                             
                                         
                                  + 3             ln[(,   , )] .
                                             


The optimal bequest amount is the amount that solves

                                        1 2
                                         +  = 0.                               (41)
                                           
                                                                               
Unfortunately, even under Assumption 1, it is practically impossible to obtain    from (41)
as an explicit function of the exogenous parameters. However, let (41) implicitly define the
optimal bequest amount as a function of exogenous parameters. Consequently,
                                   
                                         /3
                                     =-                                         (51)
                                   3     /

We verify that the right-hand side of (51) can be strictly positive around a range of points
satisfying (41), implying that an increase in 3 might increase the optimal bequest amount.
                                                                    
Using this fact and expression (35) (where we replace   with           ), we can compute the
comparative statics as follows:
                      
                      
                      3
                                                                                        (50)
                                                                                3
                          -1 (1 + 2 + 3 ) - 4  +                    (2 + 3 )
                                                               3
                      =                                                             ,
                                             (2 + 3 )2 4

where
                            
                       4  (2 (2 + 3 )2 + 1 (1 + 2(2 + 3 ))).                            (52)


Even when (51) is positive, the sign of (50) is ambiguous. The same ambiguity is certainly
observed when considering the number of hours worked during the working phase of life,
which can be expressed as

                                             14
                                                                 
                                                                   - 
                             ()  1 -  () = 1 +                                         (46)
                                                                  - 

Remark 10. Under Assumption 1, both the retirement age and hours worked move in the same
direction in response to the rise in the strength of the exchange motive (see (46) and (50)).

Intuitively, in the case of the quid pro quo strategic or exchange bequest motive, the decision-
making parent wants to extract as much care as possible from her child and for that reason she
wants to leave as large a bequest as possible, which follows from equation (51). This
encourages the parent to maximize lifetime income, which in turn requires the parent to supply
more labor and to retire later. However, in order to be able to afford to leave a larger bequest,
the parent might want to reduce private consumption, which can be compensated for by
increasing the amount of leisure. Interestingly, equation (46) implies that if the strategic or
exchange bequest motive induces the parent to increase her labor supply at the intensive
margin, it will also induce her to retire later, and conversely. Thus, both the retirement age and
number of hours worked move strictly in the same direction under Assumption 1.

However, in reality, younger parents tend to have less need for care and attention from their
children. Earlier in life, people are healthier and/or they find it harder to distract their children,
who are at the early stages of their studies and career. More importantly, when parents are
preoccupied with their work duties, they feel less lonely and less vulnerable. However, when
they age and approach retirement age (and especially when they are less preoccupied with their
formal work duties), their need for attention might increase. We thus propose an alternative
specification for the care function, as given by the following assumption.

Assumption 2. Care is given by

                                                                1                             (53)
                                          (,   , ) =                      ,
                                                            1 +  2 (1-())

where 1 and 2 are exogenous parameters.

Thus, under the second assumption, the care function takes a logistic form (which is
differentiable) and again rises with the amount of bequest left,   . However, notice that during
younger working ages (when () is small), the level of care is low. As the agent ages and
thus approaches retirement (()  1), the care level demanded from the child can rise rapidly.

When care is given by (53), we can try to derive the analogue of (12), which now will become
much more complicated.

                       
                           = (2 1 + 3 2 ) - ()-1 -  ()() + () = 0,                            (12)
                        ()

where

                                                       1 
                                           1-                  2
                                                1+ 21-()
                                     1              1 
                                                                   ,                   (54)
                                             1-
                                                  1+ 2 1-()

                                                  15
                                              2 1-()  ()2
                                  2  1 +                      .                    (55)
                                              1 +  2 1-()

We can see that, in Assumption 1, essentially 1 = 2  1. Next, we obtain

                             ( )
                             (1  (2 + 2 ) - 4)2 + 3 (2 + 2 )(1   - 2)                     (22)
                           =                                          .
                                       2( )(1   - 2)

In what follows, it is important to solve (12) for leisure  () when () = 0 so that dynamic
budget constraints can be used to pin down the optimal retirement age for a given terminal
bequest level. Unfortunately, no closed-form solution exists in this case, which makes it
extremely difficult to analytically infer the effect of a quid pro quo strategic or exchange
bequest motive on the optimal retirement age and intensive labor supply. However, we have
conducted a number of computations using various techniques as well as programmed
simulations in GPOPS II (Patterson and Rao, 2014). Some interesting numerical results are
provided in Table 1.

We observe from the last column of Table 1 that parents with a stronger quid pro quo strategic
or exchange bequest motive bequeath more. The second and third columns show that the
optimal retirement age and hours worked move in opposite directions. Hence, we conclude
with the following

Remark 11. Under Assumption 2, it is possible that the stronger the quid pro quo strategic or
exchange bequest motive, the larger the number of working hours and the earlier the retirement
age, as shown by Table 1.


2.4. Summary

To summarize, our theoretical model has shown that different types of bequest motives have
different impacts on the work behavior of households. Households with a stronger altruistic
bequest motive unambiguously work more hours and retire later than households with a weaker
bequest motive, but the impact of a strategic or exchange bequest motive on work behavior is
theoretically ambiguous. Households with a stronger strategic or exchange bequest motive may
work more or fewer hours and retire earlier or later than households with a weaker strategic or
exchange bequest motive.

It is entirely possible that some parents would expect much more care specifically during the
retirement stage, while in general some parents would seek greater attention when they are less
preoccupied with their current jobs. The flexibility of (53) allows us to generate various shapes
for the care function. Under different parameterisations, the impact of a strategic or exchange
bequest motive on the timing of retirement can still be ambiguous because, on the one hand,
the parent wants to work longer to increase her lifetime income and the amount of her bequest
in order to elicit more care from children, while on the other hand, she might want to retire
earlier so she can start receiving care from her children sooner. Thus, when a strong strategic
or exchange bequest motive is present, bequest motives have a complex impact on various


                                               16
margins of work behavior. A careful empirical analysis is needed to shed light on these
interactions, and this is precisely what we do in section 3.


3. Empirical Analysis

In this section, we present the results of our empirical analysis of the impact of bequest motives
on the retirement behavior of households in Japan using micro data from the Preference
Parameters Study of Osaka University. More specifically, in subsection 3.1, we derive testable
hypotheses for a Japanese individual from our theoretical analysis; in subsection 3.2, we
explain our data source and sample selection criteria; in subsection 3.3, we explain our
estimation model and variable definitions; in subsection 3.4, we conduct a univariate analysis
of individual work behavior under different bequest motives; and in subsection 3.5, we present
and interpret our estimation results.


3.1. Hypothesis Development

In this subsection, we derive testable hypotheses from our theoretical analysis in section 2. Our
theoretical model predicts that a parent with a stronger altruistic bequest motive will leave a
larger bequest to her children and thus work more at both the intensive margin (see Remark 7
on page 11). Thus, the testable hypothesis regarding the altruistic bequest motive is as follows:

H1: The stronger an individual's altruistic bequest motive, the larger the bequest she will leave
to her children and the more she will work at both the intensive and extensive margins.

By contrast, our theoretical model reveals that an individual with a strategic or exchange
bequest motive confronts a dilemma. On the one hand, she wants to work more in order to be
able to earn more, to leave a larger bequest to her children, and to elicit more care from them,
but on the other hand, she wants to work less so that she can spend more time with (and receive
more care from) her children. As a result, the net impact of this type of bequest motive on the
amount of work at the intensive margin ( see Remark 11 on page 16) is ambiguous. However,
since the social norm in Japan is to work hard, a Japanese individual may work more at the
intensive margin (for example, work more hours per week) in order to earn more, to leave a
larger bequest to her children, and to elicit more care from them, but retire earlier in order to
be able to start receiving care from her children sooner. Thus, the testable hypothesis regarding
the strategic or exchange bequest motive is as follows:

H2: An individual with a strategic or exchange bequest motive will work more at the intensive
margin but work less at the extensive margin (i.e., retire earlier).

Hypothesis H1 is framed in terms of a continuous variable measuring the strength of the
altruistic bequest motive, and H2 is framed in terms of a variable measuring how much value
the parent places on spending time with her children, but as discussed in subsection 3.2 below,
we only have discrete information on whether or not respondents have each type of bequest
motive. Therefore, we test these hypotheses by analyzing how the work behavior of a
respondent with an altruistic or strategic/exchange bequest motive compares with that of a
respondent with no bequest motive whatsoever.



                                                17
3.2. Data Source and Sample Selection Criteria

In this subsection, we discuss the data source we use for our analysis and our sample selection
criteria. We use micro data from the 2012 wave the Preference Parameters Study (Kurashi no
Konomi to Manzokudo ni tsuite no Chousa) of Osaka University, a panel survey that was
conducted in Japan and three other countries by the 21st Century Center of Excellence (COE)
Program "Behavioral Macrodynamics Based on Surveys and Experiments" and the Global
COE Project "Human Behavior and Socioeconomic Dynamics" of Osaka University. The
survey was conducted annually during the 2003-13 period, but we chose to use data from the
2012 wave because the question about bequest motives was not asked in every year and 2012
was the most recent year for which this question was asked. The survey collects data on a
nationwide random sample of both sexes, and the 2012 survey had 4588 respondents.

The micro data from the 2012 wave is perfectly suited for our purposes because it collects
detailed information on bequest motives, working hours, employment status (full-time vs. part-
time), planned retirement age, and all of the other variables that we need for our analysis. The
complete survey instrument (questionnaire form) for the survey that we used for this analysis
can be found at the following website:
https://www.iser.osaka-
.ac.jp/survey_data/doc/japan/questionnaire/english/2012QuestionnaireJAPAN.pdf

Since the data source we used is a panel survey, it would have been preferable to do a panel
analysis with fixed effects to control for individual heterogeneity, but unfortunately, we were
not able to do so because some questions such as the ones pertaining to bequest motives were
not asked in every wave. Fortunately, however, the survey we used collects information on a
multitude of individual and household attributes, so we were able to control for such
heterogeneity by including a large number of individual- and household-related covariates.

The sample selection criteria we used are as follows:

(1) We dropped all observations for which there were missing values for at least one of the
    variables used in the estimations.

(2) We dropped all observations for which respondents are not currently working.

(3) We dropped all observations for which respondents have no children because we were
    interested in examining whether respondents' intention of leaving bequests to their children
    has any impact on their work behavior.

(4) Since the value of the wage rate (WAGE) was unreasonably high or low in some cases due
    to the reported number of hours worked being unreasonably high or low, we dropped all
    observations that were in the top 1% or the bottom 1% of the distribution of WAGE.


3.3. Estimation Model and Variable Definitions

In this subsection, we describe the estimation model and the variables we use from the survey
questions to test the hypotheses regarding the impact of bequest motives on individuals' work
behavior that we derived and discussed in the subsection 3.1. The question number in
parentheses for each variable shows the survey question we used to construct that variable.

                                               18
The estimation model for an individual i's work behavior is as follows:

 = 0 +   +   +   +   +   +    +  ,                                                                         (56)

where  is the dependent variable that represents work-related outcomes for the intensive and
extensive margins for individual i as defined below:

Log(HRSPERWEEK) = the natural logarithm of the number of hours the respondent is working
per week (a measure of the intensive margin, survey question B9), and

Log(RETAGE) = the natural logarithm of the age at which the respondent plans to retire (a
measure of the extensive margin, survey question B12).

HRSPERWEEK pertains to the intensive margin (i.e., how much the respondent works during
a given period of time, given that he or she works) whereas RETAGE pertains to the extensive
margin (i.e., how long the respondent plans to work before retiring completely). We estimate
a separate equation for each of these two dependent variables 4. More precisely, we estimate
the HRSPERWEEK and RETAGE equations using ordinary least squares.

In addition, we use the probability of working full-time as an alternate measure of the intensive
margin in our robustness checks to be presented later.

FULLTIME = 1 if the respondent is working full-time and 0 if the respondent is working part-
time (survey question B13b),

The explanatory variables pertaining to bequest motives in the estimation model above (),
which are of most interest for our purposes, are as follows:

BEQMOTALT ( ) = 1 if the respondent is planning to leave a bequest to his or her
child(ren) under any circumstances and 0 otherwise (survey question A31)

BEQMOTCARE ( ) = 1 if the respondent is planning to leave a bequest to his or her
child(ren) only if his or her child(ren) provide care (including nursing care) during old age and
0 otherwise (survey question A31)

BEQMOTFIN   = 1 if the respondent is planning to leave a bequest to his or her
child(ren) only if his or her child(ren) provide financial assistance during old age and 0
otherwise (survey question A31)




4
  It is quite possible that the two work-related variables--number of hours worked per week and planned
retirement age--are seemingly contemporaneously correlated. For example, an individual who plans to retire
earlier may choose to work for more hours per week. This can make the error terms of the two work-related
dependent variables (Log(RETAGE) and Log(HRSPERWEEK)) contemporaneously correlated. These equations
can be estimated jointly using the Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) method. However, the joint (SUR)
estimates and the single equation (ordinary least squares or OLS) estimates are identical when the right-hand side
variables are the same. In our case, the right-hand side variables are the same in the two equations, and hence we
estimate each equation separately.
                                                       19
BEQMOTBUS ( ) = 1 if the respondent is planning to leave a bequest to his or her
child(ren) only if his or her children carry on the family business and 0 otherwise (survey
question A31)

BEQMOTWEAK ( ) = 1 if the respondent does not plan to make special efforts to leave
a bequest to his or her child(ren) but will leave whatever is leftover and 0 otherwise (survey
question A31)

We regard BEQMOTALT as an altruistic bequest motive because the respondent does not
impose any preconditions for leaving a bequest, and we regard BEQMOTCARE,
BEQMOTFIN, and BEQMOTBUS as strategic or exchange bequest motives because the
respondent imposes preconditions for leaving a bequest in all three cases. The default
categories are respondents who do not plan to leave a bequest to their children under any
circumstances and respondents who want to leave a bequest to their children but will not
because they do not have the financial capacity to do so. Since we benchmark on individuals
with no bequest motive 5, the  measure the impact of each type of bequest motive on the
individual's work behavior. For instance, the sign and significance of  and  can shed
light on the impact of altruistic and strategic or exchange bequest motives on work behavior as
stated in H1 and H2 above, respectively.

To control for the impact of other individual- and household-specific factors on the three work-
related outcomes, we include the following variables in vector x following, for example, Brown
et. al (2015), Farhi et. at (2007), and Honig (1998), among others:

Log(WAGE) = the natural logarithm of the respondent's wage rate (hourly wage) (survey
questions B9 and B18)

In the data source we used, respondents have a choice between writing down his or her monthly
salary or his or her hourly wage. For respondents who wrote down their hourly wage, we used
this information as is, but for respondents who wrote down their monthly salary, we converted
their monthly salary to an hourly wage by dividing their monthly salary by the number of hours
worked per month. Since respondents are asked to report the number of hours they work per
week, we converted it to the number of hours they work per month by multiplying it by 52,
then dividing by 12 (or by multiplying by 4.33333).

Since the work decisions of respondents will be affected by the earned income of other
household members, we also include the respondent's household earned income excluding the
respondent's own earned income:

Log(OTHERINC) = the natural logarithm of non-respondent earned income, which was
calculated as the respondent's household earned income excluding the respondent's own
earned income (survey questions B19 and B36)



5
  "No bequest motive" includes the following three out of eight responses to the bequest motive question in the
survey: "the repondent does not plan to leave a bequest to his or her child(ren) under any circumstances because
doing so may reduce their will to work," "the respondent does not plan to leave a bequest to his or her child(ren)
under any circumstances because he or she wants to use his or her wealth himself or herself," and "the respondent
wants to leave a bequest to his or her chid(ren) but he or she won't because he or she does not have the financial
capacity to do so."
                                                       20
BEQREC = 1 if the respondent has received a bequest (including real and financial assets) with
a total value of 5,000,000 yen or more from his or her parents or parents-in-law in the past and
0 otherwise (survey question A32)

BEQEXP = 1 if the respondent expects to receive a bequest (including real and financial assets)
with a total value of 5,000,000 yen or more from his or her parents or parents-in-law in the
future and 0 otherwise (survey question A33)

We include wealth-related variables such as WAGE, OTHERINC, BEQREC, and BEQEXP to
eliminate the possibility that bequest motives are merely acting as a proxy for wealth, and we
believe that BEQREC and BEQEXP are especially suitable for this purpose because they are
largely exogenous, being the decision of the respondent's parents.

Furthermore, we include the following personal and work-related attributes of the respondent
to eliminate the possibility of omitted variable(s) (endogeniety) bias that can bias the bequest-
work relationship due to the model's errors ( ) being correlated with bequest motives 6:

MALE = 1 if the respondent is male and 0 if the respondent is female (survey question B1)

MARRIED = 1 if the respondent is married or cohabiting with a partner and 0 if the respondent
is never married, divorced, widowed, or separated and in the process of getting divorced
(survey question B2)

Log(AGE) = the natural logarithm of the respondent's current age (survey question B4)

HEALTH = the respondent's health status on a scale of 1 to 5 (with 5 being the highest) (survey
question B51)

WORRY = the extent to which the respondent is worried about his or her life after age 65
(future life in the case of respondents who are 65 or older) on a scale of 1 to 5 (with 5 being
the highest) (survey question A1)

WORK = the extent to which the respondent feels that "work is something to live for" on a
scale of 1 to 5 (with 5 being the highest) (survey question A1)

WORKSAT = the extent to which the respondent is satisfied with work on a scale of 1 to 5
(with 5 being the highest) (survey question B18)

SALWKR = 1 if the respondent is a salaried worker and 0 if the respondent is self-employed
or a family worker (survey question B13a)

PENSION = the proportion of the living expenses after the retirement of the respondent and
his or her spouse (if any) that the respondent expects to be able to cover using public pension
benefits (in percent) (survey question B42)

NUMCHILDREN = the number of children the respondent has (survey question B15)



6
 For example, omitting MALE may cause  to be correlated with bequest motives () since males are the
main contributor to household wealth in Japan.
                                                21
GAMBLE = 1 if the respondent gambles at least several times a year and 0 otherwise (included
as a proxy for the degree of risk aversion) (survey question B57)

We believe that our estimates are free from reverse relationship (endogeneity) bias--a bias
arising from the fact that the respondent works hard simply because he/she enjoys working,
that he/she ends up being able to accumulate more wealth than he/she can use himself/herself
because he/she works harder, and that this makes it easier for him//her to leave a bequest--
because a reverse relationship is more likely to be observed for older workers (who are more
likely to have accumulated a significant amount of wealth) whereas our results are driven by
younger workers (as we show later). Moreover, we include WORK and WORKSAT (both of
which are presumably fundamental or exogenous variables) to eliminate the possibility of
reverse relationship bias. Note, finally, that, even if including WORK and WORKSAT is not
sufficient to eliminate reverse relationship bias, the survey we used lists five types of bequest
motives (BEQMOTALT, BEQMOTCARE, BEQMOTFIN, BEQMOTBUS, and
BEQMOTWEAK), and respondents who accumulate more wealth than they can use
themselves because they enjoy working will presumably be more likely to have a weak
(unintended) bequest motive (BEQMOTWEAK) rather than an altruistic bequest motive
(BEQMOTALT) or a strategic or exchange bequest motive for care (BEQMOTCARE). For all
of these reasons, reverse relationship bias is unlikely to be applicable in the case of our main
variables of interest. 7


3.4. Univariate Analysis

In this subsection, we conduct a univariate analysis of the variables relating to work behavior
and bequest motives. As can be seen from Table 2, the mean values of the three work-related
outcomes are as follows: 59.4% of the sample works full-time, the average number of hours
worked per week is 41.3, and the average planned retirement age is 64.7 years. The average
planned retirement age is reasonable because, in Japan, the mandatory retirement age (and the
age at which workers can start receiving public pension benefits) are in the process of being
raised from 60 to 65.

As for bequest motives, 29.4% of the sample has an altruistic bequest motive, 3.0% of the
sample has a strategic or exchange bequest motive pertaining to providing care to parents, 0.8%
of the sample has a strategic or exchange bequest motive pertaining to providing financial
assistance to parents, 0.8% of the sample has a strategic or exchange bequest motive pertaining
to carrying on the family business, 47.3% of the sample has a weak bequest motive, and 18.7%
of the sample has no bequest motive at all.

Among the strategic or exchange bequest motives, we confine our discussion to the motive
pertaining to providing care to parents because this is the motive that is closest in spirit to our
theoretical model and because the shares of the other strategic or exchange bequest motives are

7
   Moreover, respondents who worked for many hours per week and accumulated considerable wealth as a result
may or may not choose to leave a bequest. For example, Andrew Carnegie strongly opposed leaving inheritances
to one's children even though he worked hard and became one of the world's wealthiest men because he felt that
it would weaken their will to work and to contribute to society (see Carnegie, 1962; this motive corresponds to
the first response in footnote 5). Indeed, he set an example by giving away all of his massive wealth to charitable
causes and leaving nothing to his daughter, and there are many other wealthy individuals who behave similarly.
Thus, we believe that bequest decisions arise from deep parameters that are exogenous and that whether or not
one has a bequest motive is independent of one's work effort or wealth level.
                                                        22
less than 1% of the sample. Moreover, the weak bequest motive is not related to H1 and H2 so
we do not discuss the results for this motive either although we include all bequest motives in
the estimation model so we can estimate the partial effects  and  of the bequest motives
in which we are interested, i.e., BEQMOTALT ( ) and BEQMOTCARE ( ).

Before turning to our regression analysis, we present the results of our univariate analysis of
the bequest-work relationship (as hypothesized in H1 and H2 ) in Table 3 with the average
values of the two work-related outcomes being broken down by bequest motive. We can see
from this table that the outcome variables differ substantially by bequest motive in systematic
ways. For example, respondents with an altruistic bequest motive (those who plan to leave a
bequest to their children under any circumstances) show higher values of both outcome
variables than other respondents: i.e., they work more hours per week and plan to retire later.
By contrast, respondents with a strategic or exchange bequest motive for care (those who plan
to leave a bequest to their children only if they provide care (including nursing care) during old
age) work more hours per week but plan to retire earlier than other respondents.

Our theoretical model showed that those with an altruistic bequest motive work more and retire
later than others but that those with a strategic or exchange bequest motive tend to work more
but retire earlier than others. Thus, our preliminary findings based on univariate analysis are
fully consistent with H1 and H2 regarding the bequest-work relationship. However, we need
to see whether these findings hold even after we control for the impact of individual- and
household-specific factors on the two work-related outcomes using regression analysis, which
is what we do in the next subsection.


3.5. Estimation Results and Empirical Findings

In this subsection, we present and discuss the estimation results of our econometric model in
equation (56) for the work behavior of individuals in Japan with emphasis on the impact of the
bequest motives of interest ( ,  ) thereon. More specifically, we present and discuss the
estimation results for the two (dependent) variables--one for work at the intensive margin, i.e.,
the number of hours worked per week and the other for work at the extensive margin, i.e., the
planned retirement age. Our interest in individual- and household-specific factors ( ) is
limited to controlling for their impact on individuals' work behavior.


3.5.1. The bequest-work relationship

We present the estimation results for the bequest-work relationship in Tables 4-5. Table 4
shows the results for the number of hours worked per week, while Table 5 shows the results
for the planned retirement age, both estimated using ordinary least squares.

We show estimation results for the full sample, for the married sample, for the male sample,
and for the married male sample for all ages and for those aged 40 or older because work
behavior tends to differ by marital status, gender, and age and because this may help us to find
the subsample, if any, that drives the bequest-work relationship in the full-sample. As discussed
earlier, we are interested primarily in the altruistic bequest motive and the strategic or exchange
bequest motive for care, and we present these results under "bequest motives of interest" in
Tables 4-5.


                                                23
We find that  is positive and statistically significant at the 10% levels for the full sample
(see the column marked "Both sexes, all ages") in log(HRSPERWEEK) regression, as shown
in Table 4. Thus, as in the case of our univariate analysis, the number of working hours per
week of respondents with an altruistic bequest motive (BEQMOTALT) is significantly higher
than that of respondents without any bequest motive. However, we do not find similar support
for respondents' planned retirement age as  is statistically insignificant in the
log(RETAGE) regression, as shown in Table 5. The fact that more significant results are
obtained for all ages than for the 40-plus sample in the log(HRSPERWEEK) regression
suggests that the significant altruistic bequest-work relationship for the full sample appears to
be driven by respondents who are less than 40 years old, which in turn suggests that altruistic
respondents modify their work behavior at a relatively early age. Thus, we find partial support
for H1 (i.e., an altruistic bequest-work relationship) in the case of Japan.

Our empirical results pertaining to H2 are consistent with theoretical predictions as well as
with the univariate analysis discussed in subsection 3.4 for both work-related outcomes. We
find that  , which measures the strength of the strategic or exchange bequest-work
relationship, is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level for the full sample (see the
column marked "Both sexes, all ages"), as shown in Table 4, and negative and statistically
significant at the 5% level in the log(RETAGE) regression, as shown in Table 5. These results
imply that the number of hours worked per week of respondents who plan to leave a bequest
only if their children provide care (including nursing care) during old age (BEQMOTCARE)
is significantly higher but that their planned retirement age is significantly lower than that of
respondents without any bequest motive. These results provide strong support for H2.

Looking at the results for various subsamples, the strategic or exchange bequest-work
relationship is stronger for the male sample than for both sexes in the log(HRSPERWEEK)
regressions (in fact,  is statistically significant at the 1% level in the male sample of all
ages). This suggests that the strategic or exchange bequest motive affects the number of hours
worked per week of male respondents more than that of female respondents and that male
respondents are the ones driving the results for the full sample.

Moreover, the strategic or exchange bequest-work relationship is stronger for the married male
sample than for the full male sample in the log(RETAGE) regression. This suggests that the
strategic or exchange bequest motive affects the planned retirement age of married males more
than it affects that of unmarried males, which suggests that it is married males who are driving
the results for the full sample (our unreported results for female respondents provide further
support for this claim). A possible explanation for this finding is that married males have a
greater demand for care from their children because they as well as their wives are potential
care recipients 8.

Our interpretation of the strategic or exchange bequest-work relationship is that respondents
with a strategic or exchange bequest motive tend to work more intensively than others before
they retire so that they can earn more, leave a larger bequest to their children, and elicit more
care from them after they retire but that they tend to retire earlier than others so that they can
start receiving care from their children sooner.

8
  Our unreported results indicate that the strategic or exchange bequest-work relationship is supported for
respondents aged less than 50 years old. In other words, the bequest-work relationship is driven by relatively
young married couples in general and young married males in particular. This makes sense since planning for
bequests and retirement is an issue for young working couples with children.


                                                     24
Comparing our results for the altruistic and strategic/exchange bequest motives,  is more
than twice as large as  in almost all cases, as can be seen from Tables 4 and 5, implying
that the strategic or exchange bequest motive (whereby parents leave a bequest to their children
in exchange for receiving care) has a much greater impact on their employment status and
working hours than the altruistic bequest motive (whereby parents give a unilateral transfer to
their children without receiving anything in return).


3.5.2. The impact of other factors on work behavior

In this subsection, we discuss our findings relating to the other factors that can affect the various
work-related outcomes considered in the estimation model. We included the sixteen control
variables discussed in subsection 3.2, plus the natural logarithm of wage squared to account for
possible non-linearity in the impact of wages. We provide explanations of the factors that are
relevant and important in the Japanese context.

3.5.2.1. Wages and other income

The net effect of the respondent's wage rate (WAGE) on the number of hours worked per week
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
is positive. More specifically, the marginal effect of an increase in the wage rate is       = 1 +
                                                                                         
22 , where  is the wage rate, which equals 1.097 + 2 × (-0.081) = 0.935 for the full
sample in the log(HRSPERWEEK) regression (see the column marked "Both sexes, all ages"
in Table 5). The effect seems to be intuitively reasonable as it implies that a one percentage
point increase in the wage rate increases the number of hours worked per week by less than
one percentage point.

By contrast, the respondent's wage rate has a consistently negative and statistically significant
impact on the planned retirement age, as shown in Table 6, presumably because leisure is a
luxury good, the demand for which increases (causing a decline in labor supply) as income
increases. More specifically, the marginal effect of an increase in the wage rate is -0.161 +
2 × (0.01) = -0.141 for the full sample in the log(RETAGE) regression (see the column
marked "Both sexes, all ages" in Table 6).

As expected, an addition to non-respondent earned income (OTHERINC) induces respondents
to retire earlier, again presumably reflecting the fact that leisure is a luxury good.

3.5.2.2. Bequest receipts and bequest expectations

Bequest receipts (BEQREC) and bequest expectations (BEQEXP), both of which are a measure
of nonwage income, should have qualitatively similar impacts as non-respondent earned
income (OTHERINC) on individual work behavior, but the impact of BEQREC is never
statistically significant, while BEQEXP has a negative and statistically significant impact in
the log(RETAGE) regression. The latter finding implies that respondents expecting to receive
bequests plan to retire earlier than respondents without such expectations, as expected.

3.5.2.3. Gender, age, and marital status


                                                 25
The impact of gender (MALE) is significantly positive as expected, reflecting the social norm
in Japan that males are expected to work more than females both at the intensive and extensive
margins.

As for the impact of marital status (MARRIED), being married shortens working time
significantly at both the intensive and extensive margins in the full sample but does not have a
significant impact on working time in the male sample. Our finding for the male sample may
arise because the desire of married males to spend time with their wives and children, which
would tend to reduce their working time, is offset by the social norm in Japan that wives bear
a disproportionate share of the burden of housework and childrearing, which would enable
married males to increase their working time.

The respondent's age (AGE) has a negative and statistically significant impact on the number
of hours worked per week but has a positive and statistically significant impact on the planned
retirement age. The former finding is plausible because mental and/or physical fatigue
presumably increases with age, reducing how much the respondent can work at the intensive
margin. The latter finding suggests that respondents postpone retirement as they get older,
perhaps because they gradually realize that they do not have enough resources to finance their
living expenses during retirement.

3.5.2.4. Work importance, work satisfaction, and occupation type

The importance of work (WORK) generally has a positive and statistically significant impact
on the number of hours worked per week and on the planned retirement age, meaning that
respondents for whom work is more important work more and work longer, which is as one
might expect.

As expected, work satisfaction (WORKSAT) has a positive and statistically significant impact
on the extensive margin (i.e., the planned retirement age), meaning that respondents who are
satisfied with work, work longer but this is not the case at the intensive margin.

As for the impact of occupation type (SALWKR), salaried workers plan to retire earlier than
the self-employed. This result is as one might expect because salaried workers face a mandatory
retirement age, whereas the self-employed do not, and because the pension benefits of salaried
workers are higher than those of the self-employed in Japan.

3.5.2.5. Public pension benefits

The generosity of public pension benefits (PENSION) has a negative and statistically
significant impact on the number of hours worked per week and on the planned retirement age
(Honig (1998) reports similar results for a sample of 590 white married women in the United
States). This is evidence of the induced retirement effect identified by Feldstein (1974).

3.5.2.6. Number of children

As for the impact of the number of children (NUMCHILDREN), it does not have a significant
impact on either work-related outcome.

3.5.2.7. Risk preference, health status, and worry about retirement


                                               26
As for the impact of the degree of risk aversion (GAMBLE), risk-loving respondents who like
to gamble do not differ significantly from other respondents for the number of hours worked
per week or for their planned retirement age in the case of both sexes. Farhi and Panageas
(2007) find that individuals who wish to retire earlier are less risk-averse and invest more in
the stock market, but our finding that there is not a statistically significant association between
the degree of risk aversion and the timing of retirement implies that Farhi and Panageas's
(2007) finding does not apply in the case of Japan. However, this result might be due to the
weak proxy we use for risk aversion.

The health status (HEALTH) of males delays their planned retirement age, which is in line
with the findings of Brown et al. (2015), who report that Croatian retirees in good health are
more likely to opt for a deferred retirement package.

Finally, worry about life after 65 (WORRY) does not have a statistically significant impact on
either work-related outcome.


3.6. Robustness Checks

In this section, we discuss the large number of robustness checks that we conducted for our
empirical analysis. First, we used the probability of working full-time as an alternative measure
of the intensive margin. The model is estimated using the probit method. The results are shown
in Table 6 for the marginal effects, and as can be seen from this table, the results are generally
very similar to those for the number of hours worked per week, especially for the bequest
motive-related variables that are of the most interest to us. Even though working full-time is a
weak proxy for work at the intensive margin because it is not a continuous variable, it shows
that individuals with an altruistic or strategic/exchange bequest motive work more than
individuals with no bequest motive at all, as we found when we used the number of hours
worked per week.

We also conducted a battery of other robustness checks, but our main empirical results of the
bequest-work relationship remained unchanged and significant. For example, we restricted our
sample to households with at least one child since bequest allocation is a parent-child issue.
We also added a long list of individual- and household-specific controls to eliminate the
endogeneity bias arising from omitted variable(s). Moreover, our results are free from reverse
relationship bias, as discussed earlier. We also eliminated the possibility that bequest motives
are merely acting as a proxy for wealth by including a large number of wealth-related variables
such as WAGE, WAGE 2 , OTHERINC, BEQREC, and BEQEXP.


4Conclusion and Policy Implications

In this paper, we conducted a theoretical and empirical analysis of the impact of bequest
motives on the work and retirement behavior of households in Japan using micro data from the
Preference Parameters Study of Osaka University to shed light on whether or not households
planning to leave bequests work more or work longer than those not planning to leave bequests.
Our empirical findings are consistent with our theoretical model and show that respondents
with an altruistic or strategic/exchange bequest motive work more at the intensive margin than
those without any bequest motive but that respondents with a strategic or exchange bequest
motive work less at the extensive margin (i.e., retire earlier) than those without any bequest

                                                27
motive. Our findings for the strategic or exchange bequest motive are entirely plausible because
respondents with such a motive may want to work harder than others before they retire so that
they can earn more, leave a larger bequest to their children, and elicit more care from them but
that they may want to retire earlier than others so that they can start receiving care for
themselves and their spouses from their children sooner. Moreover, the altruistic bequest-work
relationship in Japan is driven by relatively young respondents (those aged less than 40 years),
which suggests that altruistic respondents decide their work behavior at a relatively young age.
Interestingly, the strategic or exchange bequest-work relationship is driven primarily by the
married male sample. A possible explanation for this finding is that married males have a
greater demand for care from their children because they as well as their wives are potential
care recipients.

We employ a battery of robustness checks to show that our empirical findings concerning the
bequest-work relationship are highly robust, remaining significant and consistent with the
predictions of our theoretical model even when (i) we use a dummy variable for full-time work
in lieu of the number of hours worked per week as a measure of the intensive margin, (ii) we
include a large number of control variables relating to individual- and household-specific
factors to address the endogeneity bias arising from omitted variable(s), (iii) we ensure that the
bequest-work relationship is free from reverse relationship bias, and (iv) we add a number of
proxies for wealth to eliminate the possibility that bequest motives are merely acting as a proxy
for wealth.

Our findings have important implications for policymakers in Japan. Since individual work
behavior can be altered by changing inheritance taxes, it is very important for policymakers to
realize that the bequest-work relationship exists but that it varies by bequest motive in Japan.
In the case of a strategic or exchange bequest motive, which affects parents' work behavior as
well as retirement decision, inheritance tax policy should be set taking account both the
increased work effort at the intensive margin as well as the induced retirement effect of this
motive. On one hand, a lower inheritance tax will encourage parents to work more before
retirement so they can leave a larger bequest, and this will contribute to higher economic
growth. However, a lower inheritance tax may also lead some parents to retire earlier than
otherwise so that they can start receiving care sooner, meaning that labor supply may not
increase, on balance, as a result of a reduction in the inheritance tax. In the case of the altruistic
bequest motive, by contrast, there does not seem to be any need to worry about the induced
retirement effect, meaning that lowering inheritance taxes will unambiguously increase work
efforts by encouraging individuals to leave bequests. Since the rapid ageing of Japan's
population is projected to produce severe shortages of workers in the coming years, reforming
inheritance taxes and other government policies relating to bequests may be an effective way
of encouraging people to work more, if implemented carefully.




                                                 28
                                         References

Arrondel, Luc, and Masson, Andre (2006), "Altruism, Exchange or Indirect Reciprocity: What
  Do the Data on Family Transfers Show?" in Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier
  Ythier, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, Volume 2
  (Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.), pp. 971-1053.

Bagchi, Shantanu (2015), "Labor supply and the optimality of Social Security," Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 58 (Sept.), pp. 167-185.

Bernheim, B. Douglas; Shleifer, Andrei; and Summers, Lawrence H. (1985), "The strategic
  bequest motive," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 93, no. 6 (Dec.), pp. 1045-1076.

Blau, David M., and Goodstein, Ryan M. (2016), "Commitment in the household: Evidence
   from the effect of inheritances on the labor supply of older married couples," Labour
   Economics, vol. 42 (Oct.), pp. 123-137.

Blau, Francine D., and Kahn, Lawrence M. (2007), "Changes in the labor supply behavior of
   married women: 1980-2000," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 25, no. 3 (July), pp. 393-
   438.

Brown, Jeffrey R.: Coile, Courtney C.; and Weisbenner, Scott J. (2010), "The effect of
  inheritance receipt on retirement," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 92, no. 2 (May),
  pp. 425-434.

Brown, Jeffrey R.; Ivkovic, Zoran; and Weisbenner, Scott (2015), "Empirical determinants of
  intertemporal choice," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 116, pp. 473-486.

Bütler, Monika (2001), "Neoclassical life-cycle consumption: A textbook example," Economic
  Theory, vol. 17, no. 1 (Jan.), pp. 209-221.

Carnegie, Andrew (1962), "The Advantages of Poverty," in Edward C. Kirkland, ed., The
  Gospel of Wealth and Other Timely Essays (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: The Belknap
  Press of Harvard University), pp. 50-77.

Dimova, Ralitza, and Wolff, François-Charles (2011), "Do downward private transfers
  enhance maternal labor supply? Evidence from around Europe," Journal of Population
  Economics, vol. 24, no. 3 (July), pp. 911-933.

Doorley, Karina, and Pestel, Nico (2016), "Labour supply after inheritances and the role of
  expectations," IZA Discussion Paper No. 9822, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA), Bonn,
  Germany.

Dustmann, Christian; Micklewright, John; and Soest, Arthur (2009), "In-School Labour
  Supply, Parental Transfers, and Wages," Empirical Economics, vol. 37, no. 1 (Sept.), pp.
  201-218.

Elinder, Mikael; Erixson, Oscar; and Ohlsson, Henry (2012), "The impact of inheritances on
   heirs labor and capital income," BE Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, vol. 12, no.
   1, pp. 1-37.

                                              29
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Panageas, Stavros (2007), "Saving and investing for early retirement: A
   theoretical analysis," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 83, no. 1 (Jan.), pp. 87-121.

Feldstein, Martin (1974), "Social security, induced retirement, and aggregate capital
   accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 82, no. 5 (Sept.-Oct.), pp. 905-926.

Gahramanov, Emin, and Tang, Xueli (2016a), "Impatient in experiments, but patient in
  simulations: A challenge to the Heckman-type model," Economic Record, vol. 92, no. 297
  (June), pp. 268-290.

Gahramanov, Emin, and Tang, Xueli (2016b), "Labor-leisure choice: Is everything as
  straightforward as one might have thought?," Theoretical Economics Letters, vol. 6, no. 4
  (Aug.), pp. 750-760.

Gong, Tao (2009), "Do parental transfers reduce youths' incentives to work?" LABOUR:
  Review of Labour Economics and Industrial Relations, vol. 23, no. 4 (Dec.), pp. 653-676.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas; Joulfaian, David; and Rosen, Harvey S. (1993), "The Carnegie
  Conjecture: Some Empirical Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, no. 2
  (May), pp. 413-435.

Honig, Marjorie (1998), "Married women's retirement expectations: Do pensions and social
  security matter?" American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 88, no. 2
  (May), pp. 202-206.

Horioka, Charles Yuji (2104), "Are Americans and Indians more altruistic than the Japanese
  and Chinese? Evidence from a new international survey of bequest plans," Review of
  Economics of the Household, vol. 12, no. 3 (September), pp. 411-437.

Horioka, Charles Yuji; Gahramanov, Emin; Hayat, Aziz; and Tang, Xueli (2018), "Why do
  children take care of their elderly parents? Are the Japanese any different?" International
  Economic Review, vol. 59, no. 1 (Feb.), pp. 113-136.

Horioka, Charles Yuji; Kasuga, Norihiro; Yamazaki, Katsuyo; and Watanabe, Wako (1996),
  "Do the aged dissave in Japan? Evidence from micro Data," Journal of the Japanese and
  International Economies, vol. 10, no. 3 (Sept.), pp. 295-311.

Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Niimi, Yoko (2017), "Nihon no koureisha setai no chochiku koudou
  ni kansuru jisshou bunseki (An empirical analysis of the saving behavior of elderly
  households in Japan)," Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis), no. 196 (Dec.), pp. 29-47 (in
  Japanese).

Hurd, Michael D. (1990), "Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and
  Consumption and Saving," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 28, no. 2 (June), pp.565-
  637.

Joulfaian, David, and Wilhelm, Mark O. (1994), "Inheritance and Labor Supply," Journal of
   Human Resources, vol. 29, no. 4 (Autumn), pp. 1205-1234.


                                             30
Kopczuk, Wojciech (2010), "Economics of estate taxation: A brief review of theory and
  evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 15741, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Cambridge, MA, USA.

Laferrere, Anne, and Wolff, Francois-Charles (2006), "Microeconomic Models of Family
  Transfers," in Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier, eds., Handbook of the
  Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, Volume 2 (Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.), pp.
  889-969.

Laitner, John, and Ohlsson, Henry (2001), "Bequest motives: A comparison of Sweden and the
   United States," Journal of Public Economics, vol. 79, no. 1 (Jan.), pp. 205-236.

Léonard, Daniel, and Van Long, Ngo (1992), Optimal Control Theory and Static Optimization
  in Economics. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

Niimi, Yoko, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2019), "The wealth decumulation behavior of the
   retired elderly in Japan: The relative importance of precautionary saving and bequest
   motives" Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 51 (Mar.), pp. 52-63.

Niizeki, Takeshi, and Hori, Masahiro (2019), "The effect of inheritance receipt on individual
   labor supply: Evidence from Japanese microdata," Japan and the World Economy, vol. 49
   (Mar.), pp. 176-186.

Patterson, Michael A., and Rao, Anil V. (2014), "GPOPS-II: A MATLAB software for solving
   multiple-phase optimal control problems using hp-Adaptive Gaussian quadrature
   collocation methods and sparse nonlinear programming," ACM Transactions on
   Mathematical Software (TOMS), vol. 41 (Oct.), pp. 1-37.

Rodgers, L. C. G. (2013), Optimal Investment (Springer Briefs in Quantitative Finance). Berlin
  and Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag (https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783642352010).

Sugano, Saki, and Matsuyama, Hirokazu (2017), "Isan ga Ko no Keizai Katsudou ni Ataeru
  Eikyou: Chuukounensha Paneru Deta wo Mochiita Bunseki (The Effect of Bequests on
  Children: New Evidence from a Panel Data Survey of Elderly People)," Kokumin Keizai
  Zasshi, vol. 215, no. 1 (January), pp. 35-46 (in Japanese).

Wilhelm, Mark O. (1996), "Bequest behavior and the effect of heirs' earnings: Testing the
  altruistic model of bequests," American Economic Review, vol. 86, no. 4 (Sept.), pp. 874-
  892.

Wolff, François-Charles (2006), "Parental transfers and the labor supply of children," Journal
 of Population Economics, vol. 19, no. 4 (Oct.), pp 853-877.




                                              31
Table 1
Numerical results for the case of strategic or exchange bequest motives
These results correspond to the following parameters of the model. The wage rate ( ) is 1, the age of death ( +
25) is 80, the weight on personal consumption (1 ) is 0.10, the weight on personal leisure (2 ) is 0.20, and the
care function parameters 1 and 2 are equal to 0.20, and 5.00, respectively.
    Strength of exchange               Age of          Average number of hours worked             Optimal
        motive (3 )                  retirement                  per week                         bequest
              0.40                      60.55                         40.66                         5.02
              0.50                      60.10                         40.77                         5.33
              0.60                      59.53                         41.24                         5.56
              0.70                      59.30                         41.42                         5.73
              0.80                      58.93                         41.84                         5.88
              0.90                      58.65                         42.20                         6.00




                                                      32
Table 2
Summary statistics for the variables used in the estimation model.
 This table shows summary statistics for Japanese households based on micro data from the 2012 wave of the Preference Parameters
Study (Kurashi no Konomi to Manzokudo nit suite no Chousa) of Osaka University. We used the natural logarithm (log( )) of all
continuous variables in the estimation model. Variables and relevant considerations are discussed in section 3.


Variable                            Mean          Std. dev.       Median          Minimum           Maximum         No. of obs.

                                                     Dependent variables
HRSPERWEEK                         41.347         15.151             40              1                 105             1574
log(HRSPERWEEK)                     3.632         0.480            3.689             0                4.654            1574
RETAGE                             64.694         5.402              65             35                  90             1574
log(RETAGE)                         4.166         0.084            4.174          3.555               4.500            1574
FULLTIME                            0.594         0.491               1              0                   1             1574
                                     Explanatory variables pertaining to bequest motives
BEQMOTALT                           0.294         0.456               0              0                  1              1574
BEQMOTCARE                          0.030         0.172               0              0                  1              1574
BEQMOTFIN                           0.008         0.087               0              0                  1              1574
BEQMOTBUS                           0.008         0.091               0              0                  1              1574
BEQMOTWEAK                          0.473         0.499               0              0                  1              1574
BEQMOTNONE                          0.187         0.390               0              0                  1              1574
                                                Other explanatory variables
WAGE                              1521.143       856.469         1296.154        346.154            6527.473           1574
log(WAGE)                           7.196         0.501            7.167          5.847               8.784            1574
OTHERINC                           10.045         6.628             13.5             0                 24.2            1574

log(OTHERINC+1                      2.053           1.004          2.674               0              3.227            1574

BEQREC                              0.341          0.474             0                0                 1              1574
BEQEXP                              0.267          0.443             0                0                 1              1574
MALE                                0.571          0.495             1                0                 1              1574
MARRIED                             0.922          0.267             1                0                 1              1574
AGE                                51.230          9.852            51               26                79              1574
log(AGE)                            3.917          0.199           3.932            3.258             4.369            1574
HEALTH                              3.475          0.917             3                1                 5              1574
WORRY                               3.494          1.068             4                1                 5              1574
WORK                                3.576          0.858             4                1                 5              1574
WORKSAT                             3.283          0.944             3                1                 5              1574
SALWKR                              0.838          0.369             1                0                 1              1574
PENSION                            48.221          24.424           55                5                95              1574
NUMCHILDREN                         2.165          0.431             2                1                 5              1574
GAMBLE                              0.431          0.495             0                0                 1              1574
Table 3
Distribution of work-related outcomes by bequest motive.
 This table shows the mean, standard deviation, and the number of observations of the work-related outcomes for each bequest motive. The full
sample consists of 1574 observations. We classify BEQMOTALT as an altruistic bequest motive, and BEQMOTCARE, BEQMOTFIN and
BEQMOTBUS as strategic or exchange bequest motives as explained in subsection 3.2. FULLTIME is a dummy variable that takes a value of one
for respondents who work full-time and a value of zero for respondents who work part-time, HRSPERWEEK is the number of hours the respondent
works per week, and RETAGE is the respondent's planned retirement age. See the notes to Table 2 and subsection 3.4 for further details.


                 Full
                            BEQMOTALT         BEQMOTCARE           BEQMOTFIN         BEQMOTBUS         BEQMOTWEAK          BEQMOTNONE
                sample
                                                              HRSPERWEEK
Mean             41.3            44.0               42.9               39.4               41.8               39.9                 40.6
Std. dev.        15.2            14.5               14.5             11.1                 19.4               14.6                 16.9
# of obs.        1574            463                 48               12                   13                744                  294
                                                                 RETAGE
Mean             64.7            64.8               64.3               63.3               68.5               64.6                 64.7
Std. dev.         5.4            5.5                 5.3                5.8               8.5                 5.5                 4.9
# of obs.        1574            463                 48                 12                13                  744                 294
Table 4
The bequest-work relationship for the number of hours worked per week
 The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the respondent's number of hours worked per week. The bequest motives of interest are the altruistic
bequest motive (BEQMOTALT) and the strategic or exchange bequest motive for care (BEQMOTCARE), and the table shows the impact of these
variables after controlling for the effect of other bequest motives and explanatory variables on the planned retirement age. The model described in
subsection 3.2 is estimated by ordinary least squares and the standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. The p-values for the significance of the
coefficients are expressed as *p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05 and ***p < 0. The model's estimates are shown in the eight columns 2--9 and vary due to variations
in the sample, which are based on various combinations of gender, marital status, and/or age. For example, the second column shows the estimates for
the full sample, while the third shows the estimates for individuals of both sexes aged 40 years or above.



                                                                  Dependent variable: log(HRSPERWEEK)

                                                             Both sexes,     Both sexes,                                     Married        Married
                             Both sexes,     Both sexes,                                       Males,          Males,
Explanatory variable                                         married, all     married,                                       males, all      males,
                              all ages        age>=40                                          all ages       age>=40
                                                                ages          age>=40                                          ages         age>=40

                                                             Bequest motives of interest
BEQMOTALT                      0.053*           0.039           0.048            0.034          0.009           0.021          0.010          0.021
                               (0.031)         (0.034)         (0.031)       (0.035)           (0.027)        (0.029)         (0.027)        (0.030)
BEQMOTCARE                     0.121**         0.099*          0.141***      0.121**           0.096***       0.110***        0.102***       0.117***
                               (0.052)         (0.056)         (0.053)       (0.057)           (0.035)        (0.037)         (0.037)        (0.039)
                                                               Other bequest motives
BEQMOTFIN                      -0.063           -0.102          -0.111          -0.170         -0.240**        -0.240*        -0.239**       -0.242*
                               (0.105)         (0.117)          (0.121)         (0.137)        (0.120)         (0.131)        (0.119)        (0.130)
BEQMOTBUS                       0.040           0.044           0.027            0.031          -0.210         -0.177         -0.208          -0.175
                               (0.173)         (0.169)          (0.175)         (0.171)        (0.246)         (0.240)        (0.247)        (0.240)
BEQMOTWEAK                      0.028           0.023           0.022            0.020          -0.016         -0.008         -0.011          -0.003
                               (0.030)         (0.033)          (0.030)       (0.032)          (0.027)         (0.029)        (0.028)        (0.030)
                                                             Other explanatory variables
log(WAGE)                      1.097*           0.719           1.034*           0.681          0.432           0.504          0.559          0.649
                               (0.597)         (0.590)          (0.604)         (0.598)        (0.641)         (0.665)        (0.675)        (0.704)
            2
log(WAGE )                    -0.081   **
                                                -0.055          -0.076   *
                                                                                -0.052          -0.036         -0.041         -0.045          -0.051
                               (0.041)         (0.040)          (0.041)         (0.041)        (0.044)         (0.045)        (0.046)        (0.048)
log(OTHERINC)                  -0.009           -0.004          -0.012          -0.008          0.005           0.010          0.002          0.007
                               (0.010)         (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.012)        (0.010)         (0.011)        (0.010)        (0.011)
BEQREC                         -0.012           -0.005          -0.015          -0.007          0.009           0.009          0.011          0.011
                               (0.024)         (0.024)          (0.025)         (0.025)        (0.020)         (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.022)
BEQEXP                          0.017           -0.010          0.011           -0.015          0.004           0.001          0.002         0.0005
                               (0.022)         (0.023)          (0.024)         (0.024)        (0.020)         (0.022)        (0.021)        (0.022)
                                      ***              ***             ***             ***
MALE                          0.530            0.520           0.536           0.526
                               (0.029)         (0.031)          (0.031)         (0.033)
                                       ***             ***
MARRIED                       -0.161          -0.156                                            -0.009          0.002
                               (0.042)         (0.045)                                         (0.044)         (0.046)
log(AGE)                      -0.285***       -0.570***        -0.270***       -0.542***       -0.448***      -0.672***      -0.449***      -0.676***
                               (0.065)         (0.086)          (0.067)         (0.088)         (0.054)        (0.079)        (0.055)        (0.080)
HEALTH                          0.003           0.011           0.0003           0.009          0.009           0.008          0.010          0.009
                               (0.012)         (0.013)          (0.013)         (0.014)         (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.013)
WORRY                          -0.002           -0.009          -0.011          -0.018          0.011           0.008          0.010          0.007
                    (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.012)             (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.009)        (0.010)
                             *             **                                 *                                         *
WORK                 0.025         0.028          0.021              0.024          0.017         0.018         0.020         0.022*
                    (0.013)        (0.014)       (0.013)             (0.014)       (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.013)
WORKSAT              -0.019        -0.020         -0.014             -0.015         0.005         0.011         0.002          0.009
                    (0.013)        (0.014)       (0.013)             (0.014)       (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.012)        (0.014)
                                                                                           ***
SALWKR               0.058          0.057         0.053               0.054        0.007         -0.005         0.010         -0.002
                    (0.036)        (0.040)       (0.037)             (0.040)       (0.032)       (0.034)       (0.033)        (0.035)
                             ***            **            ***                 **                          **            ***
PENSION             -0.001         -0.001        -0.001              -0.001        -0.001        -0.001        -0.001         -0.001**
                    (0.0005)       (0.001)       (0.001)             (0.001)       (0.0004)      (0.0005)      (0.0004)       (0.0005)
NUMCHILDREN          -0.009        -0.015         -0.001             -0.004         0.015         0.010         0.018          0.014
                    (0.015)        (0.017)       (0.016)             (0.018)       (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.012)        (0.013)
GAMBLE               -0.009        -0.013         -0.003             -0.009         0.001         0.004         0.001          0.004
                    (0.021)        (0.022)       (0.021)             (0.023)       (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.018)        (0.020)
Constant             0.916          3.439         0.909               3.287        4.265*        4.901**        3.781         4.366*
                    (2.209)        (2.174)       (2.251)             (2.233)       (2.369)       (2.483)       (2.502)        (2.640)
           2
Adjusted R           0.283          0.283         0.292               0.290         0.161         0.177         0.163          0.179

# of observations    1,574          1,369         1,452               1,263          899           792           868            763




                                                                36
Table 5
The bequest-work relationship for the planned retirement age
 The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the respondent's planned retirement age. The bequest motives of interest are the altruistic bequest
motive (BEQMOTALT) and the strategic or exchange bequest motive for care (BEQMOTCARE), and the table shows the impact of these variables
after controlling for the effect of other bequest motives and explanatory variables on the planned retirement age. The model described in subsection 3.2
is estimated by ordinary least squares and the standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. The p-values for the significance of the coefficients are
expressed as *p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05 and ***p < 0. The model's estimates are shown in the eight columns 2--9 and vary due to variations in the sample,
which are based on various combinations of gender, marital status, and/or age. For example, the second column shows the estimates for the full sample,
while the third shows the estimates for individuals of both sexes aged 40 years or above.



                                                                             Dependent variable: log(RETAGE)

                                                                          Both          Both
                                        Both           Both                                                                     Married        Married
                                                                         sexes,        sexes,        Males,         Males,
Explanatory variable                  sexes, all      sexes,                                                                    males, all      males,
                                                                        married,      married,       all ages      age>=40
                                        ages         age>=40                                                                      ages         age>=40
                                                                        all ages      age>=40
                                                           Bequest motives of interest
BEQMOTALT                               -0.005        -0.007      -0.006        -0.008                0.006         -0.002        0.003         -0.005
                                       (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)
BEQMOTCARE                             -0.022**       -0.022**          -0.026**      -0.027**        -0.017        -0.019      -0.023**       -0.026**
                                       (0.010)        (0.010)           (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.011)
                                                                    Other bequest motives
                                                **
BEQMOTFIN                              -0.044         -0.018            -0.050**       -0.020         -0.026        -0.015       -0.028         -0.016
                                       (0.021)        (0.012)           (0.024)       (0.013)        (0.021)       (0.016)       (0.022)       (0.016)
BEQMOTBUS                               0.012          0.006             0.011         0.006          0.037         0.028         0.035         0.027
                                       (0.025)        (0.024)           (0.025)       (0.024)        (0.035)       (0.034)       (0.035)       (0.034)
                                                *             ***                *             **
BEQMOTWEAK                             -0.009        -0.013             -0.009        -0.013          -0.001        -0.006       -0.002         -0.007
                                       (0.005)        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)             (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
                                                            Other explanatory variables
log(WAGE)                              -0.161**       -0.153*      -0.180**     -0.169**             -0.319***     -0.284***    -0.366***     -0.338***
                                       (0.079)        (0.078)           (0.082)       (0.083)        (0.109)       (0.108)       (0.107)       (0.106)
            2
log(WAGE )                              0.010   *
                                                      0.010    *
                                                                        0.012   **
                                                                                       0.011   *
                                                                                                     0.020   ***
                                                                                                                   0.018   **
                                                                                                                                0.024   ***
                                                                                                                                               0.022***
                                       (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)
log(OTHERINC)                          -0.004**       -0.003*            -0.001        -0.002         0.002         0.002         0.002         0.002
                                       (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
BEQREC                                  0.002          0.003             0.004         0.005          -0.003        -0.002       -0.002        -0.0002
                                       (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)
                                               ***            ***               ***            ***            *                          **
BEQEXP                                -0.013         -0.012            -0.014         -0.013         -0.009         -0.007      -0.010          -0.008
                                       (0.004)        (0.005)           (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)
MALE                                   0.049***       0.046***          0.052***      0.049***
                                       (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.004)
                                               ***            ***
MARRIED                               -0.030         -0.022                                           -0.006        -0.004
                                       (0.007)        (0.007)                                        (0.015)       (0.016)
                                               ***            ***               ***           ***            ***
log(AGE)                               0.119          0.163             0.121         0.159          0.111         0.140***     0.113***       0.140***
                                       (0.012)        (0.013)           (0.012)       (0.014)        (0.013)       (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.016)
                                                                                               *              *             *            **
HEALTH                                  0.003          0.003             0.003         0.004          0.004         0.005        0.005         0.005**
                                       (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)

                                                                             37
WORRY                -0.0001        -0.002         0.0005         -0.001        -0.0002        -0.002       -0.0002        -0.002
                     (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
                             ***            ***            ***            ***           **            **             *
WORK                 0.010          0.010          0.010          0.010         0.006         0.007          0.005         0.005*
                     (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
                             **             **              *              *                           *
WORKSAT              0.004          0.004          0.004          0.004          0.003         0.004         0.003         0.005*
                     (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
SALWKR              -0.067***      -0.067***      -0.068***      -0.069***      -0.070***     -0.073***     -0.071***     -0.075***
                      (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)
PENSION             -0.0003***     -0.0003***     -0.0003***     -0.0003***     -0.0002       -0.0002*      -0.0002       -0.0002*
                     (0.0001)       (0.0001)       (0.0001)       (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)
NUMCHILDREN           0.001         0.0005          0.001         -0.0005        0.003         0.001         0.002         -0.001
                     (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)
GAMBLE               -0.0003        -0.001         -0.001         -0.001         -0.004        -0.006        -0.002        -0.004
                     (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
                             ***            ***            ***            ***           ***           ***           ***
Constant             4.339          4.131          4.362          4.182         5.003         4.764         5.172         4.971***
                     (0.299)        (0.295)        (0.311)        (0.314)       (0.415)       (0.417)       (0.405)       (0.410)
Adjusted R2           0.316          0.366          0.323          0.373         0.305         0.344         0.319         0.364

# of observations     1,574          1,369          1,452          1,263          899           792           868           763




                                                        38
Table 6
The bequest-work relationship for employment status (full-time vs. part-time)
 The dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether or not the respondent works full-time. The bequest motives of interest are the altruistic
bequest motive (BEQMOTALT) and the strategic or exchange bequest motive for care (BEQMOTCARE), and the table shows the impact of these
variables after controlling for the effect of other bequest motives and explanatory variables on the planned retirement age. The model described in
subsection 3.2 is estimated by the probit method, the coefficients and the p-values are for (average) marginal effects, and the standard errors are robust
to heteroscedasticity. The p-values for the significance of the coefficients are expressed as *p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05 and ***p < 0. The model's estimates
are shown in the eight columns 2--9 and vary due to variations in the sample, which are based on various combinations of gender, marital status, and/or
age. For example, the second column shows the estimates for the full sample, while the third shows the estimates for individuals of both sexes aged 40
years or above.



                                                            Dependent variable: FULLTIME (full-time dummy)

                              Both                          Both sexes,          Both sexes,                                   Married         Married
                                           Both sexes,                                            Males,         Males,
Explanatory variable        sexes, all                      married, all          married,                                     males, all       males,
                                            age>=40                                               all ages      age>=40
                              ages                             ages               age>=40                                        ages          age>=40

                                                             Bequest motives of interest
                                     **
BEQMOTALT                    0.082            0.021            0.079*              0.013          0.060*          0.021          0.061*          0.024
                             (0.039)         (0.044)          (0.042)              (0.046)        (0.035)        (0.041)         (0.035)        (0.040)
                                     *                                **                                 ***             *              ***
BEQMOTCARE                   0.141            0.078           0.146                0.076         0.133           0.131          0.128           0.126*
                             (0.074)         (0.088)          (0.073)         (0.089)             (0.050)        (0.071)         (0.048)        (0.069)
                                                                Other bequest motives
BEQMOTFIN                    -0.224         -0.310**          -0.375**       -0.488***           -0.385**       -0.527***       -0.369**       -0.511***
                             (0.159)        (0.154)           (0.149)         (0.111)            (0.167)         (0.164)        (0.176)         (0.179)
BEQMOTBUS                     0.134           0.102            0.134               0.104          -0.062         -0.071          -0.053         -0.056
                             (0.184)         (0.185)          (0.189)              (0.190)        (0.118)        (0.124)         (0.113)        (0.116)
BEQMOTWEAK                    0.033          -0.008            0.039               -0.003          0.022         -0.001           0.035          0.015
                             (0.038)         (0.041)          (0.040)              (0.044)        (0.036)        (0.041)         (0.036)        (0.041)
                                                             Other explanatory variables
log(WAGE)                     1.112           1.088             1.14               1.152           0.436          0.557           0.314          0.400
                             (1.157)         (1.195)          (1.358)              (1.386)        (0.979)        (1.065)         (0.993)        (1.055)
            2
log(WAGE )                   -0.054          -0.052            -0.055              -0.056         -0.019         -0.027          -0.011         -0.017
                             (0.079)         (0.081)          (0.093)              (0.095)        (0.066)        (0.072)         (0.067)        (0.071)
log(OTHERINC)                -0.018          -0.019            -0.021              -0.026          0.012          0.011           0.013          0.013
                             (0.015)         (0.016)          (0.016)              (0.017)        (0.013)        (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.014)
BEQREC                        0.002           0.023            0.009               0.036           0.002          0.033          -0.001          0.033
                             (0.031)         (0.033)          (0.033)              (0.034)        (0.029)        (0.030)         (0.029)         (0.03)
                                     **                                *                                  **             *               **
BEQEXP                       0.072            0.049            0.063               0.033          0.062          0.064           0.058          0.057*
                             (0.032)         (0.035)          (0.034)              (0.036)        (0.029)        (0.033)         (0.029)        (0.033)
                                    ***             ***               ***                 ***
MALE                        0.351           0.337             0.377               0.369
                             (0.030)         (0.033)          (0.031)              (0.034)
                                     ***             **
MARRIED                     -0.142          -0.142                                                0.166*         0.228**
                             (0.053)         (0.058)                                              (0.088)        (0.099)
log(AGE)                    -0.483***       -0.780***        -0.496***            -0.825***      -0.590***      -0.881***       -0.559***      -0.859***
                             (0.086)         (0.121)          (0.092)              (0.131)        (0.099)        (0.132)         (0.098)        (0.131)
HEALTH                        0.006           0.001            -0.002              -0.007          0.021          0.013           0.017          0.009
                             (0.016)         (0.017)          (0.017)              (0.018)        (0.015)        (0.018)         (0.015)        (0.018)


                                                                            39
WORRY                 0.0003        -0.013        -0.013             -0.029*        0.017         0.006         0.011        -0.001
                      (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.015)            (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.014)       (0.015)
WORK                  -0.008        -0.013        -0.019             -0.024        -0.013        -0.014        -0.018        -0.020
                      (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.019)            (0.021)       (0.018)       (0.020)       (0.018)       (0.020)
WORKSAT               -0.023        -0.004        -0.019             -0.003        -0.001         0.011        -0.003         0.010
                      (0.017)       (0.018)       (0.018)            (0.019)       (0.017)       (0.019)       (0.017)       (0.019)
                              ***           ***           ***                ***           ***           ***           ***
SALWKR                0.251         0.237         0.253              0.232         0.345         0.300         0.353         0.305***
                      (0.048)       (0.050)       (0.052)            (0.053)       (0.061)       (0.062)       (0.062)       (0.064)
PENSION               0.0001        0.0001        -0.0002             0.000        -0.0004       0.0002        -0.001        -0.0001
                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)            (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
NUMCHILDREN           0.045**       0.051**       0.041*             0.048*        0.043*        0.047*         0.037         0.038
                      (0.021)       (0.024)       (0.023)            (0.026)       (0.023)       (0.027)       (0.023)       (0.026)
                              *             *             *                  **
GAMBLE                0.047         0.055         0.057              0.065          0.025         0.029         0.035         0.041
                      (0.029)       (0.03)        (0.030)            (0.032)       (0.027)       (0.03)        (0.027)        (0.03)
Correctly predicted
                       77.26         76.77         77.9               70.99         82.31         82.2          81.44         70.99
(%)
McFadden R2            0.27          0.27          0.29               0.15          0.28          0.29          0.31          0.15

# of observations      1,574         1,369         1,452              1,263         899           792           868            763




                                                                40
