                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HOW DO EMPLOYERS USE COMPENSATION HISTORY?:
                     EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                       Moshe A. Barach
                                        John J. Horton

                                      Working Paper 26627
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26627


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




Both Horton and Barach have consulted for the online labor market that was the context of this
experiment. For helpful comments and advice, thanks to Ned Augenblick, Amanda Agan,
Amanda Pallais, Joe Golden, John Morgan, Liz Lyons, Noam Yuchtman, Paul Oyer, Stan
Veuger, and Steve Tadelis, as well as seminar participants at Berkeley/Haas, and Georgetown
MSB. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Moshe A. Barach and John J. Horton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Employers Use Compensation History?: Evidence From a Field Experiment
Moshe A. Barach and John J. Horton
NBER Working Paper No. 26627
January 2020
JEL No. J0,J23,J48,J7

                                          ABSTRACT

We report the results of a field experiment in which treated employers could not observe the
compensation history of their job applicants. Treated employers responded by evaluating more
applicants, and evaluating those applicants more intensively. They also responded by changing
what kind of workers they evaluated: treated employers evaluated workers with 5% lower past
average wages and hired workers with 13%lower past average wages. Conditional upon
bargaining, workers hired by treated employers struck better wage bargains for themselves.


Moshe A. Barach
University of Minnesota
mbarach@umn.edu

John J. Horton
MIT Sloan School of Management
and NBER
john.joseph.horton@gmail.com




Author contact information and code are currently or will be available at
http://www.moshebarach.com/
1       Introduction
The economic problem of hiring is conceptually straightforward: the firm com-
pares the marginal increase in revenue from a worker's labor to what they will
have to pay to obtain that labor (Oyer et al., 2011). What makes this problem
challenging from the firm's perspective is that a worker is an "experience good"
and so the employer has to make an inference about productivity, relying on
whatever signals they have available (Spence, 1973; Holzer, 1987). As such,
there are good reasons for an employer to be interested in a job applicant's
past wages. In a competitive labor market, a very recent wage in a similar job
is approximately the worker's marginal productivity--precisely what a would-
be employer is interested in learning (Kotlikoff and Gokhale, 1992; Oyer et al.,
2011; Altonji and Pierret, 2001; Lange, 2007; Kahn and Lange, 2014). Know-
ing the applicants' past wage could also usefully inform the firm's bargaining
strategy, affecting what initial offer to make and how to respond to the worker's
proposals (Nash Jr., 1950; Binmore et al., 1986).
    Perhaps as a consequence of the usefulness it has to employers, half of
workers in the US report that their current employer learned their wage from
their previous job (Hall and Krueger, 2012). Over 80% of workers in the US
report that if their employer learned their past wage, they learned it before
extending a job offer.1 Despite the apparent usefulness of compensation history
information to employers, there is a public policy concern: access to past wage
information can potentially create a path dependence in wages, impeding wage
growth, particularly for women and disadvantaged minorities.
    In this paper, we report the results of a field experiment in which treated
employers in an online labor market could not observe the compensation his-
tories of their applicants, whereas control employers could. The compensation
history for an applicant is the collection of hourly wages for all on-platform
contracts started or completed by that applicant, at the time of application.2
    1
     We build on the work of Hall and Krueger (2012) and conducted a nationally represen-
tative survey, asking whether employers asked about past compensation history, and when
this occurred. The survey in question was conducted using Google Surveys. It is described
in detail in Appendix A.1.
   2
     We use the terms "employer" and "employee" or "worker" for consistency with the


                                           2
    Our empirical focus is on how the absence of compensation history infor-
mation changed the hiring process. We are particularly interested in whether
the treatment affected: (1) the extent and intensity of information acquisition
by employers, (2) the attributes of the workers evaluated and ultimately hired,
(3) wage bargaining, (4) whether employers made a hire, and (5) the match
quality, if a hire was made.
    In our experiment, we find that without access to applicant wage histo-
ries, employers responded by enlarging the pool of applicants they considered,
with treated employers evaluating about 7% more applicants. They also eval-
uated those applicants more intensively, asking more--and more substantive--
questions. In short, treated employers responded to their information deficit
primarily by acquiring more of their own information. We find no evidence that
treated employers put more weight on other individual worker productivity sig-
nals available to them, such as past feedback scores, past market experience,
and so on, though our estimates are generally imprecise.
    In addition to causing more extensive and intensive evaluation, the treat-
ment also changed what kind of workers were evaluated and eventually hired.
Although treated employers evaluated workers with only slightly lower past
wages, workers hired by treated employers had about 13% lower past aver-
age wages. The observed preference for lower wage workers--which we refer
to as "bargain hunting"--is consistent with the framing of the hiring problem
found in the personnel and labor economics literatures (Oyer et al., 2011). The
treatment made low experience/low wage bid workers seem like better "deals"
relative to high experience/high wage bid workers, as firms with less informa-
tion infer the workers have productivities closer to the mean. This of course
raises questions about what would happen in equilibrium--a consideration we
will discuss at length.
    For job openings in which a hire was made, we measure the extent of bar-
gaining by comparing the initial proposed wage bid of the worker to the wage
that was ultimately agreed upon. We find no evidence that the treatment
economics literature, not as a commentary on the legal nature of the relationships created
on the platform.



                                            3
affected the probability that bargaining occurred, but we find evidence that
when bargaining occurred, workers hired by treated employers struck a more
favorable wage bargain--they were offered and accepted wages which were 9%
more of their initial bid compared to those workers bargaining with control
employers.
    Given the less favorable wage bargain struck by treated employers who still
made a hire, a natural concern is that a greater fraction of treated employers
might decide to forgo hiring altogether rather than pay higher wages. Treated
employers might also "drop out" earlier, deciding not evaluate anyone given
their lack of compensation history information. This concern was not borne
out in the experiment, as treated employers were more likely to make a hire.
Furthermore, there is no evidence that treated employers had worse contractual
outcomes, though our estimates are imprecise.
    We present all of our results using the full sample, but we do find evi-
dence of heterogeneous effects. In particular, we find that all of our effects are
stronger for employers that stated, ex ante, they were willing to consider less
experienced, less proven workers. These employers are willing to screen more
applicants and show a greater willingness to hire less experienced workers when
they lack compensation history information. This heterogeneity is important,
as it suggests different kinds of employers might be differently impacted by
policies restricting the use of compensation history information.
    A natural question is whether employers would continue to acquire informa-
tion as in the experiment when compensation history is available again. Cre-
ating a panel of employers whose activity spans the experimental period and
the return to the pre-experiment status quo, we compare experimental behavior
to post-experimental behavior. We find that when treated employers regained
access to compensation history information, they revert to their previous de-
gree of information acquisition. This implies that employers do not perceive
the increased screening costs borne during the experiment as worth the cost
savings. However, removing wage history information could be justifiable from
a social welfare perspective, given that there are likely positive externalities to
more screening and hiring of relatively less experienced workers (Tervi¨  o, 2009;


                                        4
Pallais, 2014).
    A limitation of experiment is that workers did not know that their past wage
histories might be hidden from certain employers. In an equilibrium in which
the lack of employer access to compensation history was common knowledge,
workers could respond to employer behaviors in many ways, such as altering
which jobs they apply to or how they present themselves to employers. In our
setting, in which workers are the first to bid, relatively low wage workers might
adjust their wage bids up, and for relatively high wage workers to adjust their
bids down. This would reduce the experimental "bargain hunting" effects we
found and instead turn it into a price effect. We explore this possibility with a
structural model of hiring, finding that bid adjustments would be exceedingly
modest. However, future work looking at entire markets would help alleviate
this "partial equilibrium" concern, and indeed, some is already emerging--see
McNichols and Hanson (2019).
    Our paper is a contribution to a larger literature on the role of information in
the hiring process. It is the first paper that we are aware of that directly explores
the role of compensation history in hiring. It also analyzes a true experiment,
which is rare in a literature that has mostly been observational, at least with
respect to removing whole "classes" of information rather than just whether
an applicant has some attribute or not (as in audit studies). A feature of this
paper that differentiates it from the larger literature on information in hiring
is that we document the importance of endogenous information acquisition
as an employer response to an information deficit.3 Endogenous information
acquisition could be an important margin of adjustment in other contexts but
would typically be overlooked, as it is often hard to measure. This finding
highlights an advantage of our online setting.
    The experiment is timely, in the sense that it approximates policies that are
being implemented--or are under active consideration--in several conventional
labor markets. For example, both New York City and Philadelphia recently
passed laws that prevent employers from asking candidates about past com-
   3
    Kuhn and Shen (2013) find that firms' idiosyncratic gender preferences can be overridden
by factors such as greater incentive to search broadly for the most qualified candidate.



                                             5
pensation.4 To the extent our results generalize to these settings, these policy
proposals would have the intended effect; they would help relatively less expe-
rienced workers get their foot in the door (our bargain hunting results), and
perhaps help those workers obtain a better wage bargain (our bargaining re-
sults), without reducing hiring (our finding of more hiring in the treatment
group). Early evidence is consistent with our results--using a synthetic con-
trol approach, McNichols and Hanson (2019) finds substantial increase in the
female to male wage ratio following salary history bans in both California and
Massachusetts.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the em-
pirical context. Section 3 presents the experimental design. Section 4 presents
the results. Section 5 concludes.


2       Empirical context
The context for our experiment is an online labor market. In online labor mar-
kets, employers hire workers to perform tasks that can be done remotely, such
as computer programming, graphic design, data entry, research, and writing
(Horton, 2010). Online labor markets differ in their scope and focus, but com-
mon services provided by the platforms include publishing job listings, hosting
user profile pages, arbitrating disputes, certifying worker skills, and maintaining
feedback systems.
    There has been some research that uses online labor markets as an empirical
context. Pallais (2014) conducted a field experiment to demonstrate how much
value employers place on past on-platform work experience. Gilchrist et al.
(2016) explore the effects of higher wages on output using a field experiment.
Stanton and Thomas (2015) show that agencies (which act as quasi-firms) help
workers find jobs and break into the marketplace. Agrawal et al. (2016) investi-
gate which factors matter to employers in making selections from an applicant
    4
    "Philadelphia Is About to Ban Employers From Asking Potential Hires About
Their Salary History," Fortune Magazine, January 20th, 2017.     Accessed on-
line on Wednesday 6th November, 2019, at:      http://fortune.com/2017/01/20/
philadelphia-wage-history-employee-salaries/.


                                        6
pool, and present some evidence of statistical discrimination; the paper also
supports the view of employers selecting from a more-or-less complete pool of
applicants rather than serially screening. Horton (2019b) reports results from
a large scale minimum wage experiment.


2.1     Transacting on the platform
The process for filling a job opening on the platform is qualitatively similar to
the process in conventional labor markets. First, a would-be employer creates
a job post.5 An employer chooses a job title, writes a job description, and
labels the job opening with a category (e.g., "Administrative Support") and
required skills. Additionally, employers choose a contractual form (hourly or
fixed-price).
    Employers also must choose their relative preference for price and quality
by selecting from one of the following options: Entry level ("I am looking for
workers with the lowest rates."), Intermediate ("I am looking for a mix of
experience and value."), and Expert ( "I am willing to pay higher rates for the
most experienced workers."). The employer's "vertical" preference selection is
shown to would-be applicants.6
    Firms presumably tailor their hiring to attract the employees that generate
the most match specific surplus for the task at hand. Drawing on the assor-
tative matching in labor markets literature (Rosen, 1982; Sattinger, 1993), we
take firms' ex-ante vertical preferences for price and quality as a signal of the
project's importance. Firms that indicate they are looking for "entry level"
labor are revealing that the project is not essential and they are willing to
accept some risk that the task is not completed. We will make use of these
employer vertical preferences when exploring heterogeneity in the effects of the
treatment.
    Once the employer submits his or her job opening, it is reviewed by the
platform and then posted publicly to the marketplace. Would-be applicants
   5
      Employers also choose whether to make it public or private. Public jobs can be seen by
all workers on the platform, while only invited applicants can see private jobs.
    6
      See Horton and Johari (2015) on the effects of this feature on applicant sorting.



                                             7
generally learn about job openings via electronic searches. Potential applicants
can see the details of the job opening as well as some information about the
associated employer. If the worker chooses to apply, he or she submits a wage
bid (for hourly jobs) or a total project bid (for fixed-price jobs) and a cover
letter.
    Employers can also seek out workers themselves, inviting workers to apply
to their opening. To help employers find and evaluate workers, the platform
hosts worker "profiles." A profile page shows details about the worker's work
history on the platform, skills, education, availability to take on more work,
and other information that he or she wants to share.7 A worker also lists his or
her "profile rate," which is an hourly wage. Although it is self-reported, it is
usually close to the typical wage that the worker earns, and employers consider
it when deciding who to invite to their openings. The profile rate is a useful
measure for our purposes, as it is recorded even if the worker has no work
history on the platform. Furthermore, unlike average past wages, the profile
rate is not "dragged" down by wages from jobs completed far in the past.
    After applying, the applicant immediately appears in an interface the em-
ployer has for tracking applicants. This interface shows the applicant's bid,
name, picture, self-reported skills, and a few pieces of platform-verified infor-
mation, such as total hours worked and average feedback rating from previous
projects (if any). For these past projects, employers could, historically, see
how many hours the worker worked on that project and, critically, his or her
past wage. We will discuss how the treatment affected their ability to see this
information when discussing the experimental design.
    The employer can screen his or her applicants by asking questions and
organizing interviews. After this screening, employers can decide to make an
offer (or offers). Although employers typically extend an offer at the same wage
as the worker's original wage bid, about 11% of workers in the control group
are hired at a wage lower than the proposed wage due to back-and-forth wage
bargaining.
  7
   See Horton (2019a) on the importance of worker capacity information on probability of
match formation.



                                           8
   Once hired, hours-worked are recorded using platform-provided software
that workers install on their computers. At the conclusion of the contract,
both parties give a reason for ending the contract (typically that the project
was completed successfully) and provide both written and numerical feedback
about each other.


3       Experimental design
The experiment was conducted in late 2014 by the platform. All employers that
posted a job opening during a 14-day period were allocated to the experiment.
The unit of randomization was the individual employer. All allocated employers
were assigned to either the treatment group (n = 2, 974) or the control group
(n = 2, 948). The sample sizes were determined by the platform ex ante.
If an assigned employer posted an additional job opening, this job opening
also received the treatment assignment of the initial job opening. However,
we only use the first job opening by each employer in our analysis, as the
treatment could have affected the probability of posting additional openings or
the characteristics of any subsequent job opening.
    We also restrict the sample to hourly job openings, as the bidding and
hiring process of fixed price jobs is qualitatively different. Our sample is further
restricted to only public jobs, which any applicant could bid on.8 The change
in the interface available to employers was not explained to treated employers;
the interface simply changed.9 Applicants to job postings were not aware of the
experiment, and hence the possibility that the employer might not have access
to their past on-platform compensation history. Given that this compensation
history is visible to workers on their own profiles--and that it was historically
available to employers--most workers presumably applied believing it would be
available.
    8
     As a robustness check, we run our analysis on private jobs which are composed only of
applicants expressly invited by the employer with whom the employer previously worked.
There are no treatment effects on private jobs.
   9
     We monitored employer discussion forums (which are generally not very active) and
there was almost no discussion of the experiment. One employer did post about it, and
others responded suggesting it was most likely a bug.


                                            9
    To assess balance, the means for a collection of pre-randomization attributes
with respect to job opening characteristics, employer characteristics, and the
composition of the applicant pool are shown in Appendix A.3. The experi-
mental groups are well-balanced, which is unsurprising, as the software used to
allocate employers to treatment cells has been used many times and has proven
reliable.


3.1    Employer's view of the applicant pool and measures
       of screening
A stylized representation of the employer's evaluation interface for an hourly job
opening is shown below. Note that the employer can see the applying worker's
name, hourly rate wage bid, average feedback rating, and on-platform experi-
ence, measured in hours of work completed. Critically, there is no information
in this interface about the past hourly wage earned by the worker.
              Name       Hourly Wage Stars Hours Country
              Ada H. $6.15/hour         4.5     123     UK
              Paul H. $8.27/hour        4.2     89      India
    From this list, employers could "view" an application by clicking on it.
An employer viewing an application would see that applicant's past work his-
tory. How this work history was presented differed by the employer's treatment
assignment: in the control group, employers could see the past hourly wage as-
sociated with each past job held by the worker, but in the treatment, they could
not. For example, a work history item for an applicant would be presented to
a treated employer as:
              Job Title:        Lead data scientist
              Contract Type: Hourly
              Total:            $451.34
              Time:             December 2014 - present
whereas a control employer viewing the same applicant would see:
              Job Title:        Lead data scientist
              Contract Type: Hourly
              Hourly Wage:      $17.00
              Total:            $451.34
              Time:             December 2014 - present

                                       10
    Note that the control employer could see that the worker worked at $17.00/hour,
but a treated employer could not. Treated employers could not circumvent this
restriction by searching for the worker and finding his or her information else-
where on the platform--the employer's treatment assignment restricted access
to this information everywhere.
    We measure whether an applicant was "viewed" by the employer, sent a
message by the employer (i.e., "called-back"), asked a question by the employer,
or (planned to be) interviewed by the employer "face-to-face," by scheduling a
video teleconference session. To illustrate different measurements, consider an
employer who received 6 applications:
              Name        Wage Bid       Stars Hours-worked Country
              Molly M. $10.13/hour 4.6           563             Philippines
              Ada H.      $6.15/hour 4.5         123             UK
              Eliot G.    $6.10/hour 4.1         20              Russia
              Julia M.    $7.16/hour 4.3         75              US
              Paul H.     $8.27/hour 4.2         89              India
              Emma G. $7.16/hour 4.3             75              US
    The employer clicked to learn more about Paul, Julia, and Molly, so the
number of applicants "viewed" is three. After learning more about those three
applicants, the employer also sent a message to Paul and Julia, making the
number messaged just two. A message in this context can be thought of as an
invitation to interview for a job opening, similar to a "call back" in the audit
study literature.
    Employers communicate with applicants through a platform-provided mes-
saging system. All of the messages back and forth between one employer and
one applicant are considered a message "thread." We search these message
threads for a number of measures of employer evaluation and construct in-
dicator variables of these measures: (1) setting up a face-to-face meeting by
exchanging Skype IDs, (2) ending a sentence with a question mark, and (3)
starting a sentence with a question word i.e., "when, where, why, or how."
    Returning to our example, if the employers' message to Julia was:

           Hi Julia - Nice application, looking forward to working
           together!


                                      11
This message would not have a question word, a question mark, or any attempt
to set up a face-to-face meeting. In contrast, consider a message to Paul:
            Hi Paul -- I'm interested in your application. Do
            you have much experience with my kind of project?
            When did you last use Python? My Skype ID is
            x12889--please get in touch to schedule an interview.
   In the case of the message to Paul, we would have a question mark, a
question word ("when"), and a Skype ID exchanged to set up a face-to-face
meeting.10


3.2     Summary statistics on the hiring process
Summary statistics on hiring and screening in the control group are presented
in Table 1. On average, 35 applicants apply to each job opening, and 1 of
these applicants is invited to apply to the job by the employer, leaving about
34 "organic" applicants who apply to a job without being invited. Employers
only view 7 of the applications submitted to the job by organic applicants, and
only message, i.e., "call-back," about 2 of these applicants.
    Turning to the interviewing phase, employers specifically ask at least one
question to about 62% of the applicants they message. About half of applicants
who are messaged are asked to conduct a "face-to-face" interview, at least as
measured by appearance of the "Skype" keyword. On average, this hiring
process leads to about 40% of job openings posted being filled within 6 months
of being posted (on average 0.58 applicants are hired, as some jobs hire more
than one applicant). This is not dissimilar to the traditional labor market--
only 44% of a sample of conventional jobs were filled within 30 days, and it is
suspected that many of these openings are never filled.11
  10
      In Appendix A.5 we conduct further analyses which investigate the nature of the messages
(i.e., simply coordinating logistics or asking probing questions.
   11
      Report by CEBR, http://press.indeed.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Time-to-fill-
jobs-in-the-US.pdf




                                             12
  Table 1: Per-opening summary statistics for the control group (n = 2, 948)


Statistic                              Mean     St. Dev.    Min    Median     Max
Applicants                             35.105    43.296      0        22       639
  Workers invited to apply              3.668    21.230      0         0      1,007
  Invited workers that applied          1.414     4.504      0         0       175
  Organic applicants                   33.691    43.036      0       20.5      639
Applications viewed                     7.321     9.257      0         5       122
  Organic applications viewed           6.671     9.014      0        4        116
  Organic applicants messaged           1.797    3.684       0         1       91
Org. appl's "questioned"                1.121     2.050      0         0        36
Org. appl's face-to-face interviewed    0.890     1.890      0         0        23
Applicants hired                        0.580     1.039      0         0        26
Notes: This table reports summary statistics on the applicant pool characteristics
and employer evaluation of their applicant pool in the control group. All reports are
on a per-opening basis. For example, the row labeled "Applicants" reports statistics
on the total number of applicants that applied to the job. "Invited" workers are
those that the employer sought out and asked to apply for the opening. "Organic"
applicants are workers that applied without being invited. An application is "viewed"
if the employer clicked on a worker's application to learn more about the applicant.


4     Results
We will present experimental results chronologically with respect to the hiring
process, going from initial screening to post-hire contractual outcomes. As
we have a true experiment, we will always present results as simple means
comparisons at the job opening level, though when it is useful, we will also use
regression.


4.1     Employer evaluation and information acquisition
Although the treatment does not affect the employer's initial view of the ap-
plicant pool, a treated employer might decide to click on, or "view" more or
fewer applicants after observing less information from each applicant he or she
views. In the top line of Table 2, labeled "Measures of employer interest," we
can see that treated employers on average view another 0.45 applications from
a baseline of 7 applications per opening, or about 7% more applicants than in


                                         13
the control.
    In our experimental context, the equivalent of an interview call-back is the
employer "messaging" an applicant. In Table 2, in the panel labeled "Mea-
sures of employer evaluation/elicitation," the means for several outcomes are
reported. Treated employers called back about 7% more applicants, though this
estimate is imprecise and not conventionally significant. Treated employers ask
at least one question (as measured by a question word) to an additional 0.15
applicants per job opening, which corresponds to a 13% increase in the number
of applicants questioned. The increase in questioning as measured by question
mark is similar in magnitude.
    As the information acquisition outcomes are counts of applicants, we can
potentially gain more precision from a regression with the appropriate link
function, and so we estimate a Poisson count regression

                   yj = (0 + 1 WageHistHidj + Xj  + j ),                              (1)

where yj is some outcome of interest, WageHistHidj is the treatment indi-
cator, and Xj is a collection of pre-randomization job opening and employer
characteristics.12 We plot the coefficients on WageHistHidj in Figure 1. For
each point estimate, a 95% CI is shown. For each outcome, we plot the coeffi-
cient using the full sample, labeled "Pooled" and for each of the three employer
vertical preference levels, "Beginner," "Intermediate," and "Expert."
    Reassuringly, the regression coefficients shown in Figure 1 for the "Pooled"
sample give marginal effects similar to similar to those found in the means com-
parison: treated employers called-back 9.2% more applicants, used at least one
question mark in 12.1% more message threads (and at least one question word
in 15.6% more message threads), and set up 8.2% more face-to-face interviews
as control employers. While economically meaningful, the effect on face-to-face
meetings setup is borderline insignificant in the "Pooled" sample.
  12
    We control for the category of the job opening, prior jobs billed by the employer, the
amount of money the employer has previously spent on the platform, the number of applica-
tions to the job openings, the number of recommended applications to the job opening, the
average bid, and an indicator if the employer requested specific skills.



                                           14
Table 2: Effects of hiding applicant compensation history on various outcomes

                                     Control                 Treatment                Difference     %
                                                                                                     Change

  Measures of employer interest (number of applicants per job)
                                  N = 2,948                   N = 2,974
    Viewed                        6.67 (0.17)                 7.12 (0.18)            0.45 (0.24)        6.76
  Measures of employer evaluation/elicitation (number of applicants per job)
    Messaged                      1.80 (0.07)                 1.93 (0.07)            0.13 (0.10)        7.09
    Questioned (Q Word)           1.12 (0.04)                 1.27 (0.05)            0.15 (0.06)       13.40
    Questioned (Q Mark)           1.19 (0.04)                 1.31 (0.05)            0.12 (0.06)       10.14
    Face-to-Face Sched.           0.89 (0.03)                 0.95 (0.04)            0.06 (0.06)        6.30
  Characteristics of called-back (i.e., messaged) applicants
                                  N = 6,530                   N = 6,725
    Bid amount                    12.85 (0.33)               12.40 (0.29)           -0.46 (0.44)       -3.55
    Profile wage rate             12.86 (0.30)               12.36 (0.26)           -0.50 (0.40)       -3.86
    Avg 6-month wage              11.09 (0.29)               10.56 (0.25)           -0.53 (0.38)       -4.78
    Min 6-month wage              8.93 (0.24)                 8.53 (0.21)           -0.40 (0.32)       -4.51
    Max 6-month wage              14.11 (0.40)               13.36 (0.31)           -0.76 (0.50)       -5.37
    Previous hours worked         1107.33 (46.57)         1072.50 (36.68)          -34.84 (59.28)      -3.15
    Prior billed jobs             27.62 (0.93)               26.73 (0.79)           -0.90 (1.22)       -3.24
    Avg Feedback                  4.70 (0.01)                 4.71 (0.01)            0.00 (0.01)        0.08
  Job opening outcomes
    Hire made?                    0.40 (0.01)                 0.43 (0.01)            0.03 (0.01)        7.23
    Hourly Wage Rate              12.29 (0.44)               10.93 (0.36)           -1.35 (0.56)      -11.01
    Feedback (1-10)               8.79 (0.12)                 8.91 (0.10)            0.12 (0.15)        1.38
    Contract rated a success? 0.59 (0.02)                     0.61 (0.02)            0.02 (0.03)        3.65
  Characteristics of hired applicants
                                  N = 1,520                   N = 1,744
    Bid amount                    11.77 (0.35)               10.53 (0.47)           -1.25 (0.58)      -10.59
    Profile wage rate             12.05 (0.34)               11.03 (0.48)           -1.02 (0.59)       -8.47
    Avg 6-month wage              10.33 (0.38)                9.00 (0.43)           -1.33 (0.57)      -12.87
    Min 6-month wage              8.36 (0.34)                 7.10 (0.38)           -1.26 (0.51)      -15.08
    Max 6-month wage              13.11 (0.49)               11.71 (0.55)           -1.39 (0.74)      -10.64
    Previous hours worked         1140.67 (57.99)         1252.57 (85.72)         111.90 (103.49)       9.81
    Prior billed jobs             35.90 (1.75)               34.33 (1.50)           -1.58 (2.30)       -4.39
    Avg Feedback                  4.72 (0.01)                4.71 (0.02)            -0.01 (0.02)       -0.20
  Wage Bargaining | hire made
    Any bargaining?               0.13 (0.01)                 0.12 (0.01)           -0.01 (0.02)       -8.04
    Wage-to-bid | bargaining 0.88 (0.03)                     0.96 (0.03)             0.08 (0.04)        9.22
Notes: This table reports means errors across experimental groups. Sample sizes are reported inline for
most outcome categories. When the sample size differs within category of outcome they are reported below.
The sample size for evaluating if there was a hire is 2,974 treatment jobs and 2,948 control jobs. The sample
sizes for evaluating wage rate and if there is any bargaining is 907 treatment jobs and 842 control jobs.
The sample sizes for evaluating feedback is 604 treatment jobs and 547 control jobs. The sample sizes
for evaluating the change in wage-to-bid ratio is 105 treatment jobs and 105 control jobs. Next to each
mean, standard errors are reported in parentheses. The "% Change" column is the percentage change
in the treatment, relative to the control. Significance stars are calculated using p-values for a two-sided
t-tests of the null hypothesis of no difference in means across groups. Significance indicators: p  0.10 : ,
p  0.05 : , and p  .01 :   .




                                                    15
Figure 1: Effects of the treatment on extensive margin measure of employer
information acquisition
  Estimated Treatment Effect


                                           Applicants             Applicants               Applicants                Meetings
                                           messaged            questioned (marks)       questioned (words)            setup
                                0.4
                                                                                              q                        q
                                0.2               q
                                                                     q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                q          q
                                       q    q
                                                                                                                 q          q
                                0.0                                                                      q
                                                        q                       q
                                                                                                                                 q

                               -0.2


                                         d    er  te   rt         d    er  te   rt         d    er  te   rt        d    er  te   rt
                                    o ole inn edia xpe       o ole inn edia xpe       o ole inn edia xpe       oole inn edia xpe
                                   P       g         E      P       g         E      P       g         E      P      g         E
                                        Be term                  Be term                  Be term                 Be term
                                           In                       In                       In                      In


                               Note: This figure shows the relationship between measures of information acquisi-
                               tion and the treatment separated by requested expertise of the worker. The level
                               of observation is the job opening. The model and controls are the same as used in
                               the estimation of Equation 1, except that each employer vertical preference group is
                               fit separately. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are used to construct 95%
                               confidence intervals.


    Turning to the employer vertical preference sub-samples, we can see that the
overall increase in information acquisition in the treatment is primarily driven
by employers interested in hiring low and medium expertise applicants, with no
evidence of a treatment effect for employers with "high" vertical preferences.13
In fact, when restricting the sample to employers interested in hiring "Beginner"
applicants, the effect on face-to-face meetings setup is significant at the 10%
level.
    The effects presented so far are all extensive margin effects, but we are
also interested in intensive margin effect, i.e., of the applicants they called-
back, did treated employers evaluate them differently? Although we know
the treatment changed the quantity of applicants called-back, we can still test
whether employers engaged in more evaluation on a per-applicant basis by
  13
    Another margin which employers could react would be by directly asking applicants about
their past earnings. Additional analysis, which is available from the authors, shows that
treatment and control employers do not differentially ask about "wage[s]", or "earn[ing--s]"
or "rate[s]" in messages to applicants.




                                                                               16
estimating the following application-level logit model:

                        yi,j = logit-1 (0 + 1 WageHistHidj +                                 (2)
                                Xi,j  + j ) CalledBacki,j = 1,

where yi,j is some outcome for applicant i to job opening j , such as whether
they were asked a question, and Xi,j is a collection of pre-randomization job
opening and applicant characteristics.14 The sample is restricted to applicants
the employer called-back.
    Figure 2 plots odds ratios from applicant-level logit estimates of Equation 2,
both for the entire sample (labeled "Pooled") and each of the vertical preference
tiers. Coefficients are exponentiated to be interpretable as odds ratios. The
left panel of the figure report estimates for the question marks, the center panel
reports odds ratios for question words, and the right panel reports odds ratios
of face-to-face meeting setup.
    As with the extensive margin estimates, treatment effects appear to be
concentrated among employers with low and medium vertical preferences. For
example, employers with the low vertical preferences are 1.51 times more likely
to question an applicant they message (using the "question words" measure).
In contrast, employers with the highest vertical preferences show no treatment
effects. Across groups, there is no evidence of an intensive margin difference in
face-to-face interviewing.
    One potential explanation for the treatment effect on information acquisi-
tion being limited to employers who are looking for "entry level" and, to a lesser
extent, "intermediate level" workers is that the value of locating and hiring a
suitable worker is already high enough that those employers seeking "expert"
labor are already engaging in higher levels of information acquisition. It is also
possible that employers looking for "entry level" are closer to the "no surplus"
  14
    We control for the category, prior jobs billed by the employer, the employer's prior
amount spent on the platform, the number of applications to the job openings, the number
of recommended applications to the job opening, an indicator if the employer requested
specific skills, the log of the applicant's bid, the log of the applicant's tenure, the number of
prior jobs worked by the applicant, and the applicants' prior feedback.



                                               17
Figure 2: Effects of the treatment on intensive margin information acquisition
measures, by employer vertical preferences

                                               Questioned (marks)                             Questioned (words)                                   Meeting setup
       Estimated Odds Ratio


                              2.0


                              1.5                                                                       q
                                                       q
                                           q                                              q                            q
                                                                  q                                                             q                         q
                                                                             q
                              1.0                                                                                                           q                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                      q




                                                          r                    t                      er                        rt                      er                     rt
                                        led           ne        dia
                                                                    te      er         led                          iat
                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                             pe          led                       iat
                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                            pe
                                    Po
                                       o
                                                   gin         e         xp        Po
                                                                                      o           inn              d       Ex        Po
                                                                                                                                        o           inn           d       Ex
                                                 e           m         E
                                                                                              Be
                                                                                                 g              me                              Be
                                                                                                                                                   g           me
                                               B          er                                             e  r                                             er
                                                      Int                                            Int                                               Int


Note: This figure shows the relationship between intensity of information acquisition and the
treatment, by the employer's reported vertical preference. The model and controls are the
same as used in the estimation of Equation 2, except that each employer vertical preference
group is fit separately. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are used for 95% confidence
intervals.


margin described by Clemens and Wither (2014). When the treatment reduces
cheap information, these employers now need to acquire more information to
be willing to make a hire.


4.2                Characteristics of called-back applicants
In the absence of compensation history information, treated employers might
change the kind of applicants they evaluate. The panel of Table 2 labeled
"Characteristics of called-back applicants " compares the mean characteristics
of applicants who are called-back, by experimental group. The workers called-
back by treated employers had lower wage bids, lower profile rates, and lower
past wages, though these differences were not, taken one by one, statistically
significant at the 10% level. However, the effects are all directionally the same--
called-back workers in the treatment bid about 4% less, had 4% lower profile
rates, and 5% lower average past wages. All effects are consistent with treated
employers evaluating applicants who have a greater potential to be a bargain.
    To study how these effects differ by employer's vertical hiring preferences,




                                                                                                     18
Figure 3: Employer probability of calling back a worker conditional on the
applicant log profile rate, the treatment assignment, and the employer vertical
preference

                                        Pooled               Beginner                Intermediate             Expert
                            50.0%
   Pr(Interview | Viewed)




                                                                                                                   Control
                            40.0%
                                             Control                                          Control
                            30.0%                                                                             Treatment
                                                                                          Treatment
                            20.0%       Treatment                  Control


                            10.0%                                Treatment


                                    0   2    4         6 0   2        4        6 0    2       4         6 0   2    4         6
                                                                 Applicant log profile rate
                            Note: This figure plots, for each employer requested expertise of the worker,
                            predicted values from a linear model which regresses if the employer called-
                            back an applicant, conditional on viewing the applicant, on the log of the
                            applicant's profile wage rate by treatment status of the employer. Standard
                            errors are clustered at the job opening level.


we estimate an applicant-level selection model

  CalledBacki,j = 0 + 1 log(ProfileRatei,j )
                            + 2 WageHistHidj + 3 log(ProfileRatei,j ) × WageHistHidj
                                                                                             +    i,j   Viewedi,j = 1, (3)

for the whole sample, as well as for the three employer vertical preference tier
sub-samples.
    Figure 3 plots the predicted probability of being called-back versus the ap-
plicant profile rate for both treatment and control, with separate panels for the
employer's vertical preference type. In the leftmost panel, which shows results
for the full sample, we can see the treatment shifting call-back probability to-
wards workers with relatively lower profile rates). In the low ("Beginner") and
medium ("Intermediate") vertical preference panels, we mostly see a shift in
evaluation towards relatively lower profile rate workers, whereas in the highest
tier, we simply see slightly less hiring of the highest profile rate workers.

                                                                          19
4.3     Probability of hiring and the characteristics of hired
        workers
Treated employers could have abandoned their job openings if their information
deficit lowered the expected value of hiring below their reservation value. How-
ever, we find the opposite, with employers being somewhat more likely to make
a hire. In the panel of Table 2 labeled "Job opening outcomes," we see that the
treatment increased hiring by about 3 percentage points, from a baseline hire
rate in the control group of 40%.
     As we saw in Section 4.2, called-back applicants in the treatment have
slightly lower past wages, albeit not significantly so. However, this bargain
hunting is much more evident in hiring. The panel labeled "Characteristics of
hired applicants " in Table 2 shows the strong shift towards workers with lower
past wages in the treatment group: their hourly wage bids were nearly 11%
lower and average past wages were about 13% lower.15 These differences are
substantially larger than the differences in mean attributes of the called-back
applicants.
     Although the bargain hunting effect is sizeable, as we noted earlier, the
treated group did have about a 7% higher fill rate, and so some of the decrease
in the average past wages could be a composition effect due to these additional
filled job openings. However, it is impossible for the change to be purely due to
the additional filled job openings as marginally filled jobs must have applicants
with negative past wages to achieve a 13% reduction overall in past wages.16
     We might suspect that, in the absence of compensation history information,
employers would put more weight on other available signals, such as total past
earnings, tenure on the platform, past feedback, and so on. We fit a model of
employer hiring on the basis of observable characteristics and find no evidence
that the weight put on various attributes differed by employer treatment status.
  15
     We found no indication that treated employers were more likely to hire someone they
had worked with in the past. However, this would be quite rare in our data, because if an
employer already knew someone, they would have likely just contacted them directly with a
private job opening, and we do not include private job openings in our sample.
  16
     The marginally filled jobs would need average past wages of $-8.68 per hour for the 13%
reduction in past wages to be entirely driven by the increased fill rate, which is impossible.


                                             20
However, many of the point estimates are quite imprecise. This analysis is in
Appendix A.2.


4.4    Prevalence and outcome of wage bargaining
Although workers make the first wage offer, employers are free to counter-offer,
which the worker can counter, and so on. We can measure the extent of this
bargaining, and see to what extent bargaining explains the decline in hired
worker wages. We consider two aspects of wage bargaining: (1) whether any
bargaining occurred among hired workers, as measured by a difference between
the hired wage and what the worker initially proposed, and (2) the outcome of
the wage bargaining, as measured by the ratio of the realized wage to the bid.
In Table 2, the panel labeled "Wage bargaining | hire made " reports means for
both measures in the treatment and control. There is no strong evidence that
the treatment caused a change in the fraction of worker/employer pairs that
negotiate, but there is some evidence that hired workers in the treated group
strike better wage bargains, conditional upon bargaining.
    Given that we know the treatment encouraged the hiring of lower wage
workers, this could simply be a selection effect if lower-wage workers typically
have better bargaining outcomes. In a regression framework, we can potentially
control for these composition changes, as well as see whether bargaining effects
are concentrated among relatively lower-wage workers.
    First, we re-capitulate the means comparison results in Column (1) of Ta-
ble 3, estimating

       AnyBargainingj = 0 + 1 WageHistHidj +              j   Hiredj = 1.    (4)

    As expected, the coefficient on the treatment indicator is essentially a pre-
cisely estimated 0--there is no evidence that the treatment affected the preva-
lence of bargaining. From the constant term, we can see that for about 11%
of filled job openings in which a hire was made, bargaining does occur. In
those cases, we can look at whether the wage bargain is affected by the treat-
ment, subject to the selection caveats described above. Column (2) reports an


                                       21
Table 3: Effect of the treatment on the existence and outcomes of hired worker
wage bargaining


                                                           Dependent variable:
                                             AnyBargaining           WageToBidRatio
                                                     (1)               (2)          (3)
Wage history hidden, WageHistHid                  -0.005             0.089       0.281
                                                  (0.016)            (0.043)     (0.122)
Applicant profile rate in logs (LPR)                                              0.008
                                                                                 (0.034)
WageHistHid × LPR                                                                -0.093
                                                                                 (0.054)
Constant                                          0.108              0.836       0.818
                                                  (0.012)            (0.029)     (0.083)
Observations                                       1,424               150         150
Notes: This table reports regressions where the outcomes are measures of bargaining. In
Column (1), the outcome is whether any wage bargaining occurred. The sample is restricted
to employers that made a single hire. In Columns (2) and (3), the outcome is the ratio
of the realized wage to the initial wage bid. The sample for these two regressions are only
those hires for which some bargaining ocurred. Heteroskedastic robust standard errors are
reported. The top and bottom .5% of wage-to-bid ratios are dropped. Significance indicators:
p  0.10 : , p  0.05 : , and p  .01 :   ..




                                            22
estimate of

WageToBidRatioj = 0 + 1 WageHistHidj +               j   AnyBargainingj = 1.
                                                                             (5)

The coefficient on the treatment indicator is positive and significant, with the
treatment increasing the wage-to-bid ratio by about 9%, from a baseline ratio
of 0.84.
     Given that the treatment increased employer interest in relatively low-wage
workers, we might suspect that bargaining effects are concentrated among those
workers. In Column (3), we interact the treatment indicator with the appli-
cant's log profile rate. The effects on the interaction term are negative and
conventionally significant, implying that workers with relatively low wages saw
the largest increase in their bargained wage. We can also see this in the larger
coefficient on the WageHistHidj indicator. The coefficient on the log pro-
file rate is a precisely estimated zero, which undercuts the selection concern
that lower profile workers simply have better bargaining outcomes on the ratio
measure (which would be a concern given that the treatment causes bargain-
hunting).


4.5    Contract outcomes
The treatment induced employers to hire workers with lower past average wages.
If past wages simply reflected productivity, then we would expect more hours-
worked if project sizes remained the same, but an unchanged wage bill. If these
hired workers were "worse," this might have reduced the quality of the work
the employer received. This in turn might create less employer surplus, though
it could be offset by the lower wage bill. We do not directly measure employer
surplus, but we do have some reasonble proxies.
    In the panel labeled "Job opening outcomes " in Table 2, we report means
for 1) the "private" feedback score, which was a rating on a scale from 1-
10 and made only to the platform and (2) whether the employer rated the
completed contract a success, which is a binary indicator. These two feedback


                                      23
measures perhaps most closely map to surplus, as they are less subject to
strategic misreporting (Filippas et al., 2019).
    It is important to note that for these outcome measures, we are conditioning
on filled jobs. This introduces both selection concern and it means the sample is
smaller. We only have 5,922 job postings, and given that more than half of job
postings are not filled we are left with 2,715 jobs eligible to provide feedback.
Furthermore the baseline percentage of employers that actually leave feedback
upon completion of a job is not 100%. These caveats aside, both outcome
measures in Table 2 are higher in the treatment, though the effects are far from
conventionally significant.
    We expand our collecetion of contractual outcomes in Table 4, estimating
effects using linear regression and adding several pre-randomization controls.17
The outcomes are: (1) the number of hours the applicant billed on the job, (2)
the numerical public feedback the employer left for the worker (1 to 5 scale), (3)
the numerical "private" feedback on the worker (reported only to the platform)
(1 to 10 scale), also standardized (4) the dollar amount of any bonus left for
the worker, and (5) if the worker was rehired by the employer after completing
the job.




  17
    We add controls for the number of prior contracts the employer billed, the number of
times the employer has worked with this specific contractor and the category of the job.


                                          24
         Table 4: Effect of the treatment on employer's subjective measures of contract outcomes

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                                      Public     Private
                                   log(Hours Billed)   Feedback Left Feedback Feedback         Bonus Given    Rehired
                                          (1)               (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)
     Wage history hidden                -0.010            -0.002          0.001       0.002        0.935       -0.003
                                        (0.021)           (0.077)        (0.056)     (0.115)      (4.623)      (0.015)
     Constant                          2.603              0.746         4.691       9.935          3.550        0.110
                                        (0.105)           (0.377)        (0.160)     (0.095)      (3.675)      (0.076)
     Employer-level covariates            Yes               Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
     Assignment-level covariates          Yes               Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
     Observations                        1,851             1,851         1,002       1,095         1,672        1,848
      Notes: This table reports regressions where the outcome is a measure of the employer's subjective evaluation of
25




      the contract. The sample is restricted to filled job openings. In Column (1) the outcome is the log of the number
      of hours billed on the job. In Column (2) the outcome is an indicator if the employer left any public feedback.
      In Column (3) the outcome is the public feedback score left by the employer on the employee's performance.
      In Column (4) the outcome is the private feedback score left by the employer on the employee's preformace. In
      Column (5) the outcome is an indicator if the employer left the worker a bonus. In Column (6) the outcome
      is an indicator if the employer rehired the worker for a later job. Covariates included are category indicators,
      the number of prior jobs the employer filled, and the number of prior jobs the employer and worker completed
      together, and total job billings. Significance indicators: p  0.10 : , p  0.05 : , and p  .01 :   .
    Each of these measures is not without some complications in interpretation.
Changes in hours-worked could reflect hiring a more productive worker (which
would tend to lower hours-worked) but if these same workers are hired a wage
lower than their marginal product, the employer might ask for more work to be
completed. As it is, in Column (1) we see there appears to be no evidence of a
change in hours-worked in the treatment, though the estimate is imprecise.
    Before presenting the feedback measures, we first report a regression whether
the outcome is whether any feedback was left, in Column (2). Importantly, the
treatment does not seem to have any effect whatsoever on the feedback response
rate. In Columns (3) and (4), the outcome is the public and private feedback
scores. There is no evidence of a difference by treatment assignment--both
point estimates are very close to zero, with the private feedback measure now
being closer to zero compared to what we observed in Table 2. In Column (5)
and (6), the outcomes are bonuses and re-hires. As with our other results, there
is no evidence of a difference by treatment assignment. The totality of the ev-
idence is that matches were not detectably better or worse in the treatment
group.


4.6    Is limiting information efficient from the employer's
       perspective?
If treated employers enjoy lower wages and no worse contractual outcomes,
might they change how they screen going forward, post-experiment? The an-
swer presumably depends on the cost of the added screening. We answer this
question using a difference-in-differences design by combining our experimen-
tal data with data from a post period in which the platform reverted to the
pre-experiment status quo.
    We have two time periods, t = 0, corresponding to the period when the
experiment was active, and t = 1, which is after the experiment ended. We can




                                       26
then estimate

  yjt = 0 + 1 WageHistHidj + 2 t + 3 WageHistHidj × t + Xjt  + j ,
                                                                (6)

where yjt is one of the measures of intensive search used previously on job j ,
in time period t, WageHistHidj is the treatment assignment the employer
posting job opening j , and Xj are pre-randomization job characteristics.18 Our
sample consists of employers that also posted a job with one month after the
experiment ended. This sample is necessarily smaller, and to the extent the
treatment affected an employer's probability of posting a subsequent job open-
ing in the post-period, the sample could be selected, though we have no evidence
that this was the case.
    The coefficient on WageHistHidj should be similar to the experimen-
tal estimates, subject to the caveat that the sample is only those employers
posting jobs in both periods. If the change in employer screening behavior per-
sisted post-experiment, then the coefficient on WageHistHidj × t should
be zero. If instead the employers revert, the point estimate on the intreraction
term should have the same magnitude but opposite sign as the coefficient on
WageHistHidj .
    Table 5 reports estimates of Equation 6 using a quasi-maximum likelihood
Poisson regressions with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. In general,
the point estimate on the treatment indicator is similar to the experimental
estimates, though less precise (as expected). In Columns (1) and (2), we see
some evidence that treated employers reverted to evauating smaller pools in
the post period, though the estimates are imprecise and smaller in magnitude
than the treatment effects.




  18
    Controls include the category of the job opening, employer's prior jobs, employer's prior
spending, number of applications to job, number of recommended applications to job, skill
requested indicator, and the average applicant's bid.


                                             27
                         Table 5: Effect of treatment on information elicitation by experimental period

                                                                Dependent variable:
                                  Applicants Applicants      Applicants                 Applicants      Meetings
                                   viewed,   messaged,   questioned (marks),        questioned (words),  setup,
                                 NumViewed NumMessaged NumQuestionedMarks NumQuestionedWords NumFaceToFace
                                     (1)              (2)                     (3)                         (4)                      (5)
                                                                                                                
     WageHistHid                    0.054             0.093                0.149                        0.153                    0.072
                                   (0.045)           (0.063)               (0.061)                      (0.066)                 (0.084)
     Period, t                      0.018             0.048                 0.092                        0.093                   0.036
                                   (0.048)           (0.068)               (0.069)                      (0.074)                 (0.079)
     t × WageHistHid              -0.017             -0.032               -0.220                       -0.246                    0.022
                                  (0.066)            (0.101)               (0.096)                      (0.105)                 (0.124)
     Constant                     1.675             0.536                   0.034                        0.165                  -0.522
28




                                  (0.133)            (0.186)               (0.206)                      (0.224)                 (0.274)
     Opening-level covariates        Yes              Yes                    Yes                          Yes                     Yes
     Employer-level covariates       Yes              Yes                    Yes                          Yes                     Yes
     Observations                   5,975            5,975                  5,975                        5,975                   5,975
       Notes: This table reports the results of Poisson regressions where the outcomes are various measures of employer information
       elicitation. The level of observation is the job opening. The sample is limited to employers who posted a job within 1 month of
       the experiment ending. Estimates are from quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson models. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
       are reported.The outcome in Column (1) is a count of the number of applicants viewed. The outcome in Column (2) is a count of
       the number of applicants messaged. The outcome in Column (3) is a count of the number of applications that exchanged messages
       including a question mark with the employer. The outcome in Column (4) is a count of the number of applications that included
       at least one of the following question words: who, what, where, when, why, or how. The outcome in Column (5) is a count of the
       number of applications that included the word "Skype" in a message with the employer. All models include as controls indicators
       for the category of work, the number of prior jobs billed by the employer, the employers prior spending on the platform, the
       number of applications to the job opening, the number of recommended applications to the job opening, the average applicant's
       bid, and an indicator if the employer requested a specific skill. These other regression coefficients are not shown. Significance
       indicators: p  0.10 : , p  0.05 : , and p  .01 :   .
   The coefficients on the interaction, WageHistHid × t, in Column (3) and
Column (4) are negative and significant, indicating that treatment employers
revert in the post-experiment period. The effect sizes are large enough that
the experimental effect is completely undone, though the effects are imprecise
enough to make strong claims unwarranted. It appears that the upfront costs of
more screening do not seem to be worth the potentially better match and lower
wage. In short, in the absence of the experimental intervention, we cannot rule
out that employers return to their status quo screening strategies.


4.7     Applicant outcomes
Although our experiment was conducted at the level of employer, we can also
analyze the experiment at the application level. We might expect, given the
shift towards hiring workers with lower past wages, that the applicants with
comparatively higher past wages are disadvantaged by the treatment. However,
this may not necessarily be the case given that removing compensation history
information also increased hiring overall.19
    We compare the monetary benefit to an applicant stemming from that ap-
plicants submitting a bid to both treatment and control job postings. The
outcome is TotalValuei,j , the total earnings that originated from applica-
tion from worker i to opening j . The outcome is $0.00 if the application does
not result in employment and a positive value if the applicant is hired. We
take advantage of the fact that applicants could apply to both jobs posted by
treated employers as well as control employers, allowing for a within-worker
analysis. We estimate the following model:

        log(1 + TotalValuei,j ) = 0 WageHistHidj + Xj  + i +                       i,j ,   (7)

where i is an applicant-fixed effect and Xj is a collection of pre-randomization
job-opening and employer characteristics.20 Figure 4 plots the coefficients on
  19
     In this section we examine which individuals benefit differentially from bids submitted in
treatment and control jobs. In Appendix A.6 we investigate longer-run effects on applicants,
although our experimental design makes detecting these differences difficult.
  20
     Covariates include: job category indicators, an indicator if the applicant is from the


                                              29
 Figure 4: Effects of the treatment on applicant's expected value of bidding


         Estimated Treatment Effect
                                       0.050

                                       0.025                                         q
                                                      q              q
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                  q
                                       0.000

                                      -0.025

                                                   led             4.5               $9          3.5            90
                                               Po
                                                  o             -$                .5-         $1           .5-$
                                                             .11              $4          $9
                                                                                             -
                                                                                                        13
                                                          $1                                           $
                                                                         Profile Wage Quartile
    Note: This figure shows the relationship between an applicants expected value from
    submitting a bid, and the treatment by the applicant's profile wage. The level of
    observation is the bid. The first quartile of profile wages range from $1.11-$4.5,
    the second quartile ranges from $4.5-$9, the third quartile ranges from $9-$13.5,
    and the fourth quartile ranges from $13.5-$90. Models all include an applicant level
    fixed effect. Observations are weighted by 1/(number of total applications sent by
    the worker). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by job opening are
    used for 95% confidence intervals.


WageHistHidj from each regression by quartile of the profile wage rate. For
each point estimate a 95% CI is shown. The full sample estimate are labeled
"Pooled."
    The regression coefficients shown in Figure 4 for the "Pooled" sample indi-
cate that on average, applicants' expected value of each bid submitted increases
by about 1.8%. The quartile regression results indicate that while applicants
whose profile wage rate is between $4.50 and $9.00 benefit the most from hid-
ing past compensation history. There is no strong evidence that workers in the
other quartiles were harmed (or helped), though these estimates are all fairly
imprecise.


5     Discussion and conclusion
This paper demonstrates how employers react when compensation history is re-
moved. They respond primarily by acquiring more information, expanding their
same country as the employer, the applicant's tenure, the algorithm score assigned to the
applicant, and a indicator for the order the application was submitted to the job.)



                                                                             30
evaluation on both the extensive and intensive margins. We find no evidence
that they simply abandon their search or rely more heavily on other signals.
There is no evidence they ultimatley form worse matches. The strongest find-
ing of the paper is a marked shift towards evaluating and hiring lower wage
workers.
    Endogenous information acquisition by firms has been almost entirely over-
looked in extant empirical work. This absence of research attention is not
because this margin is viewed as implausible--the idea of endogenous informa-
tion acquisition has a long history in economics (Arrow, 1996; Grossman and
Stiglitz, 1980; Stigler, 1961)21 . In the labor literature, search-focused models
have workers acquiring information about wages offered by different employ-
ers (Mortensen, 1970; McCall, 1970; Mortensen and Pissarides, 1999). Far less
attention has been paid to information acquisition on the demand side of the
labor market, though there is some literature that touches on it. For example,
there is cross-sectional work examining how employer and industry character-
istics affect the time employers spend on recruiting and screening applicants
(Barron et al., 1985, 1989).
    Much of the empirical literature on information in hiring comes from au-
dit studies. The information about particular candidates in manipulated, and
the key outcome is typically the characteristics of workers that are called-
back or hired (Goldin and Rouse, 2000; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004;
Autor and Scarborough, 2008; Dobbie et al., 2019). Although the intent of
some information-removing policies is to counteract discrimination, a potential
down-side is that they may encourage a reliance on other signals, which in turn
might harm the very workers the policies are designed to help (Agan and Starr,
2017; Doleac and Hansen, 2018; Craigie, 2017; Shoag and Veuger, 2016). Fur-
thermore, removing information might potentially cause a reduction in hiring
altogether if the process becomes too costly relative to the expected benefits.
    Our findings suggest that policies that limit employer access to compen-
sation history would more or less have the intended effects, benefiting those
  21
    Endogenous information acquisition has been a feature of work used to analyze auc-
tions (e.g., Milgrom and Weber (1982)), voting (e.g., Martinelli (2006); Persico (2004)), and
medical patient decision-making (e.g., Koszegi (2003)), among many other applications.


                                             31
with relatively low wages, with no overall reduction in hiring. These workers
would benefit both from being more likely to be evaluated by employers, and
perhaps also by being able to strike a better wage bargain. However, we also
show that not all employers are equally pliable with respect to whom they con-
sider: employers with "entry level" vertical preferences were the employers who
responded by more information acquisition and a shift in hiring.




                                      32
References
Agan, Amanda and Sonja Starr, "Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and
 Racial Discrimination: A Field Experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 08 2017, 133 (1), 191­235.
Agrawal, Ajay K, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons, "Does infor-
 mation help or hinder job applicants from less developed countries in online
 markets?," Journal of International Economics, 2016, 103, 1­12.
Altonji, Joseph G and Charles R Pierret, "Employer learning and sta-
 tistical discrimination," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1),
 313­350.
Arrow, Kenneth J, "The economics of information: An exposition," Empir-
 ica, 1996, 23 (2), 119­128.
Autor, David H and David Scarborough, "Does job testing harm minority
 workers? Evidence from retail establishments," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2008, pp. 219­277.
Barron, John M, Dan A Black, and Mark A Loewenstein, "Job match-
 ing and on-the-job training," Journal of Labor Economics, 1989, 7 (1), 1­19.
  , John Bishop, and William C Dunkelberg, "Employer search: The
  interviewing and hiring of new employees," The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 1985, 67 (1), 43­52.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Are Emily and Greg
 more employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor
 market discrimination," The American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (4), 991­
 1013.
Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky, "The Nash bar-
  gaining solution in economic modelling," The RAND Journal of Economics,
  1986, pp. 176­188.
Blake, Thomas and Dominic Coey, "Why marketplace experimentation is
  harder than it seems: The role of test-control interference," in "Proceedings
  of the fifteenth ACM conference on Economics and Computation" ACM 2014,
  pp. 567­582.
Brown, Sarah and Karl Taylor, "Reservation wages, expected wages and
 unemployment," Economics Letters, 2013, 119 (3), 276 ­ 279.

                                      33
Clemens, Jeffrey and Michael Wither, "The minimum wage and the great
  recession: Evidence of effects on the employment and income trajectories of
  low-skilled workers," Working Paper, 2014.

Craigie, Terry-Ann, "Ban the box, convictions, and public sector employ-
 ment," Convictions, and Public Sector Employment (January 27, 2017),
 2017.

Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Neale Mahoney, and Jae
 Song, "Bad Credit, No Problem? Credit and Labor Market Consequences
 of Bad Credit Reports," Technical Report, Becker Friedman Institute for
 Research in Economics Working Paper 2019.

Doleac, Jennifer L and Benjamin Hansen, "Does "ban the box" help
 or hurt low-skilled workers? Statistical discrimination and employment out-
 comes when criminal histories are hidden," Journal of Labor Economics,
 2018.

Filippas, Apostolos, John J Horton, and Joseph M Golden, "Reputa-
  tion Inflation," Working Paper, 2019.

Gilchrist, Duncan S, Michael Luca, and Deepak Malhotra, "When 3+
 1 > 4: Gift structure and reciprocity in the field," Management Science,
 2016, 62 (9), 2639­2650.

Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse, "Orchestrating impartiality: The im-
 pact of "blind" auditions on female musicians," The American Economic
 Review, 2000, 90 (4), 715­741.

Grossman, Sanford J and Joseph E Stiglitz, "On the impossibility of
 informationally efficient markets," The American Economic Review, 1980,
 70 (3), 393­408.

Hall, Robert E and Alan B Krueger, "Evidence on the incidence of wage
 posting, wage bargaining, and on-the-job search," American Economic Jour-
 nal: Macroeconomics, 2012, 4 (4), 56­67.

Holzer, Harry J, "Hiring procedures in the firm: their economic determinants
 and outcomes," Working Paper, 1987.

Horton, John Joseph, "Online Labor Markets," Internet and Network Eco-
 nomics, 2010, p. 515.



                                     34
  , "Buyer uncertainty about seller capacity: Causes, consequences, and a
  partial solution," Management Science (forthcoming), 2019.

  , "Price floors and employer preferences: Evidence from a minimum wage
  experiment," Working Paper, 2019.

   and Ramesh Johari, "At what quality and what price?: Eliciting buyer
  preferences as a market design problem," in "Proceedings of the Sixteenth
  ACM Conference on Economics and Computation" ACM 2015, pp. 507­507.

Kahn, Lisa B and Fabian Lange, "Employer learning, productivity, and the
 earnings distribution: Evidence from performance measures," The Review of
 Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (4), 1575­1613.

Koszegi, Botond, "Health anxiety and patient behavior," Journal of Health
 Economics, 2003, 22 (6), 1073­1084.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J and Jagadeesh Gokhale, "Estimating a firm's age-
 productivity profile using the present value of workers' earnings," The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (4), 1215­1242.

Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas I. Mueller, "A contribution to the em-
 pirics of reservation wages," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 February 2016, 8 (1), 142­79.

Kuhn, Peter and Kailing Shen, "Gender discrimination in job ads: Ev-
 idence from China," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1),
 287.

Lancaster, Tony and Andrew Chesher, "An econometric analysis of reser-
  vation wages," Econometrica, 1983, 51 (6), 1661­1676.

Lange, Fabian, "The speed of employer learning," Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 2007, 25 (1), 1­35.

Martinelli, C´
             esar, "Would rational voters acquire costly information?," Jour-
 nal of Economic Theory, 2006, 129 (1), 225­251.

McCall, John Joseph, "Economics of information and job search," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (1), 113­126.

McDonald, Paul, Matt Mohebbi, and Brett Slatkin, "Comparing Google
 consumer surveys to existing probability and non-probability based internet
 surveys," Google White Paper, 2012.

                                     35
McNichols, Drew and Benjamin Hanson, "Information and the Persis-
 tence of the Gender Gap: Early Evidence from California's Salary History
 Ban," Working Paper, 2019.

Milgrom, Paul R and Robert J Weber, "A theory of auctions and com-
 petitive bidding," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (5), 1089­1122.

Mortensen, Dale T, "Job search, the duration of unemployment, and the
 Phillips curve," The American Economic Review, 1970, 60 (5), 847­862.

   and Christopher A Pissarides, "New developments in models of search
  in the labor market," Handbook of Labor Economics, 1999, 3, 2567­2627.

Nash Jr., John F., "The bargaining problem," Econometrica, 1950, pp. 155­
 162.

Oyer, Paul, Scott Schaefer et al., "Personnel economics: Hiring and incen-
 tives," Handbook of Labor Economics, 2011, 4, 1769­1823.

Pallais, Amanda, "Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets," The Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 2014, 104 (11), 3565­99.

Papke, Leslie E and Jeffrey Wooldridge, "Econometric methods for frac-
 tional response variables with an application to 401 (k) plan participation
 rates," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1996, 595 (11), 619­632.

Pennebaker, James W., Martha E. Francis, and Roger J. Booth,
 "Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC2015.," 2015.

Persico, Nicola, "Committee design with endogenous information," The Re-
 view of Economic Studies, 2004, 71 (1), 165­191.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Authority, control, and the distribution of earnings," The
 Bell Journal of Economics, 1982, pp. 311­323.

Sattinger, Michael, "Assignment models of the distribution of earnings,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, 1993, pp. 831­880.

Shoag, Daniel and Stan Veuger, "No woman no crime: Ban the cox, em-
  ployment and upskilling," Working Paper, 2016.

Spence, Michael, "Job market signaling," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 1973, 87 (3), 355.



                                     36
Stanton, Christopher and Catherine Thomas, "Landing the first job: The
  value of intermediaries in online hiring," The Review of Economic Studies,
  2015, 83 (2).

Stigler, George J, "The economics of information," The Journal of Political
  Economy, 1961, 69 (3), 213­225.

Tervi¨o, Marko, "Superstars and mediocrities: Market failure in the discovery
  of talent," The Review of Economic Studies, 2009, 76 (2), 829­850.




                                     37
A        Online Appendix: Not for publication
A.1       Survey evidence employer compensation history us-
          age
Following Hall and Krueger (2012), we ran two nationally representative surveys
to shed light on match formation and wage bargaining in the conventional labor
market. We had two goals for our surveys. First, we wanted to determine how
frequently firms ask about applicant compensation history, and when in the
process they ask. If compensation history is asked only after a job offer is
made, the firm can only be using it for bargaining purposes. In contrast, if the
firm asks before making an offer, they can use it during the screening process
and during the bargaining process. The latter matches the scenario in our
empirical context, in the control group. Second, we wanted to determine how
frequently the worker is the first one to make the wage offer, as is the case in
our empirical context.
    We ran our surveys on Google Surveys, an online marketing research service
that compares favorably to other Internet-based panels (McDonald et al., 2012).
In our first survey, we asked subjects:

        In the last job that you interviewed for, did the employer ask about
        your past wage/salary history?

with answer options of:

    · No

    · Yes, before I was offered a job

    · Yes, after I was offered a job

The results of this survey are publicly available.22 For this survey, we received
responses from 391 subjects with demographic weights. Of those, 115 reported
they were asked about their compensation history, or 29.4%. Among those
 22
      https://surveys.google.com/reporting/survey?survey=tfqrbh2keackwznfzkwtzgp45a.



                                           38
Figure 5: Survey evidence on when compensation history is asked about and
the order of wage bargaining


                                           When did the interviewer ask
                                         about wage/compensation history?
            Before offered a job                                                q

             After offered a job                q



                                            Who made initial wage offer?

      Employer made first offer                                       q

      Applicant made first offer                          q

                                     0.0%       25.0%         50.0%       75.0%
                                                    % of respondents
     Note: This figure reports population-weighted means from two surveys con-
     ducted on Google Surveys. In the top panel, the sample is restricted to respon-
     dents reporting that in the last job they interviewed for the employer asked
     for their compensation history. Respondents answered whether the employer
     elicited this information before an offer was made or only afterwards. In the
     bottom panel, the sample is restricted to subjects who reported they bargained
     over wages in their last job. Respondents answered whether they made the ini-
     tial offer or the employer made the initial offer.


asked, 82.6% report the firm asked about wage/compensation before extending
a job offer. The population-weighted fraction is shown in Figure 5, in the top
panel, with weighted standard errors, which is very close to the unweighted
fraction. This first survey shows that asking about compensation history is
fairly common. Additionally, when employers ask about past compensation,
it is much more likely to be asked upfront, presumably because it is used in
evaluation, or in forming expectations about the likely outcome of bargaining.
    In our second survey, we asked the question:

     In your current job, did you bargain with your employer over com-
     pensation/benefits, and if so, who made the first offer?

with answer options of:

   · No - wage was known when I applied

                                           39
   · Yes - bargained, and I made first offer

   · Yes - bargained, and firm made first offer

The results of this survey are publicly available.23 For this survey, we received
responses from 1,509 subjects with demographic weights. Of those, 316 re-
ported they bargained over wages, or 29.4%. Among those asked, 39.2% report
they were the first to propose a wage. The population-weighted fraction is
shown in Figure 5, in the bottom panel, with weighted standard errors, which
is very close to the unweighted fraction. Clearly, among workers bargaining,
it is more common for the firm to make the first offer. However, a non-trivial
fraction of conventional market bargained outcomes have a bargaining structure
similar to our empirical context.


A.2       Reliance on other signals of productivity
One way in which policies that remove information from the hiring process can
backfire is if employers put more weight on some other, correlated signal in their
screening. In our setting, we can directly look at this "signal substitution" by
estimating a model of the employer's selection decision. We compare the effect
of five salient signals on the employer's probability of calling back a viewed
applicant by the employer's treatment status. The five signals we analyze are
the applicant's profile wage rate, the applicant's mean prior feedback score,
the number of previous jobs an applicant has completed, the applicant's prior
earnings, and the applicant's tenure on the platform.
    To make comparing the effect on interviewing across signals of different
types easier, we transform each viewed applicant's signal into a z-score which
is normalized within a job opening. For example, if a job received only two
applicants, one with 1 day of tenure and another with 2 days, we would give
them tenure z-scores of -0.71 and 0.71, respectively.
    Figure 6 reports the regression coefficients on each signal from regressions
run separately for treatment and control employers, and by employer vertical
 23
      https://surveys.google.com/reporting/survey?survey=z5eldvvypuvrco4zvo2fkirreq



                                            40
preference, from a regression of the form:

                               5
         CalledBacki,j =            x Signalx + j +   i,j   Viewedi,j = 1,     (8)
                              x=0


where x indexes x-score measures of five readily available signals of productivity
of each applicant i to job j including: Wage bid, Profile wage rate, Prior
feedback score, Prior number of jobs completed, Prior earnings, and Platform
tenure in days. j is a job opening fixed effect. As we have shown, most other
treatment effects differed by employer vertical preference, and so by looking for
signal substitution by their preferences, we potentially have a more powerful
test.
    In Figure 6 from top to bottom, we can see that employers value prior jobs,
prior earnings, and prior feedback: for each signal, for all vertical tiers and for
both the treatment and control, the coefficients are positive. Employers do not
rely very strongly on the applicant's profile wage rate, conditional on all the
other signals, though the profile rate is highly correlated with the bid. Tenure
is also an exception, with longer tenure having a negative effect. However, it is
important to remember that these coefficients effects are all conditioned on all
other effects. As such, the negative sign is unsurprising, as having joined the
platform a long time ago is not a signal of quality per se, unlike, for example,
having received good feedback.
    Comparing within panels, there is no obvious pattern with respect to the
treatment, offering no strong evidence of signal substitution. For example,
employers with low vertical preferences in the treatment put more weight on
the number of prior jobs, but medium-preference employers do not. Similarly,
low-preference employers in the treatment seem to value earnings slightly less,
while medium- and high-preference employers value it more, at least according
to the magnitudes--the differences themselves are far from significant. Taken
together, there is no strong evidence of signal substitution.




                                         41
Figure 6: Applicant characteristics on the probability call-back, by vertical
preference tier

                                              Entry level             Intermediate                      Expert

                             0.050                          q




                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                  ob
                                                                      q                                          q
                             0.025




                                                                                                                                rJ
                                          q                                            q        q




                                                                                                                              io
                             0.000




                                                                                                                           Pr
                                                                                                                       um
                            -0.025




                                                                                                                      N
                            -0.050

                             0.050                                                     q




                                                                                                                                  gs
                                                                                                                 q
                             0.025




                                                                                                                                   n
                                          q




                                                                                                                                ni
                                                            q         q                         q




                                                                                                                             ar
                             0.000




                                                                                                                           rE
                                                                                                                        io
                            -0.025




                                                                                                                      Pr
    Estimated Effect (SD)




                            -0.050

                             0.050




                                                                                                                                    ck
                                                                                                                                 ba
                             0.025        q                 q         q                q                         q




                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                q




                                                                                                                           ee
                             0.000




                                                                                                                         rF
                                                                                                                       io
                            -0.025




                                                                                                                      Pr
                            -0.050

                             0.050




                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                 ag
                             0.025                                                              q
                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                W
                                          q                           q                q
                             0.000

                                                                                                                           ile
                                                            q


                                                                                                                        of
                            -0.025                                                                                    Pr
                            -0.050

                             0.050
                                                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                                                  ay
                             0.025
                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                             in



                             0.000
                                                                                                                            e




                                          q                                                     q
                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                         nu




                                                            q         q
                            -0.025                                                     q
                                                                                                                      Te




                                                                                                                 q

                            -0.050
                                           l             nt            l            nt              l            nt
                                       ntro          tme          ntro         atm
                                                                                   e         ntro            tme
                                     Co             a           Co                         Co               a
                                                Tre                        Tre                          Tre
                                                                Experimental group
   Note: This figure shows the coefficients on the non-wage bid parameters in Equa-
   tion 8. The sample consists of viewed applications. Independent variables are trans-
   formed into z-scores normalized within job. Estimates represent change in standard
   deviations in probability of interviewing an applicant with 1 standard deviation in-
   crease in signal. Estimates are from linear probability models with job-level fixed
   effects. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the job-level are used
   for 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                              42
A.3     Randomization
Table 6 reports the means for a collection of pre-randomization attributes with
respect to job opening characteristics, employer characteristics, and the com-
position of the applicant pool. The groups were well-balanced, with only one
pre-treatment characteristic difference in means being conventionally statisti-
cally significant--and only marginally so--despite almost 40 covariates used to
assess balance.
    As with any experiment conducted in a true market, there is a concern
about violations of the stable unit treatment value assumption (Blake and
Coey, 2014). However, given the short duration of the experiment, we view
market-moving equilibrium effects as highly unlikely. The balance in applicant
pool composition shown in Table 6 supports this contention.


A.4     Expectations of available information
Employers' expectations concerning available information could influence our
interpretation of observed treatment effects. It is possible that the observed
increase in number of applicants viewed could be driven by employers experi-
encing surprise or confusion over the lack of usually available information on
applicants' compensation histories. Especially employers who have had pre-
vious experience using the platform and, therefore, might react to not being
able to view the past compensation history. It is possible that after viewing
one application and noticing this information is missing, the employer might
view another application to investigate Furthermore, an increase in the number
of applicants viewed could also influence downstream measures of information
acquisition and potentially even probability of hiring. Thus, we must investi-
gate if expectations of available information causes a treatment effect which is
unrelated to exogenous efforts by employers to obtain more information about
a wider set of applicants.
    To investigate this alternative explanation for our results we compare em-
ployers who have never previously posted a job on the platform and thus have
no expectations of which information may or may not be provided in this mar-


                                      43
Table 6: Employer, job opening, and applicant characteristics by experimental
group

                                       Control             Treatment           Difference      % Change

 Employer attributes
   Prior job openings                23.49 (0.90)          23.98 (0.95)        0.49 (1.31)        2.10
   Prior billed jobs                 10.71 (0.43)          11.29 (0.46)        0.58 (0.63)        5.45
   Prior spend by employers          5643.10 (312.83)    6053.35 (328.90)   410.25 (453.99)      7.27
   Num prior contractors             10.84 (0.46)          11.73 (0.65)        0.89 (0.80)        8.18
   Avg feedback score of employer    4.81 (0.01)           4.79 (0.01)        -0.03 (0.02)       -0.55
   Num of reviews of employer        8.05 (0.40)           8.84 (0.59)         0.79 (0.71)        9.82
 Job opening attributes
   Number non-invited applicants     33.62 (0.80)          33.44 (0.74)       -0.18 (1.09)       -0.53
   Avg best match score              0.36 (0.00)            0.36 (0.00)        0.00 (0.00)        0.83
   Avg bid                           12.76 (0.17)          12.60 (0.17)       -0.16 (0.24)       -1.23
   Prefered experiance in hours      33.69 (2.43)          34.25 (2.37)        0.56 (3.40)        1.65
   Estimated job duration in weeks   17.19 (0.39)          16.93 (0.39)       -0.26 (0.55)       -1.53
 Applicant attributes
   Tenure in days                    868.81 (1.98)        866.77 (2.74)        -2.03 (3.38)      -0.23
   Hours worked to date              1212.73 (8.39)      1207.21 (11.56)      -5.53 (14.28)      -0.46
   Num past jobs worked              33.59 (0.19)          33.81 (0.28)         0.22 (0.34)       0.67
   Past hourly earnings              9812.41 (87.48)     9706.79 (121.18)   -105.62 (149.45)     -1.08
   Past fixed wage earnings          2035.25 (17.94)     2027.06 (25.70)      -8.19 (31.34)      -0.40
   Num prior employers               25.80 (0.13)          26.01 (0.20)         0.21 (0.24)       0.80
   Wage bid                          10.99 (0.07)          10.94 (0.10)        -0.05 (0.12)      -0.48
   Profile wage                      10.69 (0.06)          10.64 (0.09)        -0.05 (0.10)      -0.50
   Min hr. wage (6 months)           6.93 (0.04)            6.89 (0.06)        -0.04 (0.08)      -0.63
   Avg hr. wage (6 months)           8.46 (0.05)            8.42 (0.07)        -0.04 (0.09)      -0.48
   Max hr. wage (6 months)           10.56 (0.06)          10.54 (0.09)        -0.02 (0.11)      -0.20


Notes: This table reports means for a number of pre-randomization characteristics for the
employer, job opening, and applicant pool, by experimental group. Standard errors are re-
ported next to the estimate, in parentheses. The far right column also reports the percentage
change in the treatment group, relative to the mean in the control group. For the wage mea-
sures in "Applicant attributes," the 99th and 1st percentile are removed as outliers, as a very
small number of wage bids are not bona fide hourly wage proposals, but instead place-holders
with "wages" of $0.01/hour or $999/hour. In the bottom panel, standard errors are clus-
tered at the job opening level, as applicants are nested within job openings. The associated
significance stars on the difference are for a two-sided t-tests of the null hypothesis of no
difference in means across groups. Significance indicators: p  0.10 : , p  0.05 : , and
p  .01 :   .




                                                    44
             Figure 7: Effects of the treatment by employer information expectations

                                                     Applicants                               Applicants                             Applicants
                                                       hired                                   viewed                                messaged

                                0.4
  Estimated Treatment Effect




                                0.2
                                             q              q              q                                       q          q                           q
                                                                                        q                                                   q
                                                                                                     q
                                0.0
                               -0.2


                                                 Applicants                                Applicants                                 Meetings
                                              questioned (marks)                        questioned (words)                             setup

                                0.4
                                                                           q
                                0.2                                                     q                          q                        q
                                             q              q                                        q                                                    q
                                                                                                                              q
                                0.0
                               -0.2


                                           led             ion             ion        led         tio
                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                tio
                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                          ole
                                                                                                                              d           ion             ion
                                      Po
                                         o
                                                     c tat           c tat       Po
                                                                                    o           ta            ta       Po             tat             tat
                                                  pe              pe                         ec
                                                                                             p            pec                     pe
                                                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                                                                 pe
                                                                                                                                                    c
                                             o Ex            o Ex                       o Ex          o Ex                   o Ex           o Ex
                                         In f            n  f                       In f           n f                    Inf           n  f
                                      No              sI                         No             sI                     No            sI
                                                  Ha                                         Ha                                   Ha


                               Note: This figure shows the relationship between measures of information acquisi-
                               tion and the treatment separated by the employer's expectation of available informa-
                               tion. The level of observation is the job opening. The sample is limited to employers
                               with either zero or one previous on-platform experience. Heteroskedasticity-robust
                               standard errors are used for 95% confidence intervals.


ket to employers who have only posted one previous job. We limit the analysis
to those with only one previous job as much more experienced applicants use
different screening practices, which limits comparability. We re-estimate the
same Poisson count regression as in Model 1 separately for employers with zero
previous job postings and for employers with exactly one previous job post-
ing.24 We plot the coefficients of WageHistHidj in Figure 7. For each point
estimate, a 95% CI is shown.
    Reassuringly, the regression coefficients shown in Figure 1 for the "Pooled"
sample, which consists of only employers with either zero or one previous plat-
  24
     We control for the category of the job opening, prior jobs billed by the employer, the
employer's prior spend on the platform, the number of applications to the job openings, the
number of recommended applications to the job opening, the average bid, and an indicator
if the employer requested specific skills.


                                                                                             45
form job postings, give marginal effects similar to those for the complete sample
used in our main results. The results of Figure 1 also allow us to conclude that
the effect of removing compensation history information is not statistically
different for employers who have expectations about platform-provided infor-
mation ("Has Info Expectation") and employers with no expectation over what
information is provided by the platform ("No Info Expectation").
    We also investigate expectations affecting treatment effects by looking for
differences in the treatment effect over the duration of experimental period for
employers who posted multiple jobs over the experimental period. By analyzing
all of an employer's job postings after being assigned to treatment or control,
we can look for decay in the experimental results. If the treatment effect
is driven primarily by a surprise reaction to the lack of available information,
once employers adapt to not expecting to observe applicant's past compensation
history, the treatment effect should decrease.
    The median number of job postings by an employer during the experimental
treatment is 1, and the 75th percentile is only 2 job postings. For this reason,
we group job postings into four groups: Employers' first job posted during the
experiment, employers' 2nd job posted during the experiment, employers' third
through fifth jobs posted during the experiment, and job postings for which the
employer has posted greater than 5 previous postings during the experimental
period.
    We estimate the same Poisson count regression as in Model 1 however,
we now add an employer random effect to help control for individual level
heterogeneity. We plot the coefficients of WageHistHidj in Figure 8. For
each point estimate, a 95% CI is shown. The treatment effects are stable over
the entire experimental period. There is no statistical difference in estimated
treatment effect based on how many prior jobs the employer has posted over the
experimental period for any of our information acquisition measures. Together,
these investigations allow us to conclude that the treatment effect is not driven
by expectations over the available information in the market, but by employers
seeking to obtain additional available information in the market.




                                       46
Figure 8: Effects of the treatment by number of previous experiment job post-
ings

                                                  Applicants                                          Applicants                                          Applicants
                                                    hired                                              viewed                                             messaged

                                1
                                       q                       q                           q                                                    q
                                0                  q                       q                           q           q                                       q           q
  Estimated Treatment Effect




                                                                                                                               q

                               -1                                                                                                                                                  q


                               -2


                                                Applicants                                         Applicants                                              Meetings
                                             questioned (marks)                                 questioned (words)                                          setup

                                1
                                       q                                   q               q
                                0                  q           q                                       q           q           q                q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                               -1
                               -2

                                        ts          st          ts         ts            ts            st           ts           ts            ts           st         sts         sts
                                      os         Po          os          os            os           Po           os           os             os          Po          Po          Po
                                    rP      io r          r P         r P           r P
                                                                                              i o r           r P          r P            r P
                                                                                                                                                    i or           r           r
                                rio       r           rio
                                                                Pr
                                                                   i o         ri o         r            ri o
                                                                                                                    Pr
                                                                                                                       i o            ri o        r           ri o
                                                                                                                                                                        Pr
                                                                                                                                                                           i o
                      0P               1P         4P                         0P         1P           4P                            0P         1P          4P
                                              2-            5+                                   2-             5+                                     2-            5+


                               Note: This figure shows the relationship between measures of information acqui-
                               sition and the treatment by the number of previous job postings by an employer
                               during the experiment. The level of observation is the job opening. Models all
                               include an employer-level random effect term. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
                               errors clustered by employer are used for 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                      47
A.5     Message text analysis
One limitation of "question based" measures of information acquisition is that
they might also be capturing coordination-related questioning. For example,
our measures would regard "You're hired--when can you start?" as a measure
of information acquisition, even though the employer is not assessing the ap-
plicant's productivity. To address this shortcoming, we also look for words in
messages that would more likely indicate continued probing.
    We analyze the message text by counting how frequently words appear that
are found in the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 2015 (LIWC) dictionary
(Pennebaker et al., 2015). The LIWC is a word dictionary that classifies words
into categories often studied in social, health, and personality psychology such
as cognitive processes, perceptual process, and biological processes. Each of
these categories also includes sub-categories. We focus on the categories of
"interrogation," and "cognitive processes," and two "cognitive processes" sub-
categories: "insight" and "causation." For example, the sub-category of "in-
sight" contains words such as: "think" and "know," while the sub-category of
"causation" contains words such as: "because" and "effect." The logic behind
this analysis is that coordination messages would be less likely to have these
kinds of terms than interviewing messages. To analyze this textual data, we
use a message-level logit model weighted by the number of words in each mes-
sage thread, with standard errors clustered at the job opening level (Papke and
Wooldridge, 1996). If the employer sent more than one message to an appli-
cant, we combine all messages sent by an employer into a single message. On
average there are about 3.5 messages sent by an employer to an applicant, per
message thread.
    Column (1) of Table 7 reports a regression where the outcome of interest is
equal to the proportion of words in a message which are associated with "inter-
rogation" sent by the employer on a job opening. We find that the proportion
of words in a message that are associated with "interrogation" is 1.09 times the
proportion of words in a message that are associated with "interrogation" for
control employers.
    Columns (2), (3) and (4) report regression results in which the outcome is

                                      48
Table 7: Effect of hiding past wage history on the kinds of words used in
messages from employers to applicants


                                                Dependent variable:
                          Interrogative     Cognitive process   Insight             Causation
                           term usage         term usage      term usage            term usage
                               (1)                   (2)                 (3)               (4)
Wage history hidden         0.091                 0.035               0.089            0.047
                            (0.051)               (0.021)             (0.039)         (0.047)
Constant                   -4.493                -2.252              -3.957          -4.104
                            (0.041)               (0.016)             (0.031)         (0.036)
Observations                 36,814               36,814              36,814              36,814
   Notes: This table reports regressions where the outcomes are the fractions of words
   in a message that come from specialized list of thematically related words. The
   unit of observation is messages sent by the employer to applicants. On average
   there are about 3.5 messages sent by an employer to an applicant, per message
   thread. Estimates are from logit models weighted by the number of words in each
   message. The dependent variable in Column (1) is the percentage of total words
   associated with interrogation and includes words like: how, when, what. The de-
   pendent variable in Column (2) is the percentage of total words associated with
   cognitive processes and contains words like: cause, know, ought. The dependent
   variable in Column (3) is the percentage of total words associated with insight and
   contains words like: think, know. The dependent variable in Column (4) is the per-
   centage of total words associated with causation and contains words like: because,
   effect. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the job posting level
   are reported. The sample is restricted to hourly first job posts by an employer.
   Significance indicators: p  0.10 : , p  0.05 : , and p  .01 :   .




                                           49
the proportion of words belonging to different LIWC categories. The results
indicate that treated employers use 1.04 times as many "cognitive process"
words (from Column (2)), and 1.09 as many "insight" words (from Column (3)).
The Column (4) regression shows "causation" words are used more frequently,
but the effect is not conventionally significant.


A.6     Longer-term Effects
Due to the short duration of the experiment, our ability to identify longer-term
effects of removing past compensation history on applicants and employers is
limited. However, it is possible that the short-term advantage preference for
lower wage applicants caused by the removal of past wage information may
lead to greater future employment opportunities, and greater future wages for
these advantaged applicants. To evaluate these longer-term effects, we need to
look at outcomes which occurred long after the experiment ended. This cre-
ates a problem of control-treatment interference. To help eliminate treatment
vs. control overlap, we remove all applicants who experienced both treatment
and control jobs. We compare applicants who experienced only treatment jobs
to applicants who experienced only control jobs. It is important to note that
the sample in this analysis is composed of applicants who only applied to ei-
ther treatment or control jobs and thus will contain applicants who applied to
fewer jobs on average. The more jobs an applicant applies to the greater the
probability they will experience both a treatment and control job.
    Figure 9 plots the the coefficients from log-linear regressions where the out-
put of interest is the log of future wages. As such, the coefficients can be
interpreted as percent difference in treatment applicants' future wage from the
future wages of control applicants.
    Across all of the models in Figure 9, the large standard errors make it
impossible for us to conclude whether the short-run experiment had long-run
effects on applicants' earnings. Furthermore, there is no detectable time trend
either increasing or decreasing among any of the profile wage groups. Thus, we
can not draw any conclusions concerning longer-term wage effects, which is not
surprising given the constrains of our experimental design.

                                       50
                                    Figure 9: Effects of the treatment on future applicant earnings

                                           One Month Earnings              Six Month Earnings              One Year Earnings
                              0.2
Estimated Treatment Effect




                              0.1
                                                                                   q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                             q                  q
                                              q
                              0.0                       q
                                                                q      q                                           q           q
                                       q                                                               q
                                                   q                                                                    q
                                                                                         q

                             -0.1


                             -0.2

                                          d    .5 -$9 $15 $90             d    .5 -$9 $15 $90            d    .5 -$9 $15 $90
                                      ole   $4                        ole   $4                        ole  $4
                                    Po .11- $4.5 $9- $15-           Po .11- $4.5 $9- $15-           Po .11- $4.5 $9- $15-
                                      $1                              $1                              $1


                              Note: This figure shows the relationship between applicants future (post exper-
                              imental) earnings and if the applicant applied to a treatment job posted during
                              the experiment. The level of observation is the applicant. Models include co-
                              variates the tenure of days the applicant was on the platform at the end of the
                              experiment, and the applicant's hourly profile wage, the applicants prior earn-
                              ings, and the number of previous jobs billed by the applicant, and indicators
                              for applicants prior feedback including no prior feedback. Heteroskedasticity-
                              robust standard errors clustered by employer are used for 95% confidence in-
                              tervals.




                                                                              51
A.7     Equilibrium considerations
In the experiment, workers did not know that employers would lack access to
their compensation history. With an actual market-wide policy change, workers
would know that their compensation history is hidden, and could respond.
Workers could respond in many ways, such as altering which jobs they apply
to or how they present themselves to employers. However, perhaps the most
consequential way of responding would be to adjust their wage bids up or down.
This could potentially turn some of the compositional effect we observe into a
price effect.
    Given our findings, the most likely wage response would be for relatively
low-wage workers to adjust their wage bids up, and for relatively high-wage
workers to adjust their bids down. However, the desirability of any one worker
increasing his or her wage bid depends on how much competition they face on
a per-job basis from similarly situated workers.
    To determine what is likely to happen in equilibrium, we model both the
employer's hiring problem and the workers' bidding decision. We begin by
modeling the employer's hiring decision. If all employers were homogeneous
and workers differed only in their productivity and wage bids, then the utility
employer j derives from hiring worker i is j = u0 - wi /yi , where u0 is the
value the employer derives from the completed project, wi is the wage paid
to employee i, and yi is the productivity of employee i. Profit maximizing
employers thus care about maximizing log yi - log wi . We assume that the
employer error in inferring productivity, plus any un-modeled heterogeneity
in worker job-specific productivity, is captured by i , which is distributed iid
extreme value for all values of i. The employers choice function follows a logit
choice function and can be modeled as a discrete choice problem, with the
probability of hiring worker i being:


                                               exi 
                         Pr(Hiredi = 1) =          xa 
                                                       ,                     (9)
                                               ae


where a indexes the other applicants to that job opening and x = [log y
                                                                      ^, log w].

                                      52
We will assume that the firm makes a single hire.

A.7.1     Employer preferences

In the data, we observe a collection of wi for each worker, as this is the worker's
hourly wage bid for each opening. We do not observe perceived productivity,
yi , directly, but we estimate it from workers' wage bids. Consistent with the
market being approximately competitive, we assume that worker's bids are
proportional to their expected marginal productivity given their attributes,
plus some idiosyncratic error. For predictors, we use the worker's average
feedback to date, log mean wage over the last six months, log cumulative prior
earnings, log cumulative prior hours, number of past contracts, tenure, and
whether they are affiliated with an agency and all the pair-wise interactions
of these predictors. We then label each worker with the prediction from this
model.
     With measures of both wi and yi , we can estimate Equation 9 by maximum
likelihood. We restrict the sample to job openings where exactly one hire was
made, and where the number of applicants was two or more.25 We estimate
the  coefficients separately for treatment job openings and for the control job
openings. Table 8 presents the estimated  coefficients for both the control and
treatment groups. Although the differences in parameter point estimates are
not conventionally significant, we can see that treated employers put relatively
more weight on the wage bid and less on the perceived productivity, which is
consistent with the bargain hunting effect we observed.
     Using these estimated coefficients, we can compute for each worker his or
her probability of being hired in both the treatment and the control group,
given that worker's wage bid using Equation 9. A worker's predicted change in
hiring probability for each job opening they apply to is thus:

             pi = Pr(Hired|wi , ^W HH =1 ) - Pr(Hired|wi , ^W HH =0 ).                    (10)
   25
      We also estimated the model by adding a "not hire" option to the choice set, giving it a
value of 0 . This approach performed very poorly, yielding a massive 0 . The likely reason
is that job openings that go unfilled are likely due to idiosyncratic factors pertaining to the
employer rather than a poor collection of applicants.


                                              53
                     Table 8: Estimated Coefficent Vector

                                      ^y
                                                          ^w
                                                          
                  Control       0.493(0.126)       -0.158(0.117)
                 Treatment      0.429(0.119)       -0.233(0.111)
                    Notes: This table reports the estimated  co-
                    efficent vector for treatment and control job
                    postings. Estimates are generated from Equa-
                    tion 9 using maximum likelihood estimation.


Note that we are making use of the coefficients from the employer's fitted
choice model, where    ^WHH=1 is the coefficient for the treatment group where
the compensation history is hidden and     ^WHH=0 are the estimated coefficients
for the control. In the top panel of Figure 10, the solid curve shows the change
in probability of being hired for workers of various predicted productivities
due to employers being prohibited from observing past wages. We can clearly
observe the bargain hunting: the effect of the treatment on probability of being
hired is bigger for workers with relatively lower estimated productivity than it
is for workers with relatively high estimated productivities.

A.7.2   Wage bid adjustment

We now consider how workers would adjust their wage bids when they know
they are facing an employer with "treatment preferences" and when competing
with other similarly situated job applicants. We model workers as adjusting
their wage bid by an own-productivity dependent multiplier function, m(y^i ).
As a function form for m(), we assume

                                 ^i ) = e0 +1 log y
                               m(y                ^ i
                                                      ,                    (11)

where 0 and 1 are parameters to estimate. If both 0 and 1 are zero, then
m(y ^i ) = 1, and there is no adjustment. Given our "bargain hunting" find-
ings, we expect that relatively low productivity workers will bid up, but that
relatively high productivity workers will bid down, implying 0 > 0 but 1 < 0.


                                           54
                       Figure 10: Estimated effects on individual worker's probability of hire

                                                                                        Treatment effect
                                   q                         q       q
                          0.250%       q         q
                                                     q
                                                         q       q       q q q q q q q q q q q
                                                                                               q q q q q q q q
                                           q q                                                                 q q q q
                          0.000%                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                             q q q q q
                                                                                                                                         q q
                         -0.250%                                                                                                             q
 Probability of hire




                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                     q q
                         -0.500%

                                                     1.0                          1.5                 2.0                    2.5                      3.0

                                                                             Equilibrium wage adjustment effect

                        0.00100%
                        0.00000%
                       -0.00100%

                                                     1.0                          1.5                 2.0                    2.5                      3.0
                                                                                Predicted log productivity
                  Note: This figure shows the relationship between worker productivity and the
                  change in probability of being hired due to (1) the employer's ability or lack thereof
                  to observe past wages, in the top panel, and (2) the worker's equilibrium wage
                  adjustment, in the bottom panel. Plotted points are averages within log y      ^i bins
                  of size .005. In the top panel, the solid curve plots a quadratic line of best fit of
                  change in probability of being hired for workers of various predicted productivities
                  due to employers being prohibited from observing past wages. In the bottom panel,
                  the dashed curve plots a quadratic line of best fit of change in probability of being
                  hired for workers of various predicted productivities due to worker's equilibrium
                  wage adjustment due to employers that cannot observe past wages.




                                                                                      55
   To estimate m(y ^i ), we must first describe the worker's wage bidding prob-
lem. For a given job opening, they choose a bid wi that maximizes their payoff,
or

                           arg max     p(wi )(wi - ci )h,
                               wi


where h is the hours of work required, p(wi ) the probability of hire as a function
of the wage bid and ci is the opportunity cost of an hour of work. The optimal
wage bid satisfies

                                        p(w )
                               w = -           + ci .
                                        p (w )

In our experiment, employers' inability to observe past wages shifts the proba-
bility of being hired at a given wage, p(wi ), curve for each worker. For relatively
low wage workers, the p(wi ) curve was shifted out, leading to an increase in
probability of being hired. For relatively high wage workers, the p(wi ) curve
was shifted in, leading to a decrease in probability of being hired For a small
shift in the curve caused by the experiment, the optimal shift in the wage bid
can be calculated by taking the partial derivative with respect to p(wi ) and
reorganizing:

                                             dp(w)
                                    dw = -         .
                                             p (w)

We can now see that the optimal shift in bid is equal to the change in the
probability of being hired scaled by the inverse slope of the demand curve.
We can also express the optimal adjustment in the wage bid, as a percentage
change, or

                             dw         dp
                                
                                 =                 .
                              w    p(w) - ci p (w)

Empirically, this optimality condition gives us a first order condition for each




                                        56
worker:

                                     dp         dw
                             E                -    = 0.                             (12)
                                 p - ci p (w)    w

To use Equation 12, we need estimates of p (w) and c. For p (w), we can exploit
the matched worker-employer nature of our data and the fact that workers
vary their wage bids, despite the fact that their productivity is presumably
fixed during relatively short periods of time, such as during our experiment.
In Appendix A.7.3, using both worker and job opening fixed effects, we obtain
an estimate of p (w) = -0.011. For the reservation wage, ci , we rely on the
literature on the relationship between actual and reservation wages and use
ci = 0.9wi , but we try a range of values.26
    We estimate the the  vector from Equation 11 by minimizing the square
error in the sample analog of Equation 12. In short, for a given  , we calculate
the change in each worker's wage bid, then compute the change in individual
hire probability (which depends on the wage bids of all other workers). We
then compute the total squared error from Equation 12. The  parameters
that minimize this error are 0 = 0.0078 and 1 = -0.0014.
    As 0 is positive and 1 is negative, for low levels of worker productivity, the
worker's equilibrium wage adjustment multiplier will be greater than 1, leading
to an increase in the worker's optimal equilibrium bid. But as productivity
increases, the worker's equilibrium wage adjustment multiplier will decrease
but still remain positive (except at very high productivity levels, log y^i  6).
However, the implied adjustments are small. Workers with estimated log pro-
ductivities of 0.66 adjust their wage bids up by 0.69% while workers with esti-
mated productivities of 2.19 adjust their wages up by 0.47% and workers with
  26
     Krueger and Mueller (2016) use data from a survey of recently unemployed workers in
New Jersey. The data they collected shows that workers report reservation wages which are
about 98% of the previous wages the week they become unemployed. Brown and Taylor
(2013) use data from the British Household Panel Survey which asked recently unemployed
workers both for their reservation wage and the wage they expect to make upon returning
to work. The ratio between log reservation wage and log expected wage is .929. An older
study by Lancaster and Chesher (1983) analyzed both the 1974 "National Survey of the
Unemployed" and the 1973 "Men out of Work (Oxford)" surveys, and found that the ratio
of reservation wages to expected wages were .89 and .84 in the two surveys respectively.


                                           57
estimated productivities of 2.53 adjust their wages up by 0.43%.
    The bottom panel of Figure 10 shows how little of an effect wage bidding
adjustments have on hire probability. As expected, workers' equilibrium wage
adjustment decreases the probability of being hired for relatively low produc-
tivity workers and increases the probability of being hired for relatively high
productivity workers. However, these effects are vanishingly small relative to
the change induced by the treatment, shown in the top panel of the same fig-
ure. For example, a worker with a predicted log productivity of 1 is about
0.19% more likely to be hired when employers are unable to observe past wage
histories. A maximizing worker will increase her bid by about 0.64%, reducing
her probability of being hired by only about 0.00074%.
    We conclude that almost none of the bargain hunting we observed in the ex-
periment would be eroded in equilibrium. Given the lack of changes in the wage
bidding, we expect that we would also observe the same increase in evaluation
and hiring.

A.7.3    Estimate of demand curve

In Column (1) of Table 9, we report a regression of a hiring indicator for each
application on the log wage bid of the applicant interacted with the treatment
assignment. This regression is run without a worker-specific effect. The pos-
itive coefficient on wage bid reflects the fact that higher wages are positively
correlated with signals of worker productivity and more productive workers are
more likely to be hired. The treatment indicator is positive and highly signifi-
cant, reflecting the increase in probability of employers hiring when they cannot
observe past compensation history. The negative coefficient on the interaction
term implies that this increase in hiring probability is focused on applicants
with lower wage bids, reflecting the earlier documented "bargain hunting."
    In Column (2), we include a worker fixed effect. After including a worker-
specific fixed effect, which controls for the worker specific general quality, a
higher wage bid decreases the probability that worker is hired, as we would
expect.
    In Column (3), we include both a worker-specific fixed effect and a job-


                                       58
                  Table 9: Wage bid and probability of hiring


                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                        Applicant hired
                                             (1)                (2)                (3)
Log wage bid                                 0.003            -0.011             -0.011
                                            (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.002)
WageHistHid                                  0.006              0.003
                                            (0.002)            (0.002)
Log wage bid × WageHistHid                 -0.002             -0.001             -0.001
                                            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)
Constant                                     0.011
                                            (0.001)
Outcome mean                                0.018               0.018              0.018
Worker FE                                  N                   Y                  Y
Job Opening FE                             N                  N                   Y
Observations                              188,833            188,833            188,833
     Notes : This table reports regressions where the outcome is an indicator for
     whether the worker was hired. The unit of analysis is the individual applica-
     tion. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the individual application.
     Significance indicators: p  0.10 : , p  0.05 : , and p  .01 :   .




                                           59
posting-specific fixed effect. The identifying variation comes from workers ap-
plying at different wages to different job postings over a short period of time.
This controls both for employer and job specific heterogeneity in overall hiring
probability as well as worker-specific heterogeneity. We using the coefficient on
the log(Wage bid) term as the change in probability of hiring due to change
in wage bid. Thus, we treat p (w)  -0.011. We will use this estimate for all
workers when calculating equilibrium wage adjustments.




                                       60
