                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             IS PARENTAL LEAVE COSTLY FOR FIRMS AND COWORKERS?

                                          Anne A. Brenøe
                                          Serena P. Canaan
                                         Nikolaj A. Harmon
                                         Heather N. Royer

                                        Working Paper 26622
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26622


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2020




We thank seminar participants at the 2018 NBER Summer Institute, University of Copenhagen
CEBI Lunch, Bocconi University, Aarhus University, SOLE 2019, University of California-Santa
Barbara Labor Lunch, Vanderbilt University, University of California-San Diego, University of
Georgia, University of Kentucky, University of Gothenburg, Duke University, University of
Notre Dame, and SKILS 2020. We are also grateful to Anna Aizer, Youssef Benzarti, Marianne
Bitler, Amelia Hawkins, Katherine Meckel, Erin Troland, and Caroline Walker for helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank Maximilian Mähr, Claude Raisaro, and Molly Schwarz for
outstanding research assistance. Nikolaj A. Harmon thanks David Card and the Department of
Economics at the University of California Berkeley for their hospitality and many helpful
discussions. This research was supported by the Carlsberg Foundation grant "Understanding the
Labor Market Effects of Parental Leave." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anne A. Brenøe, Serena P. Canaan, Nikolaj A. Harmon, and Heather N. Royer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Parental Leave Costly for Firms and Coworkers?
Anne A. Brenøe, Serena P. Canaan, Nikolaj A. Harmon, and Heather N. Royer
NBER Working Paper No. 26622
January 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. H0,J13,J2

                                          ABSTRACT

Most existing evidence on the effectiveness of family leave policies comes from studies focusing
on their impacts on affected families - mothers, fathers, and their children - without a clear
understanding of the costs and effects on firms and coworkers. We estimate the effect of a female
employee giving birth and taking parental leave on small firms and coworkers in Denmark. Using
a dynamic difference-in-differences design, we compare small firms in which a female employee
is about to give birth to an observationally equivalent sample of small firms with female
employees who are not close to giving birth. Identification rests on a parallel trends assumption,
which we substantiate through a set of natural validity checks. We find little evidence that
parental leave take-up has negative effects on firms and coworkers overall. Specifically, after
accounting for wage reimbursements received by firms offering paid leave, there are no
measurable effects on firm output, labor costs, profitability or survival. Coworkers of the woman
going on leave see temporary increases in their hours, earnings, and likelihood of being employed
but experience no significant changes in well-being at work as proxied by sick days. These
limited effects of parental leave reflect that most firms are very effective in compensating for the
worker on leave by hiring temporary workers and by increasing other employees' hours. In
contrast, we do find evidence that parental leave has negative effects on a small subsample of
firms that are less able to use their existing employees to compensate for an absent worker.

Anne A. Brenøe                                   Nikolaj A. Harmon
University of Zurich                             Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          University of Copenhagen
Schoenberggasse 1                                Oester Farimagsgade 5, bygning 26
8001 Zurich                                      DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Switzerland                                      Denmark
anne.brenoe@econ.uzh.ch                          nikolaj.harmon@econ.ku.dk

Serena P. Canaan                                 Heather N. Royer
American University of Beirut                    Department of Economics
P.O.Box 11-0236 / Department of Economics        University of California, Santa Barbara
Riad El-Solh                                     2127 North Hall
Beirut                                           Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Lebanon                                          and NBER
sc24@aub.edu.lb                                  royer@econ.ucsb.edu
1     Introduction

The past few decades have been marked by a dramatic rise in female labor force participation and a

narrowing of the gender gap in education, hours of work, and earnings (Goldin, 2014). Nonetheless,

women still experience substantial earnings penalties due to motherhood (Bertrand et al. , 2010; An-

gelov et al. , 2016; Lundborg et al. , 2017; Kleven et al. , 2019). In light of these facts, policy discussions

surrounding parental leave have become more prominent.1 Nearly all high-income countries currently

have generous leave entitlements with the goals of decreasing gender inequality and improving child

development (Olivetti & Petrongolo, 2017). While many of these programs benefit mothers and their

children (Rossin-Slater, 2019), critics argue that leave take-up could impose substantial costs on em-

ployers. These costs include both wage replacement benefits during parental leave as well as indirect

expenses, such as the cost of training and recruiting replacement labor. Although one of the goals of

parental leave policies is to improve mothers' well-being, these incurred costs could harm women by

making employers more likely to discriminate against them in hiring and promotion decisions.

    To fully understand the benefits and costs of parental leaves, it is not only essential to examine how

parental leaves affect households but also how they affect firms and workplaces. Doing so is especially

important for countries that are considering introducing or extending leave benefits. For example, in

the United States--the only high-income country with no national paid leave--this question is at the

center of ongoing policy debates, as opponents contend that mandating parental leave would be too

costly and too detrimental to businesses. Former California governor Jerry Brown signed a bill into

law in 2017 that required small and medium-sized businesses to provide new parents with 12 weeks

of leave. However, he rejected a similar bill just one year earlier citing concerns "about the impact of

this leave particularly on small businesses and the potential liability that could result" (The San Diego

Union-Tribune, 2017).

    In this paper, we present some of the first evidence on the impact of parental leave on firms and

coworkers. Despite considerable policy relevance, direct estimates of the effects of leave on employers

and coworkers are scarce. In contrast to the rich evidence on the effects of parental leave on women and

children,2 a recent review of the literature on leave programs concludes that "we know very little about
   1
     Throughout the paper, we use the term "parental leave" to cover any period of leave that is taken in conjunction
with a child's birth or in the years following. The term thus includes both periods of "pregnancy leave" taken toward the
very end of a pregnancy and periods of "maternity leave" that mothers take immediately following a birth.
   2
     The evidence on the effects of leave programs on women and children is mixed. Previous studies find that short


                                                           2
how maternity and family leave policies may impact businesses, who often worry about being burdened

with extra costs resulting from dealing with employee leave-taking" Rossin-Slater (2019, p.337).3 This is

largely because answering this question requires comprehensive data linking firm and worker outcomes

to information on fertility and leave-taking, which is a challenging undertaking. Identifying causal

effects poses an additional challenge, as leave-taking is likely correlated with unobservable factors, such

as worker productivity, that may simultaneously affect firm outcomes.

    We study the effects of a woman's giving birth and taking leave on firms' labor demand, costs,

overall performance, and coworkers' labor outcomes (hours, retention, and earnings) in a setting where

firms are reimbursed for the costs associated with wage replacement benefits during parental leave. To

do this, we exploit rich administrative data on the universe of firms and workers in Denmark from 2001

to 2013. We link data on individual worker fertility and leave-taking with full administrative data on

their employing firm and their coworkers. We focus on small firms (those with less than 30 employees),

which due to their size, may bear the largest costs of parental leave policies.

    To identify the causal effects of leave-taking on firms and coworkers, our empirical strategy is

inspired by Azoulay et al. (2010) and J¨
                                       ager & Heining (2019) who study the effects of a coworker's

death. Specifically, we compare a sample of treatment firms in which a female employee is about to give

birth, to a set of control firms with female employees who do not give birth over the next few years. We

condition on a very rich set of baseline characteristics to ensure that treatment and control firms are

similar at baseline and then compare the evolution of outcomes between treatment and control firms in
periods of leave can raise women's likelihood of employment and return to work, but that leaves that are longer than
one year can have negative effects on their labor market opportunities (Ruhm, 1998; Baum, 2003; Baker & Milligan,
2008; Lalive & Zweim¨   uller, 2009; Lequien, 2012; Blau & Kahn, 2013; Sch¨   onberg & Ludsteck, 2014). Furthermore, the
introduction of parental leave improves children's health, education and earnings (Carneiro et al. , 2015; Rossin, 2011)
but further expansions in the duration of leave have no significant effects on a range of child outcomes (Baker & Milligan,
2010; Rasmussen, 2010; Dustmann & Sch¨     onberg, 2012; Dahl et al. , 2016; Danzer & Lavy, 2018). Olivetti & Petrongolo
(2017) and Rossin-Slater (2019) provide detailed reviews of the literature.
   3
     Besides the two papers by Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020) on parental leave extensions that are discussed
further below, we are only aware of a handful of policy reports dealing with parental leave and firms. Notable policy
reports with a focus on causality include Bedard & Rossin-Slater (2016) and Bartel et al. (2016). Bedard & Rossin-Slater
(2016) use panel data from California and employer fixed effects to compare firms with varying fractions of workers on
leave. They find that an increase in the share of workers is associated with a lower wage bill and slightly higher turnover.
In contrast, other work has shown that leave take-up rates are endogenous across firms in California (Bana et al. , 2018),
making causal conclusions is somewhat challenging. Bartel et al. (2016) survey 414 small and medium-sized firms in
the manufacturing and food services sectors to study the introduction of a four-week paid leave in Rhode Island. They
use a difference-in-differences approach and compare employers in the state to those in neighboring Massachusetts and
Connecticut before and after the policy. They find no significant impact on turnover rates, employee productivity, or
morale but warn that their small sample size precludes them from drawing definitive conclusions. Other policy reports
include Appelbaum & Milkman (2011) and Lerner & Appelbaum (2014) who provide descriptive analyses of in-depth
interviews and survey data collected after the introduction of paid family leave programs in California and New Jersey.



                                                             3
a dynamic difference-in-differences design. Relying on a parallel trends assumption for identification,

this allows us to estimate both the contemporaneous effects of having an employee take leave and any

delayed effects that persist or appear over the following few years. An additional advantage of this

empirical strategy is that it lends itself to several natural validity checks, which we use to substantiate

our identifying assumption.

   Our empirical analysis yields several key findings. First, firms where a woman gives birth are

exposed to an average of 282 extra parental leave days (about nine and a half months). In isolation, an

employee going on leave thus implies a substantial loss of labor inputs for firms. We find, however, that

firms are able to compensate for this lost labor supply by making adjustments both at the extensive

and intensive margins. Compared to the control group, treated firms temporarily hire more workers

when their employee gives birth and goes on leave. They also slightly raise the retention rates and

work hours of existing employees, particularly those who are in the same occupation as the woman

on leave. As a result of these adjustments, firms' total hours of work are roughly unchanged: the 95

percent confidence interval from our preferred specification excludes effect sizes such that having one

percent of the workforce on leave reduces total hours by more than 0.18 percent.

   Turning to the overall costs of leave, we find that Danish parental leave imposes minimal costs as

best as we can measure. Consistent with the increase in work hours, we document marginal increases

in existing employees' earnings, which are again driven by employees in the same occupation as the

women on leave. Together with the temporary increase in hires and retention, these changes lead to

an increase in the treatment firms' total wage bill. However, this total wage bill includes wages paid

to workers on leave, for which Danish firms receive reimbursement. When we exclude wages paid to

workers on leave, we do not find any effect on the wage bill of having a female employee on leave.

Furthermore, having an employee go on leave does not seem to affect overall firm performance. We do

not find significant effects on output or on the likelihood of firm survival. The 95 percent confidence

interval from our preferred specification excludes reductions in sales by more than 0.18 percent and in

the likelihood of survival by more than 0.05 percentage points when one percent of the workforce goes

on leave. Overall, our estimates suggest that the costs of parental leave for employers are small.

   We also find no evidence of adverse impacts on coworkers overall. As noted, coworkers see increases

in their hours, earnings, and likelihood of being employed and are thus compensated by their extra

work effort when an employee goes on leave. Moreover, at least in terms of sick leave, workers do not

                                                    4
seem to suffer from their coworker's absence.

    While firms, on net, make labor adjustments without drastic consequences for their costs, profits and

survival, some firms may face unusual adjustment costs. To delve into this further and understand the

role of firm adjustments in our results, we explore heterogeneous effects across firms. First, we focus on

the small subset of firms that have no other employees in the same occupation as the woman who goes

on leave.4 By construction, these firms face constraints on how they can adjust because they cannot

rely on increases in hours among same-occupation coworkers. Accordingly, for this subsample of firms,

we do see indications of negative effects of parental leave. In particular, despite experiencing slightly

shorter parental leaves on average, firms without same-occupation coworkers do not fully compensate

for the worker on leave but instead experience drops in total labor inputs; we estimate that in the year

the leave starts, total hours drop by 0.33 percent when one percent of the workforce goes on leave. In

addition, we see signs that this drop in labor input translates into worse firm performance, although in

this smaller subsample we have limited statistical power. These negative effects underscore that firm's

labor adjustments play an important role in mitigating the potential costs of parental leave in our

overall sample. It also highlights that even if the costs of parental leave are negligible overall, parental

leave can be costly for certain vulnerable firms. Finally, we explore heterogeneity by the initial size of

the firm. We find little evidence that the costs of parental leave varies with firm size in our sample,

however.

    The goal of our work is to understand how employees going on parental leave affects employers and

coworkers in the typical setting where employers can plan for the leave from the time the employee

announces her pregnancy. This objective is distinct from other work in the nascent research area on

the effect of parental leave on firms. Gallen (2019) studies a 2002 policy reform in Denmark that

caused mothers already on parental leave to unexpectedly extend their leave from 8 to 10 months on

average. Since the original circulation of our paper, Ginja et al. (2020) has added further evidence

from a similar reform in Sweden in 1989, which extended leaves from 12 to 14 months on average.

    These studies differ from our work in two key ways. First, they examine the intensive margin shock

of experiencing longer leaves among employees who were already scheduled for a substantial leave

period. Our work focuses instead on extensive margin shocks (having an employee on leave vs. not on
   4
     Firms that have no other employees in the same occupation as the woman who goes on leave make up 10 percent of
our main sample.



                                                        5
leave). This distinction is important because extensions of long-duration parental leaves are known to

have markedly different effects on women's labor market behavior, in particular on turnover (Rossin-

Slater, 2019). Employee turnover, in itself, is known to have negative effects on firms (Bertheau et al. ,

2019; J¨
       ager & Heining, 2019). Second, the extensions studied in Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020)

were retroactive (i.e., implemented while these women were already on leave) and thus precluded firms

from planning in advance for the leave. In normal times, however, absences due to parental leave differ

from most other employee absences exactly in that they are highly anticipated, giving firms more scope

for planning. We expand our discussion of these differences in Section 7.7.

   By focusing on the effects of worker absence due to family leave, our study is also related to the

case study of the public health care sector by Friedrich & Hackmann (2019). Friedrich & Hackmann

(2019) study a Danish policy reform in 1994, which made generous family leave available to all parents

with children up to the age of eight. Because of occupational licensing and high take-up among female

nurses, this reform created a temporary nurse shortage. Friedrich & Hackmann (2019) leverage this

shortage to provide causal estimates on the health effects of nurse care in hospitals and nursing homes.

   Our study can also be seen as enhancing our broad understanding of labor demand as a part of firms'

production process and the possible presence of labor market frictions, expanding on much theoretical

work (Stole & Zwiebel, 1996a,b; Cahuc et al. , 2008; Acemoglu & Hawkins, 2014; Kaas & Kircher,

2015). In this vein, our paper contributes to the empirical literature on worker absences derived from

sources other than parental leave (Azoulay et al. , 2010; Bartel et al. , 2014; Bennedsen et al. , 2019;

Drexler & Schoar, 2014; Golding et al. , 2005; Gruber & Kleiner, 2012; Herrmann & Rockoff, 2012;

Isen, 2013; Jaravel et al. , 2018; J¨
                                    ager & Heining, 2019; Bertheau et al. , 2019; Krueger & Mas, 2004;

Mas, 2008). As we discuss later, however, absences due to parental leave differ markedly from other

types of worker absences by being temporary with a known end date and by being highly anticipated.

   This paper also has connections to other related literatures. By directly estimating the cost of

mandated parental leave policies on firms, the paper is related to a large body of literature on how

firms may pass on the costs of mandated benefits to workers (e.g., Summers, 1989; Gruber, 1994;

Buchmueller et al. , 2011; Clemens & Cutler, 2014; Kolstad & Kowalski, 2016; Pichler & Ziebarth,

2018). Lastly, our paper's focus on firm outcomes can be seen as part of a growing focus in labor

economics on bringing a firm perspective to the analysis of the labor market (see e.g., Card et al. ,

2013; Song et al. , 2018).

                                                    6
2    Understanding the Impacts of Worker Absences

This section provides a framework to understand the impact of a worker taking parental leave on firm

and coworker outcomes based on existing theory and evidence. From a theoretical perspective, if labor

markets operate as frictionless and competitive labor markets, the only effect of a worker on leave

should be that the firm exactly replaces the lost labor input by hiring a replacement worker. In this

case, as labor is replaced at the market wage, there would be no effect on coworkers or firm output.

Assuming that firms do not bear any costs related to paid leave, firm costs and thus profits would also

be unaffected by workers taking leave.

    However, in the presence of costly search or other frictions, the predicted effects of an absent worker

are no longer this simple (see, for example, J¨
                                              ager & Heining, 2019). Under such rigidities, the firm may

not be able to replace the worker perfectly or may only be able to do so with a delay or after incurring

additional costs. If the firm fails to replace the lost worker immediately, the coworkers' productivity at

the firm will change depending on whether they are complements or substitutes in production relative

to the lost worker. For coworkers who are substitutes, productivity may increase, while the opposite

holds for coworkers who are complements. Depending on how wages and employment are determined,

these changes in productivity would imply changes in coworkers' wages, hours, and/or unemployment

risk. For the firm, output would also decrease if the lost worker is not immediately replaced, while

profits will tend to decrease in any case, due to either lower output or higher costs. If firms also have

the option of exiting the market in response to lower profits, the loss of a worker may cause some firms

to lay off all coworkers and shut down entirely. In sum, if the labor market is characterized by frictions,

the absence of one worker can have important negative effects throughout the firm--on the number of

workers, productivity, wages, firm output, profits, and ultimately, firm survival.

    Empirically, a large existing literature has examined whether these effects of worker absence exist

and how large they are, focusing on a range of different sources of worker absence, including worker

deaths (Azoulay et al. , 2010; Isen, 2013; Bennedsen et al. , 2019; Jaravel et al. , 2018; J¨
                                                                                            ager & Heining,

2019; Bertheau et al. , 2019), labor disputes (Krueger & Mas, 2004; Mas, 2008; Gruber & Kleiner, 2012),

illness (Herrmann & Rockoff, 2012; Drexler & Schoar, 2014), military reserve call-ups (Golding et al. ,

2005), and the departure of experienced nurses (Bartel et al. , 2014). Broadly speaking, the results of

this work are consistent with the presence of significant labor market frictions and with worker absences


                                                     7
having important negative effects on firm and/or coworker outcomes.

       The key motivation for our empirical analysis of parental leave absence, however, is that the sources

of worker absence studied in the previous literature differ conceptually from parental leave in a number

of ways--having a worker go on parental leave is very different from having a worker die, suddenly fall

ill, or be absent for some other reason.

       First, relative to other sources of worker absence, parental leave is highly anticipated and firms can

thus plan around absences due to parental leave. The Danish parental leave policy requires mothers

to announce their pregnancy to employers at least three months before giving birth, but it is common

for women to announce a pregnancy at their workplace up to six months before the due date. This

may make it substantially easier to compensate for the worker on leave than for a worker who dies

unexpectedly. For example, knowing about the upcoming leave several months in advance allows the

firm to start looking for potential replacement workers early and also makes it possible to involve the

worker going on leave in the potential recruitment and training process.

       Second, parental leave tends to be a temporary and not permanent absence that ends at a specific,

known time. The majority of women in Denmark return to their employer at the end of their parental

leave period. In fact, in the analysis sample we present later, the turnover for female employees who

give birth and take leave is actually slightly lower over the next few years than for comparable women

who do not give birth. Not having to deal with an employee's permanent departure from the firm

implies that some firms may be able to conclude or postpone tasks where the worker going on leave

is harder to replace. Meanwhile, the temporary nature of the leave may also impose constraints on

the types of adjustments firms can do; for example, downward wage-rigidity makes temporary wage

changes impractical.5

       Third, relative to some other types of worker absence, parental leave is a relatively common occur-

rence. This implies that firms may already be familiar with the details of the parental leave system and

be accustomed to having employees take leave. Taken together, these particular properties of parental

leave imply that the effects of parental leave absences may be very different from the types of worker

absences studied in the previous literature. This motivates our goal of providing empirical evidence on

the effects of parental leave on firms.
   5
   If nominal wages are downwardly rigid, potentially due to moral costs, firms would find it difficult to raise coworker
wages during the absence and then decrease them when the absent worker returns.



                                                           8
3        Institutional Setting: Parental Leave Policies

Danish parental leave, as is typical of most leave policies, consists of two key parts: i) wage replacement

for a specified number of weeks at a specified rate, which we discuss below, and ii) job protection while

on leave. Eligibility is conditional on the number of work hours over the months leading up to childbirth,

but requirements are low enough that virtually all employees qualify.6

        Mothers giving birth during our sample period are eligible for job-protected leave with wage re-

placement for 4 weeks before birth,7 14 weeks immediately after birth, and then have 32 weeks that the

parents can share.8 In practice, mothers take the majority of these 32 weeks, implying that a typical

new mother takes close to 50 weeks of job-protected leave with wage replacement.9 In addition, women

with medical difficulties in pregnancy are entitled to extended prenatal leave.10

        The employment protection offered by the leave policy means that workers who go on leave are

guaranteed to be able to return to their job at the end of the parental leave, although there are certain

exceptions. Employers are not allowed to terminate the employee because of the leave but can terminate

her for other reasons, such as downsizing or plant closing.

        The wage replacement offered during the leave depends on the details of the worker's employment

contract. At a minimum, all women are eligible to receive government-provided wage replacement equal

to the maximum level of Danish unemployment insurance (UI) benefits during the entire 50 weeks of

leave.11 We refer to this as unpaid leave, that is, the worker receives a direct wage replacement from

the government instead of from her firm. However, most employment contracts in Denmark offer

some period of fully paid leave during which the employer simply continues to pay the worker her

wage. We refer to these periods of employer-paid leave as paid leave, that is, the worker continues to

receive wage payments from the firm. Typically, paid leave is offered to women during all 4 weeks of
    6
      The exact requirements have changed somewhat over the years but have been low throughout. Under current rules,
for example, working ten hours a week for the past three months is sufficient to qualify for leave.
    7
      Women working in particular jobs (typically physically demanding labor), are eligible for an additional four weeks of
leave before birth.
    8
      Fathers are additionally eligible for two weeks of parental leave immediately after the birth.
    9
      Fathers take only about 10 percent of the shared leave on average. The leave policy offers various possibilities for
postponing part of the leave period until later in the child's life and for extending the job-protected leave without wage
replacement. These possibilities are less important in practice, so we focus on leave periods with wage replacement that
occur immediately after the child is born in this paper.
   10
      A woman unable to work due to her pregnancy has a right to her full salary, for which the UI system fully compensates
the employer.
   11
      The wage replacement amount cannot exceed the woman's previous wage, so for the small number of women earning
less than the maximum UI level, this is just equivalent to a full wage replacement.



                                                            9
prenatal leave, all 14 weeks immediately after birth, and for some subset of the 32 weeks after that.

Importantly, workers lose their right to government-provided wage replacement during periods of paid

leave. Contracts offering paid leave therefore do not affect the total time that women can be on leave

but instead increase the effective wage replacement for parts of the leave period. Table 1 illustrates

the parental leave system.

    Employment contracts offering paid leave are encouraged under the Danish parental leave policy.

This is done by directly reimbursing firms for wages paid to workers on leave in two ways. First, when

an employee goes on paid leave, the employing firm receives the government-provided wage replacement

that the worker would have been eligible for if not on paid leave. Second, firms paying wages to workers

on leave are also eligible for reimbursement from one of several semi-private "parental leave funds" to

which all employers contribute.12 Exact rules and reimbursement amounts differ depending on the

specific fund and the terms of the woman's employment contract. However, firms recoup almost all the

wages paid to workers on leave in the majority of cases.13 To account for this in our analysis, we use

data on firms' wage bill both including and excluding wages paid to workers on leave.

    Appendix Table A1 compares the Danish parental leave systems to schemes in other countries.

Similar to Denmark, most European countries provide mothers with between 14 and 18 weeks of

maternity leave with high earnings replacement (between 80 and 100 percent). In addition to maternity

leave, most countries provide parental leave that both parents can share. However, the duration and the

amount of benefits received under parental leave programs vary substantially across countries. Relative

to other European countries, Denmark offers a shorter period of parental leave (32 weeks) but provides

higher earnings replacement during that period. The Danish system of encouraging firms to offer paid

leave but then reimbursing them for these expenses is somewhat unusual; most countries offer wage

replacements that are directly funded and paid out via the social insurance system. But these funding

differences are unlikely to matter, because employers never bear the direct costs of replacing the wages

of women on leave.

    Finally, for thinking about the external validity of our results, it is worth noting that low levels
   12
      Prior to 2006, employers could voluntarily join these funds to replace workers' wages. Since 2006, membership in a
parental leave fund has been mandatory for all employers. Firms are required to pay into a parental leave fund for all
employees regardless of gender and age.
   13
      Based on the treatment firms and women in our estimation sample (see Section 5), we compute that firms in our data
are reimbursed for more than 90 percent of the paid leave for the average woman going on leave. In addition, firms are
eligible for full reimbursement for all the paid leave for 49 percent of the women.



                                                          10
of employment protection and high turnover and mobility are important features of the Danish labor

market. Turnover and job mobility rates in Denmark are more similar to the US labor market than to

other European labor markets (Andersen & Svarer, 2007). Danish employers thus have much leeway

for firing other employees and/or temporarily increasing their workforce when an employee goes on

leave compared to other European countries. Firms also frequently hire temporary workers.



4     Data

Our administrative data were collected from several sources and cover the universe of Danish firms and

workers from 2001 to 2013. Data on workers are linked across the different sources using unique person

identifiers from the central person registry (CPR). For firms, we link the data using firm identifiers

from the central firm registry (CVR). These identifiers are required for tax purposes for nearly all

active firms and public workplaces and enable us to merge our employer-employee data with firm-level

outcomes, such as output and profitability.14 We can distinguish between different firms, but not

between different establishments of the same firm. Nonetheless, our analysis sample includes mostly

single-establishment firms since our focus is on small firms (as further discussed in Section 5).


4.1    Worker Data

Our linked administrative data yield a range of characteristics and outcomes for workers. We obtain

basic demographic information, such as age and gender, from the CPR. Using parent-child linkages and

information on birth dates, we further construct data on when workers give birth, as well as the number

of children each worker has. We use data on the payout of parental leave benefits to individuals and

the payout of leave reimbursements to firms to calculate the total number of days of paid and unpaid

leave for each worker.15 In our measure of prenatal leave, we include instances when the leave period

is extended because of health issues related to pregnancy (see Section 3). Finally, using data from the

central education register and the Integrated Database for Labor Research (IDA), we obtain detailed
  14
     Participation in the CVR registry is required for all firms with a yearly revenue above 50,000 DKK (about 6,700 EUR
or 7,500 USD).
  15
     For each birth, we calculate the number of prenatal and postnatal leave days based on the UI rate and allocate
the number of leave days around childbirth, assuming that the woman takes all the prenatal leave uninterrupted right
before childbirth and all the postnatal leave uninterrupted in the first year starting right after childbirth. Prenatal leave
includes pregnancy-related sick leave. In the case of outliers, we truncate the length of any prenatal leave at 38 weeks,
paid prenatal leave at 6 weeks, paid postnatal leave at 52 weeks, and any postnatal leave at 104 weeks.



                                                             11
measures of workers' education and their total labor market experience since labor market entry.


4.2      Matched Employer-Employee Data

Information on employment relationships comes from yearly administrative data on wage payments

from firms to workers (the CON and RAS databases) and the IDA. We use these data to construct

measures of firm-level employment, hours of work, and wages.

       To measure the stock of employees at a firm, we use the standard IDA definition of "main November

employment relationship."16 Under this definition, a worker is considered to be employed at a firm

in a given year if his/her main job was at that firm in the last week of November.17 We refer to the

total number of such workers as the number of employees at the firm.18 Importantly, we note that this

measure of employee stock includes workers on leave.

       In addition to examining the stock of employees at a given time, we are also interested in examining

changes in hours worked. To do this we construct an approximate measure of how many hours each

worker supplied to a firm by using data on mandatory pension contributions from firms (ATP). Firms

make these pension contributions for each week an employee works at the firm and the contribution

per week scales approximately linearly with hours. Appropriately scaling the contribution amount

therefore gives us an approximate measure of total hours supplied during the year (Lund & Vejlin,

2016), which we use in our analysis. When constructing the measure of hours, we scale contributions

so that hours are measured in full-time equivalent (FTE) workers. To correct for the fact that ATP

contributions continue while employees are on paid leave, we subtract the share of the year that each

employee is on paid parental leave.

       When analyzing the resulting measure of yearly hours, it is important to note that the assumed

linear relationship between weekly hours and pension contributions is only an approximation. The

true relationship is in fact a stepwise function with four steps that tops out for full-time employees.19
  16
     Historically, the IDA data were designed to most accurately capture employment at the end of the last week of
November.
  17
     The main job is defined as the job with the most hours, and in the case of any equal amounts, that with the highest
earnings.
  18
     The results we present later are virtually identical if we instead include all workers who were ever at the firm in any
capacity during the year.
  19
     The ATP contribution schedule has fours steps for 0­9, 9­17, 18­26, and 27­ hours per week and therefore tops out
for individuals working full time (37 hours a week), so any overtime work undertaken by full-time employees will be missed
in our hours measure. For this reason, we also cannot calculate a reliable measure of hourly wages. An alternative data
source that better captures overtime hours became available in 2008. However, using this source would leave us with too
short a sample window for the analysis.


                                                            12
This implies that our analysis of yearly hours will fail to capture changes in overtime work for full-time

employees as well as smaller changes in weekly hours that do not cross one of the thresholds in the step

function. However, our measure will very precisely capture changes in the share of the year working

(for example, due to parental leave absences) as well as changes between part-time and full-time work.

       Turning to wages, we start by computing total earnings for each worker in a given year as the sum

of all (pre-tax) payments received from their main job. We then calculate the firm-level total wage

bill as the sum of all payments to workers during the year. Unlike our FTE measure, the wage bill

will reflect overtime work for full-time employees to the extent that overtime work is paid. This total

wage bill will also include any payments made to workers on paid parental leave for which firms receive

reimbursements. As an alternative measure, we construct the wage bill ex. leave where we remove

payments made to workers on leave.20 By examining the effects of parental leave on both the total

wage bill and the wage bill ex. leave, we can shed light on how firms are affected both before and after

they receive reimbursements for paid leave.21


4.3      Firm Data

Information on firm performance is taken from value-added tax (VAT) data. As part of administering

the Danish VAT, all firms are required to report their total sales and purchases if the revenue exceeds

a defined value.22 We use total sales as our measure of firm output and use firm purchases for an iden-

tification check.23 For a measure of firm profitability, we create a proxy for gross profits by subtracting

purchases and the total wage bill from total sales. We note that this proxy differs from the standard

accounting definition because the VAT data on purchases also include purchases of capital equipment,
  20
      We divide each worker's total payments from the firm by the total hours worked including paid leave (based on ATP
contributions) to get wages. We then multiply their wage by their number of hours worked excluding periods of paid leave
(based on ATP contributions and total days on paid leave). The gap between the workers' total payments from the firm
and the earnings from labor hours is a measure of the paid leave that the firms have covered. This gap is then subtracted
from the total wage bill to arrive at a measure of total wage bill excluding leave payments. Inherent in this measure is
some error for people who hold two jobs. Cases with zero or missing pension contributions are treated as working full
time all year for the purpose of these calculations. Among worker-firm years for which the worker has positive parental
leave and positive earnings, 7.9 percent have missing or zero pension contributions. These are all concentrated among
very low earners. If we further condition on having earnings of more than 30,000 DKK (4,000 EUR or 4,500 USD) for the
year, this calculation falls to 1.4 percent.
   21
      Data limitations prohibit us from examining the actual reimbursements firms receive. Specifically, we do not have
data on reimbursements received from parental leave funds (see Section 3).
   22
      As of 2018, this value is 50,000 DKK (6,700 EUR or 7,500 USD), but it was even smaller during our sample period.
With the exception of exports, the Danish VAT is almost universal. The sales and purchases data we use in the analysis
have been corrected to include export data.
   23
      Due to reporting errors and issues around accounting corrections, there are a few instances of firms reporting negative
sales and/or purchases (less than 0.2 percent). We recode these as zeros.


                                                             13
which would not normally be included when calculating gross profits.24

         One important feature of most firm data is that many firms enter and exit the market each year.

Because leave-taking might affect firm entry and survival, we do not remove firms that are inactive

and/or shut down from our sample. Instead, we consider them as having zero employees, zero hours,

and zero sales. In other words, when estimating the effects of parental leave on these outcomes, we

allow firm shutdown to be one reason why employees, hours, or sales may change. Using positive sales

as a proxy for firm activity, we also examine firm shutdown directly as an outcome.25



5         Research Design

The goal of our study is to identify the causal effect on firms and coworkers when a female employee

gives birth and subsequently goes on leave. We do this using a dynamic difference-in-differences design

with a setup that is similar to J¨
                                 ager & Heining (2019). In essence, this research design leverages a

comparison of treatment firms that employ a female worker who gives birth with control firms that

employ a female worker who does not give birth over the next few years.

         In this section, we begin by describing the construction of our treatment and control firms and then

our firm-level and coworker difference-in-differences empirical specifications. We address several consid-

erations of the analysis, including the intent-to-treat nature of our research design, the comparability

of the treatment and control firms, and the possible threats to identification.


5.1        Constructing the Treatment and Control Groups

To start our discussion of the construction of treatment and control groups, we first define what we

refer to as potential events. A potential event is defined as a woman who had her main job at some firm

in some year. In other words, events are combinations of woman-firm-year. For definitional purposes,

the year in this combination is called the baseline year and the year two years after the baseline year

is the event year. These events are determined at the individual and not the firm level because an

individual's own behaviors trigger parental leave.
    24
     Normally, capital purchases only affect net profits because these include capital depreciation. If firms in our sample
respond to employee leave-taking by systematically increasing investments, this will understate gross profits. Accounting
data that separate investments from material costs and other inputs are not available for most small firms of our analysis.
  25
     Using other definitions of firm activity does not affect the qualitative conclusions of the paper.




                                                            14
    Within our sample of potential events, we then select our set of treatment and control events as

follows (see Figure 1 for a summary): We classify a treatment event as one in which the woman gives

birth in the event year but does not give birth in the year before or after the event year. In parallel,

a control event is an event in which a woman does not give birth in the event year, the year prior, or

the year after.26 For both sets of events, the associated firm is the firm where the woman is employed

in the baseline year. The association of a firm to an event occurs in the baseline year rather than the

event year to allow for the possibility that job mobility between the baseline and event years may be

endogenous (e.g., women may sort into family-friendly firms just prior to giving birth).


5.2    Sample Restrictions

We place several restrictions on this set of potential leave events--both at the individual and the firm

level. Of these restrictions, the most important are a focus on women in their prime childbearing years

and a restriction to small private firms with less than 30 employees.

    We restrict attention to small firms for two reasons. First, the potential disproportionate impacts on

small firms often crowd public discussions of parental leave, and thus justify a particular focus on them.

Second, our research design is based on comparing firms that differ in whether one particular employee

is on parental leave. At medium and large firms, differences in the behavior of a single employee will

not generate meaningful variation. The restriction to small firms is therefore also invoked in previous

studies on worker absence that use related research designs (J¨
                                                              ager & Heining, 2019).

    In terms of other restrictions, we impose the following restrictions on the women who make up our

treatment and control events:

  1. The woman must be between 19 and 33 years of age in the baseline year.

  2. At the baseline year, the woman must have been with the firm for more than one year.

  3. The woman must not be a student in the baseline year.

Restriction 1 ensures a focus on prime-childbearing-age women.27 Restrictions 2 and 3 ensure a focus on
  26
     For women of prime childbearing age, fertility exhibits a very strong negative autocorrelation pattern across adjacent
years. The requirement that female employees in the control group not give birth over any of the next three years is
therefore necessary because we want to look at potential longer-run effects of a female employee giving birth without our
estimates being confounded by births occurring among control group members. If we only required the control group
women not to give birth in the event year, we would have large spikes in fertility in the surrounding years for this group.
  27
     As described above, we examine the effect of women's fertility two years after the baseline year. Ages 21 through 35
are the prime childbearing years for Danish women over our sample period.



                                                            15
women with reasonably strong labor market attachment. Second, we impose the following restrictions

on firms:

  4. Based on sales, hours, and the total wage bill, the firm must be active in the baseline year.28

  5. The firm must not be an extreme outlier in terms of growth, sales levels, or wage bill.29

  6. We restrict our sample to small firms in which our measure of the stock of employees is between

       3 and 30 in the baseline year, and where the total number of employment relationships observed

       at the firm at some point in the baseline year is less than 60.30

  7. The firm must be in the private sector.

Restrictions 4 and 5 ensure that our results are not driven by a small number of outlier firms or by

firms that were de facto inactive in the baseline year. As noted previously, Restriction 6 implies that

we are looking at small firms. Restriction 7 is necessary because our measures of firm performance

(sales, firm closure, and profits) are not relevant outcomes for the public sector.31


5.3     Firm-Level Difference-in-Differences

Using data on the treatment and control events (along with data preceding, during, and following the

events), our dynamic difference-in-differences specification has the following basic form:


                           Yef t =e +         k 1t=k +         k 1t=k · T reatmente + ef t                              (1)
                                         kT               kT

                                   T = {-4, -3, -1, 0, 1, 2}.


Here e indexes events, f indexes firms and t measures event time (i.e., t = 0 is the event year and

t = -2 is the baseline year). Yef t is one of our firm outcomes for firm f at event time t, T reatmente
  28
     Specifically, we require that total hours in the baseline year correspond to at least one full-time employee and that
the firm either had positive sales or positive wage payments in the year prior to the baseline year.
  29
     Firms with outlier sales or wage bills relative to their employment are excluded. Specifically, sales per employee must
be between 10,000 DKK (1,300 EUR or 1,500 USD) and 100 million DKK (thirteen million EUR or fifteen million USD),
and wages per worker must be between 10,000 DKK (1,300 EUR or 1,500 USD) and one million DKK (130,000 EUR or
150,000 USD).
  30
     Recall that our main measure of the stock of employees is based on the workforce in November. The additional
restriction on total employees throughout the year deals with highly seasonal firms that only employ a smaller fraction of
their work force in November.
  31
     The majority of public sector output will not show up in sales data. Moreover, all public sector workplaces under the
same public entity (a municipality, for example) are generally assigned a single firm identifier in our data. We thus have
no reliable way of looking at firm closure or identifying true coworkers.



                                                            16
is an indicator for whether event e is a treatment event, and                 1t=k denotes the (time) dummy for
event time k . e is an event (i.e., woman-firm-baseline year) fixed effect that absorbs level differences

in the baseline year and ensures that identification is not coming from level differences across firms.

The coefficients on the time dummies, -4 through 2 , reflect how the mean of Yef t in control firms

compares in event years t = -4 through t = 2 relative to the baseline year, i.e. t = -2.

    The parameters of interest are the coefficients on the interactions between treatment status and

event time: -4 , -3 , -1 , 0 , 1 , and 2 . These are the difference-in-differences coefficients and

show how changes over time at treatment firms differ from changes over time at control firms. Under

a parallel trends assumption, these coefficients identify causal effects of a worker going on parental

leave: 0 identifies the contemporaneous effect in the year of birth, while 1 and 2 demonstrate the

later post birth dynamics. -1 identifies any anticipation effects of a birth that materialize in the year

prior to the birth's occurrence. For example, at the firm level, management may make adjustments in

this year in anticipation of the leave. An advantageous feature of the dynamic difference-in-differences

research design is the ability to test one of the crucial identifying assumptions--the parallel trends of

the treatment and control events. The coefficients -4 and -3 serve this purpose and ideally should

hover around zero--signifying that outcomes among treatment and control firms evolve along parallel

trends in the periods before the birth occurs. We return to our pretrend estimates in Subsection 5.6.3

after discussing the rest of our empirical strategy, including the baseline covariates we condition on to

make treatment and control events comparable.

    For each event e, we use data ranging from four years prior to the event to two years following the

event in the estimation.32 The main reason for this time span is to ensure a clean comparison between

the treatment and control groups. This is because our design mainly leverages the timing rather than

the incidence of childbearing at a firm. Although women who contribute to control events are restricted

to having no births from event year -1 through 1, they are still likely to give birth at some later date. If

we expand the event window to include years that lie further into the future, the parental leave taken

by these women at control firms would make it difficult to interpret differences between the treatment

and control samples.

    In our analysis, we estimate equation (1) via OLS and compute standard errors clustered at the
  32
     We could, in principle, extend the time frame to include more years prior to the baseline year and/or more years after
the event year. Requiring data on more than these seven years causes us to lose a significant number of observations at
the beginning and end of our sample window.


                                                            17
firm level. This is appropriate as the level of treatment is at the firm level (Abadie et al. , 2017). The

clustering also corrects for the fact that the same firm may be part of more than one event in our data.

To avoid any issues with composition effects, we always estimate equation (1) on a balanced sample

that includes only firms for which we have data for all seven years.33 Whenever possible, we scale

the outcome variable in equation (1) relative to its baseline value so that our estimated effects can be

interpreted as percentage changes relative to the baseline year.34


5.4    Coworker Analysis

To understand the effects of leave on coworkers, we adopt a parallel analysis to the firm difference-in-

differences. For each woman associated with a treatment or control event, we select all her male and

female coworkers in the baseline year: i) whose job at the baseline firm constitutes the main attachment

to the labor market in the baseline year, and ii) who had hours of at least half of a full time employee

and earnings exceeding 75,000 DKK (10,000 EUR or 11,000 USD) in the baseline year.35 , 36 . For this

sample, we estimate OLS specifications that are completely analogous to (1), but where the outcome

variable is some coworker outcome (earnings, hours, etc.) and where observations are at the coworker-

year level (instead of firm-year). For this set of analyses, the units of the outcome are the individual

coworkers. For inference, we continue to cluster standard errors at the firm level. Appendix D provides

additional details for the coworker specification.


5.5    Discussion of the Treatment Leveraged in the Research Design

Although our focus is on the effects of parental leave, we note that our definition of treatment is based

on whether an employee gives birth or not. In our setting, a birth is always followed by a parental
  33
      Recall that firms, even if they shut down, are still included in our sample. The balanced sample restriction simply
implies that we do not include firms at the beginning or end of our sample window where we have missing data on event
time t = -4 or t = 2. All our main conclusions hold if we instead consider an unbalanced panel.
   34
      Despite our restriction to small firms, the firms in our analysis do differ substantially in size in the baseline year.
When measured in levels, year-to-year changes in outcomes therefore exhibit considerable skewness. Because our outcome
variables contain zeros, however, we cannot apply the usual log-transformation to mitigate this. Instead we scale outcomes
relative to baseline whenever possible. We cannot do this for all outcomes, however, because some of our outcome variables
can be zero or negative in the baseline year. Except where noted, none of our qualitative conclusions are sensitive to the
scaling.
   35
      We make this restriction to confine the sample to those with a relatively strong attachment to the firm at the baseline.
There are only five events, for which we do not have relevant coworkers; we drop these firms from the coworker analysis.
   36
      Because this sample definition only conditions on where coworkers are employed in the baseline year, our coworker
analysis will include workers who leave treatment and control firms after baseline. This is appropriate as exit from the
firm is an endogenous outcome of interest. For the same reasons, the coworker analysis does not examine the outcomes
of workers who join treatment and control firms after the baseline year.


                                                             18
leave period and the duration of this leave is very substantial in most cases.37 Formally, our design

thus estimates the joint effect of an employee giving birth and of her subsequent parental leave. Given

our interest in the effects of parental leave, this raises a concern that our estimates will conflate the

effects of parental leave with the potential negative effects of women lowering their working hours or

effort after giving birth. Indeed, much previous work has found evidence that women's labor supply

changes after giving birth (Kleven et al. , 2019).

       In Appendix B, we examine how the labor supply of our sample of treatment women changes around

the time they give birth relative to our sample of comparable control women.38 Besides the differences

caused by the parental leave itself, treatment women change their labor supply very little. Two years

after the event year--the year when our treatment women should be fully back to work--the drop

in yearly work hours for treatment women is less than one percent of a full-time worker. Moreover,

because women are less likely to quit their job immediately around childbirth, treatment women are

in fact slightly more likely to still be with their baseline employer two years after the event year.39

The fact that women's labor supply changes so little after childbirth likely reflects that we are focusing

on women with reasonably high labor market attachment in the baseline year.40 Given these very

limited changes in labor supply, we expect that any negative effects on firms stemming from changes

in the labor supply of new mothers will be dominated by the direct effects of the parental leave period.

During the parental leave period, firms have to go completely without the women's labor input during

the almost 10 months the average woman is on parental leave.
  37
      As required by European Union law, women must take at least two weeks of parental leave following childbirth and
families are only guaranteed publicly provided childcare after the child is 26 weeks old. Moreover, the leave length is
substantial for most women; 93 percent of the women in our sample take at least six months of postnatal leave and 34
percent take the maximum duration of 322 days (46 weeks).
   38
      We use a specification analogous to the firm-level difference-in-differences. To ensure that the sample of treatment
and control women are comparable, we condition on observables in the same way as in our main analysis; see Subsection
5.6.2.
   39
      This might seem puzzling given existing evidence that women start to sort into certain types of firms and jobs after
the birth of their first child (see for example (Kleven et al. , 2019)). Part of the explanation is that much of this sorting
pattern does not occur immediately after birth. More substantially, however, note that the sorting of new mothers into
certain jobs and firms does not require them to have higher quit rates than other women. If new mothers are systematically
more likely to switch to certain firms and jobs when they do quit, sorting will occur even if new mothers quit at exactly
the same rate as other women. This is indeed what we see in our sample: women do not become more likely to quit
following a birth but target different jobs and employers if they do quit.
   40
      Note also that we are not restricting the analysis to only first births as has been done in much previous work.




                                                             19
5.6     Important Considerations for the Research Design

5.6.1    Turnover and Imperfect Compliance: Obtaining LATE Estimates via 2SLS

In our construction of the treatment, there will be imperfect compliance. Women employed at a firm

in the baseline year may leave that firm after the baseline year. As we recognize that mobility may be

endogenous, we do not require women to remain at their baseline firm beyond the baseline year. The

possibility of this movement across firms means that treatment firms may not experience their worker's

childbirth.

    As is common when dealing with treatment non-compliance, the OLS estimates from the difference-

in-differences specification in equation (1) can still be interpreted as causal intention-to-treat (ITT)

estimates of how parental leave influences firms. Because we are also interested in quantifying the

size of these effects for affected firms, however, we supplement our OLS results with standard 2SLS

estimators. In our 2SLS estimates, we use treatment status as an instrument and recover local average

treatment effects (LATE) estimates, even under imperfect compliance.

    To set the stage for our specific 2SLS specifications, consider first a differenced version of equation

(1) that looks at differences across only the baseline and event years (denoted by ):


                                         Yef =0 + 0 T reatmente + ef                                                      (2)


This regression relates changes in the outcomes between the baseline and the event years to treatment

status. We note that estimating 0 using OLS in this specification will give a numerically equivalent

ITT estimate to the difference-in-differences specification (1) if the sample of firms is kept the same.41

To obtain a LATE estimate for the effect of an additional birth at the firm, we instead apply 2SLS.

To do this, we replace T reatmente in equation (2) with the total number of births in the event year,

BirthsInEventY earef , and instrument this using treatment status:


                                             Yef = 0 + 0 BirthsInEventY earef + ef                                        (3)


                       BirthsInEventY earef = 0 + 1 T reatmente +                  ef                      (3, First Stage)
   41
      In practice, however, when estimating all our 2SLS specifications building on equation (2), we end up including
slightly more firms than in the difference-in-differences specification because the specification does not require firms to be
observed at t = 2 and t = -4.


                                                             20
Under the parallel trends assumption above, the 2SLS estimate of 0 is a causal LATE estimate for

the contemporaneous effect of having one additional employee give birth and go on leave in the event

year. To obtain LATE estimates of any non-contemporaneous effects in the year after the event year as

well, we simply modify the outcome equation (3), so that it involves changes in the outcome variable

between the baseline and the year of interest.


5.6.2    Ensuring the Comparability of Treatment and Control Events: Conditioning on

         Observables via Matching and Reweighting

The difference-in-differences design employed in our firm and coworker analyses requires that our treat-

ment and control firms--in the absence of a female worker giving birth--exhibit parallel pre-trends. In

the raw data, however, the firms and women underlying treatment and control events are already quite

distinct in the baseline year. This difference is not surprising. For example, women who have decided

not to have children--and who thus contribute to our control sample--may have selected systematically

into less family-friendly firms (e.g., those that require extensive travel and long work hours). These

differences, however, raise obvious concerns about the validity of the parallel trends assumption.

    Following J¨
               ager & Heining (2019), we address these concerns by conditioning our analysis on a rich

set of baseline observables through matching. The point of this is to ensure that in the baseline year,

firms in our treatment sample look similar to our control sample. Before estimating the regression

specifications discussed above, we first apply a matching and reweighting procedure to our sample.

As we show in Appendix E, however, we can obtain similar results using a purely regression-based

approach using baseline covariates as control variables.42

    Because movement across firms may be related to childbearing (e.g., women may select into family-

friendly firms after becoming pregnant), our matching procedure uses baseline characteristics (i.e.,

characteristics two years prior to the event) rather than characteristics at the time of the event. Table

2 details the set of baseline characteristics we condition on. In terms of the women who make up our

treatment and control events, we condition on labor market experience, demographics, and fertility

history to invoke comparisons of women with similar career trajectories. In particular, female fertility

behavior might be related to labor market returns and is therefore important to include. In terms of
  42
     This is a reflection of the well-known equivalence between matching and reweighting estimators and linear regression
(Angrist, 1998). See Appendix E for details.



                                                           21
firms, we condition on standard measures of size and various proxies of family-friendliness. We do this

especially to address that high-fertility women may sort into certain types of firms.

   Our estimation procedure relies on exact matching. As our baseline matching variables are discrete,

we create cells based on all possible combinations of these variables. For each treatment event, we

determine all of the control events that have exactly the same values of the observables for the baseline

year. This means that multiple control events will be assigned to a treatment event. Control events are

therefore reweighted accordingly. When a treatment event is matched to K control units, then each
                                         1
of these controls receives a weight of   K.   These weights are applied throughout when estimating our

regression specifications.

   As usual, the matching and reweighting procedure rests on a common support assumption and the

resulting estimators can be undefined or badly behaved if this assumption is not satisfied (if for some

combinations of the observables there are very few treatment or control events). To deal with issues

regarding common support, we apply the trimming method proposed by Crump et al. (2009) and trim

away cells where the fraction of control observations in the cell exceeds 0.9 or falls below 0.1. This

effectively restricts attention to the subsample of individuals where there is "thick support" in both the

control and treatment groups, thereby improving the estimator's performance. The downside of this

procedure is a potential loss of external validity and sample size, as we restrict attention to a particular

subsample of the data.


5.6.3   Assessing the Parallel Trends Assumption

A useful feature of our research design is that it offers some natural validity checks to assess the

identifying parallel trends assumption. First, we can conduct treatment-control balance tests of pre-

determined characteristics excluded from the matching and reweighting procedure. This allows us to

assess whether treatment and control firms indeed look similar at baseline once we condition on the

observables included in our matching and reweighting procedure. Appendix Table A3 displays this

comparison. Across all variables there are only small, insignificant differences between the treatment

and (reweighted) control sample. We note that this is also true in terms of when the potential treatment

and control events occur: treatment and control events are not occurring in systematically different

years (see last row of A3). This ensures that our comparison of treatment and control samples is not

confounded by aggregate time trends.

                                                     22
    Appendix Figure A1 further compares the industry composition of our treatment and control sam-

ples. The samples are well balanced on industry as well. Formally, the differences in the industry

distribution across the two samples are not statistically significant (p = 0.92; see Appendix Figure A1).

At least in terms of these baseline characteristics, the women and firms underlying the treatment and

control events are quite comparable.

    Second, we can assess the validity of our parallel trends assumption by looking at pre-trends in

outcomes. One specific potential economic-driven violation of the parallel trends assumption is the

endogeneity of birth timing. Firm-level events may influence employees' birth timing. A positive

demand shock at the firm, for example, could translate into promotions or pay raises for employees

and lead these employees to start or postpone having children, thereby introducing reverse causality

between firm outcomes and births. The test of these pre-trends is critical for dispelling that worry.

Reassuringly, we see no evidence of differential pre-trends in any of the firm-level outcomes we consider

(see Figures 3 to 7d).

    Aside from testing for trends in firm-level outcomes, we also look at trends in the evolution of

outcomes for treatment and control women. We again see no evidence of differential pre-trends here

(as we show in Appendix B). This is consistent with the event-study results for Danish women presented

by Kleven et al. (2019).43 Part of the lack of pre-trends might reflect the fact that strategically planning

childbearing is challenging for a woman, and that many births are unplanned.44

    It is worth noting that even in the presence of some endogeneity bias for the treated individual,

propagation of that endogeneity to the firm level would be less than that at the individual level. In
  43
     Broadly speaking, the event studies in Kleven et al. (2019) have the following flavor: Women's labor market outcomes
evolve along fairly stable trends in the years leading up to their first birth. Then follows a few years with potentially very
distinct patterns in the years the women become pregnant, give birth and take parental leave. Finally, in the post-leave
period labor market outcomes settle on a new stable trend. As our matching and reweighting procedure conditions on
past fertility, our research design here tends to leverage two types of comparisons: Some comparisons will be among pairs
of women where both are on the stable trend occurring after the first birth but where one (treatment) women gives birth
again over the next few years and the other (control) woman does not. Other comparisons will be among pairs of women
who are both on the stable trend occurring before first birth. Of course, because we do not condition on future fertility
in the control group, our research design will also leverage some comparisons where the control woman never gives birth.
As shown in the Appendix to Kleven et al. (2019), however, these comparisons also tend to show parallel pre-trends.
  44
     Most births are unintended (i.e., the couple was using fertility-control methods at the time of conception) or occur
after several months of trying to become pregnant--meaning the usual timing of fertility, in general, is not well-planned.
For example, about 37 percent of all births are unplanned at conception in the United States (Mosher et al. , 2012). A
German study shows that the probability of conception during one cycle is less than 40 percent among healthy women of
prime fertile ages trying to conceive (Gnoth et al. , 2003). Te Velde et al. (2000) confirm this finding and document that
roughly 50 percent conceive within three months and 80 percent conceive within six months. However, these statistics
provide an upper bound on the birth rates, since not all conceptions result in births. One recent estimate of the birth
success rate, based on donor eggs used in vitro fertilization, suggests that the probability of a birth given a conception is
roughly 50 percent (Rice, 2018).


                                                             23
the language of a regression equation, this is because the correlation of the regressors with the error

term, which drives the endogeneity bias, would only be generated by the treated individual and would

be zero for the non-treated individuals in the firm. Of course, this logic hinges on a lack of peer effects

in fertility decisions at the firm; if fertility peer effects across coworkers are strong, endogenous fertility

decisions by one employee will spill over to the entire workforce and lead to severe bias. In our setting,

fertility peer effects appear negligible, however. In Appendix C, we show that the estimated effect of

a female worker's birth on her coworkers' leave taking is less than one day per coworker in the event

year and the following year, and it is statistically insignificant.45


5.6.4    Alternative Treatment Definitions

Our main regression equations characterize the treatment in terms of number of births at a firm

(i.e., equation (3)). One could well imagine, however, that what matters for the outcomes is not

the total number of employees on leave but instead the share of the total workforce on leave. We

therefore consider an alternative parameterization of the treatment effect that takes the firm's number

of employees into consideration. Specifically, we consider a relative version of equation (3), in which

births in the event year are divided by the number of employees at the firm at the baseline and in

which the same scaling is applied to the first stage:

                                                    BirthsInEventY earef
                                 Yef =0 + 0                              + uef                                         (4)
                                                    BaselineEmployeesef

               BirthsInEventY earef             T reatmente
                                    = 0 + 1                     + vef                                   (4, First Stage)
               BaselineEmployeesef          BaselineEmployeesef

For ease of interpretation, we measure baseline employment in 100 baseline employees when estimating

(4). This scaling implies that our estimate of 0 is a LATE estimate for the contemporaneous effect of

having one percent of the baseline employees give birth and take leave in the event year.46 To address

the possibility that firms of different sizes may evolve along different time trends, we always include a
  45
     Asphjell et al. (2014), using Swedish data, uncover workplace peer effects in fertility behavior but the peer effects
occur with delay--affecting the probability of a birth 1 to 3 years later. Because of the time frame of these peer effects
and given we only focus on four years prior and two years following a birth, these type of peer effects, if they existed in
our setting, would be less problematic for us. Also, in this vein of the literature, Ciliberto et al. (2016) develop a game
theoretic peer effects model to understand the propensity in having a birth but not the timing of that birth.
  46
     The average firm in our sample has approximately ten employees, so a typical complier firm actually experiences ten
percentage points more of their employees go on leave in the event year.



                                                            24
full set of indicators for the exact number of employees in the baseline year when estimating (4).47 As

above, we can modify outcome equation (4) so that it involves changes in the outcome variable between

the baseline and some year other than the event year in order to estimate the effect in later years.

    We take 2SLS estimates from (4) as our preferred estimate for all our firm outcomes that are binary

or are measured relative to baseline. For transparency, however, we always present results from both

specifications (3) and (4) throughout (i.e., considering the number of births as the treatment variable

as in (3) or the percent of workers on leave as in (4)). For continuous firm outcomes that are not scaled

relative to the baseline, we use 2SLS estimates from equation (3) as our preferred estimate, as they

measure the absolute effect of having one additional employee take leave. Finally, because effects on

coworkers are likely to always depend on the total size of the employment stock, we use 2SLS estimates

from equation (3) as our preferred estimate throughout the coworker analysis.



6     Descriptive Statistics

Before discussing our main difference-in-differences results, we present descriptive statistics. Table

3 first shows how our various sample restrictions change our working sample size. Not surprisingly,

the most limiting sample restriction is the restriction to small firms. This large reduction in sample

size reflects that by definition, most workers work at firms with many employees.48 The fact that we

lose observations due to trimming reflects the fine-grained nature of our matching and reweighting

procedure. Of the initial 23,762 treatment events in our sample, 9,941 (41.8 percent) are left after

trimming. In Appendix F, as a robustness check, we further present results from a coarser matching

and reweighting procedure that effectively trims fewer observations.

    In Appendix G, we examine the characteristics of our analysis sample to understand how represen-

tative our final analysis sample is. Compared to the universe of private sector firms in Denmark, firms

in our treatment sample experience more births and leave days per employee. Moreover, treated firms
   47
      The matching and reweighting procedure ensures that the baseline number of employees is balanced across the
treatment and control groups. The identification of 0 , however, also relies on comparisons across firms of different initial
sizes within the treatment group. Failing to control for initial firm size therefore causes a bias if firms of different sizes
evolve along different time paths. In practice, firm size exhibits very clear mean reversion in our data and thus introduces
this bias.
   48
      Given that women are disproportionately more likely to work in the public sector, it might seem surprising that the
restriction to the private sector only cuts our sample by 7.5 percent. The reason for this is that public sector firms tend
to be very large in our data. Most of the public sector had already been dropped before we restricted our attention to
small firms.



                                                             25
employ twice as many women than the average small firm. This is not surprising; the more women

a firm employs, the more likely it is to have an employee that gives birth. Other characteristics of

firms in our treatment sample--such as work hours and the wage bill--are mostly comparable to the

universe of private sector and small firms.

         Table 4 shows (weighted) summary statistics for the baseline year of the firm and coworker samples

that we use to estimate equation (1).49 In the baseline year, firms experience on average 0.79 female

employees giving birth and 137 days in total of leave taken by female employees. These firms have 12.9

employees, 65 percent of whom are women, and wage bills of 3.4 million DKK (455,000 EUR or 500,000

USD). Finally, Figure 2 shows the distribution of the respective length of prenatal and postnatal leave

among the women in our sample of treatment events. This clearly shows that women tend to take

the majority of available leave. Most women take close to four weeks of prenatal leave; although the

distribution of prenatal leave exhibits a long right tail due to pregnancy-related sick leave. In terms of

postnatal leave, the modal woman takes the maximum 46 weeks of leave (322 days), while the median

duration is 290 days.



7         Results

We begin our empirical analysis by verifying that our construction of the estimation sample generates

a difference in the number of births between treatment and control firms (that is, there is a treat-

ment). Panel (a) of Figure 3 plots OLS estimates of the k -coefficients from our dynamic difference-

in-differences specification (1), using total births at the firm as the outcome variable.50 In terms of

employee fertility, treatment firms appear to evolve along the same trend as control firms except in the

event year, when they experience significantly more births.51 The apparent lack of pre-trend differences

in this figure is comforting for identification purposes.

         The magnitude of the increase in the event year reveals that there is imperfect compliance with

treatment. In the event year, the relative increase in births at treatment firms is only 0.68--significantly
    49
     Appendix Table A2 shows summary statistics for all seven years used for the analysis instead of just the baseline year.
    50
     As described in Subsection 5.3, this specification is estimated by OLS on the reweighted sample of treatment and
control events.
  51
     Note that our definition of the treatment and control involves conditioning on having one female employee at baseline
who either gives birth exactly in the event year or does not give birth over the next few years. We do not place any
restrictions on any of the other employees at our treatment and control firms, so the pattern shown in Figure 3 is not a
mechanical consequence of the sample definition.



                                                            26
less than one. As discussed in Subsection 5.6.1, this imperfect compliance mainly reflects that some

baseline employees at treatment firms leave their firms before giving birth.52

    Having established that treatment firms experience more births in the event year, we next examine

how this affects leave take-up. The OLS estimates in Panel (b) of Figure 3 show that the additional

births cause a significant increase in the total number of parental leave days both in the event year and

in the following year. Most postnatal leaves stretch partly into the calendar year after the birth--giving

rise to the increase in the year after birth. In terms of magnitudes, the OLS estimates are in the order

of 136 and 59 extra days of leave, respectively, for the event year and the following year. However,

because of imperfect compliance, these OLS estimates capture ITT effects and understate the actual

number of leave days that a firm experiences when a current employee gives birth.

    As described in Subsection 5.6.1, we use a set of 2SLS specifications, equations (3) and (4), to

correct for this and obtain LATE estimates. For total leave take-up, these 2SLS results are shown in

the top row of Table 5. Columns (1) and (2) of the table show the estimated absolute effect of one

additional birth, while columns (3) and (4) show the estimated relative effect of having one percent

of the baseline workforce give birth. Because total leave is measured in levels, columns (1) and (2)

are our preferred specifications. When one additional female employee gives birth in the event year,

total leave days at the firm increase by 196 in the event year (column (1)) and 86 in the following year

(column (2)). Adding these up, we thus see that treated (complier) firms in our 2SLS specification are

experiencing an additional employee going on leave and being absent for 282 days or about nine and a

half months in total. This aligns well with aggregate statistics indicating that the average woman in

Denmark takes a little less than ten months of leave in connection with childbirth.53 , 54
   52
      In addition, some imperfect compliance may also result from our basic definition of treatment and control firms. As
our definition of a control firm only requires that is has one female employee who does not give birth around the event
year, some of our control firms will have another female employee who gives birth in the event year.
   53
      This also stresses the fact that women take the majority of parental leave in Danish families; recall that mothers and
fathers together have a total of 46 weeks of postbirth leave. Thus, while women can take less than the maximum amount
of leave (and some do as shown in Figure 2), the magnitude of the effect on parental leave is consistent with women at
the complier firms taking close to the maximum amount of leave.
   54
      Of the firms in our sample, 58.2 percent show up once in our sample, 19.8 percent show up twice, while 22.0 percent
show up three or more times. Instead of including duplicate firms, we could restrict the sample such that each firm is in
the sample only once. However, this sample restriction could lead to endogenous sample selection (i.e., dropping a control
firm in some years because of employees giving birth in other years).




                                                            27
7.1      Labor Adjustment: Extensive Margin

The results in the previous subsection show that when an employee gives birth and goes on leave, the

employing firm loses her labor for an extended period. We now examine whether and how firms' total

labor inputs respond to this loss of labor. We start by examining extensive margin responses. Panel

(a) of Figure 4 shows OLS estimates for the effect on the total employment stock (including workers on

leave). We see no differences in the years prior to the event year. In the event year, however, there is a

significant increase in the number of employees; this increase dissipates in the following time periods.

In terms of magnitudes, the second row of Table 5 presents corresponding 2SLS estimates. Because we

measure firms' employment stocks relative to the baseline, columns (3) and (4) contain our preferred

estimates. When one percent of the baseline workforce goes on leave, firms temporarily increase their

employment stock by 0.63 percent in the event year. Thus, firms adjust quite strongly on the extensive

margin to mitigate the implied loss of labor when an employee goes on leave.

       Next, we examine the nature of this extensive margin adjustment. An increase in the employment

stock can occur in two ways: changes in the number of new hires and/or changes in the retention rates

of existing workers. Panel (b) of Figure 4 shows OLS estimates for new hires. We see that new hires

indeed play a role for the increase in total employment; the number of new hires temporarily increases

in the event year in response to an employee's going on leave. Panel (c) of Figure 4 shows corresponding

results for turnover, defined as the number of employees leaving the firm relative to the previous year.

Focusing on the event year only, we see that turnover drops when an employee goes on leave. This

shows that firms also adjust their employment stock through increased retention of existing workers.

In terms of magnitudes, 2SLS results in Table 5 suggest that the more important adjustment channel

is that of new hires.55

       Looking at hiring and turnover beyond the event year, we see that turnover increases to above the

baseline level one year after the event year, while new hires drop slightly below the baseline level. This

reflects that the increase in the employment stock is temporary and that firms shed the additional

workers when the original employee returns from leave.

       To see how firms' extensive margin adjustment affects the coworkers of someone going on leave, the

remaining panels of Figure 4 turn to our coworker sample. Recall that this sample follows coworkers
  55
    Column (3) of Table 5 shows that when one percent of the workforce goes on leave, new hires increase by 0.022
individuals, while turnover only drops by 0.012 individuals.



                                                       28
who were at the treatment or control firms in the baseline year. Panel (d) shows OLS estimates for

the effect of parental leave on coworkers' likelihood of staying with the baseline firm, while Panel (e)

examines coworkers' unemployment risk. Consistent with the decrease in turnover rates seen previously,

we estimate that an employee going on leave has a positive effect on the likelihood that coworkers will

stay with the baseline firm in the event year and a negative effect on their unemployment risk, although

only the latter effect is statistically significant. The same pattern of estimated effects emerge in the

year after the event year. The temporary hires that are engaged when an employee goes on leave thus

do not replace existing employees in the longer term. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 quantify the

retention effects on coworkers. The 2SLS results here suggest that when one percent of the workforce

goes on leave, coworkers' likelihood of staying with the baseline firm increases by 0.13 percentage points

in the event year, while their share of the event year spent unemployed decreases by 0.02 percentage

points. Both effects are significant in the 2SLS specification.


7.2    Labor Adjustment: Intensive Margin

Aside from hiring temporary workers and reducing turnover of existing employees, firms can compensate

for labor supply losses by making changes at their intensive margin. Specifically, treated firms might

increase work hours for coworkers of women who take parental leave. Panel (a) of Figure 5 presents OLS

estimates for the impact of parental leave on our measure of hours of work in the coworker sample.56

We detect a small but statistically significant increase in the event year, suggesting that when a worker

takes leave, firms increase the coworkers' hours. The 2SLS estimates in Panel B of Table 5 quantify

this effect. When one percent of the workforce goes on leave, existing coworkers' hours increase by 0.10

percent in the event year (column (3)). We note that because our measure of hours does not capture

smaller changes in weekly hours or changes in overtime, this estimate may be a lower bound on the

true increase in hours (see Section 4) .


7.3    Net Effect on Labor Inputs

The previous results show that when an employee goes on leave, firms try to offset the resulting loss

of labor by increasing labor inputs along both the intensive and extensive margins. In Panel (b) of
  56
   Recall the measure of hours does not cover overtime hours for full-time employees. Therefore, any increase in hours
worked at the firm comes from workers going from reduced time to less reduced time (e.g. full-time).



                                                         29
Figure 5, we examine the combined net effect on labor inputs when an employee goes on leave. The

figure does not show any economically or statistically significant change in hours in the year the worker

goes on leave or in the following year. Our 2SLS specifications in Table 5 also show no statistically

significant effects on hours. Point estimates suggest that when one percent of the workforce goes on

leave, total hours decrease by only 0.045 percent in the event year (column (3)) and increase by 0.052

percent in the following year. Our corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals exclude a total drop

in hours exceeding 0.18 percent in the first year. Overall, firms appear to counteract the loss of labor

that occurs when an employee goes on leave very effectively. Indeed, because our measure of hours

may miss measure increases in overtime hours or smaller changes in hours for part time workers, this

slightly negative estimate is likely to be an upper bound on the actual number of lost hours.57

       To assess whether parental leave affects the quality of labor inputs, we examine the effect of parental

leave on the characteristics of the workforce in Appendix H. We find small effects on different measures

of labor quality, which go in opposite directions in the event year: when a worker goes on leave, average

schooling decreases slightly, while average experience increases. There is no evidence of a systematic

negative effect on the quality of labor inputs. If anything, average workforce characteristics seem to

improve slightly following a worker going on parental leave.


7.4       Labor Costs and Earnings

We next examine how an employee going on parental leave affects firms' labor costs. A firm may have

to compensate existing workers for extending their work hours, which can subsequently raise its wage

bill. On the other hand, firms might pay temporary workers lower wages than women on leave, leading

to lower costs.

       We start our analysis by examining firms' total wage bills. As discussed in Sections 3 and 4, this

includes wages paid to workers on leave and thus reflects the costs firms face before being reimbursed

for any paid leave. Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows OLS estimates for the effect of parental leave on firms'

total wage bills. When a worker goes on leave, firms' total wage bills increase significantly in the event

year, but then return to their initial level. Our preferred 2SLS estimate in Table 6 shows that when
  57
     As discussed in Section 4 our hours measure will miss overtime hours for full-time workers and smaller hours adjust-
ments for part time employees. It very accurately captures if employees are not working during some part of the year as
is the case when on parental leave. When looking at the net effects on firms' total hours we will thus capture all of the
lost hours due to parental leave but may miss some extra hours put forth by existing employees to compensate.



                                                           30
one percent of the workforce goes on leave, firms' total wage bills increase by 0.28 percent in the event

year (column (3)).

   Next, we examine the wage bill after excluding paid leave. As discussed in Section 3, Danish firms

are almost fully reimbursed for the costs of paid leave, so the wage bill excluding paid leave should

be a close approximation of the actual costs firms face after receiving reimbursements. Panel (b) of

Figure 6 shows the corresponding OLS estimates. We see a very different pattern here. Instead of an

increase in labor costs, the wage bills excluding paid leave shows no statistically significant change and

the point estimate is actually negative. Based on our preferred 2SLS specification in Table 6, the lower

bound of the 95 percent confidence interval for the impact on the wage bill excluding paid leave is 0.01

percent in the event year when one percent of the workforce goes on leave (column (3)).

   Panel (c) of Figure 6 shifts the focus to the coworker sample and provides OLS estimates on the

effect of leave-taking on coworkers' earnings. Coworker earnings increase significantly in the event

year, and there are some indications that this effect persists over time. In terms of magnitudes, the

corresponding 2SLS estimate in Table 6 shows that coworker earnings increase by 0.14 percent in the

event year when one percent of the baseline workforce goes on leave. This increase mirrors the increase

in coworker hours documented earlier.


7.5      Firm Performance and Coworker Well-Being

Finally, we examine the effect of parental leave take-up on overall firm performance. Even if parental

leave has negligible negative effects on total labor inputs and costs, these labor measures are insufficient

alone for understanding the effects on the firm's production as the observable changes in the labor mix

may have implications for productivity. Panel (a) of Figure 7 plots OLS estimates of the impact of

having a worker on parental leave on firms' output, as measured by total sales. We see no indication that

output is negatively affected by leave take-up. Our preferred 2SLS estimate in column (3) of Table 7 is

actually slightly positive, and the 95 percent confidence interval excludes drops in total sales exceeding

0.17 percent in the event year when one percent of the workforce goes on leave. Unsurprisingly given

our previous results, we also see no indication that leave take-up affects profits (Panel (b) of Figure

7), although we note here that estimates are less precise, likely because our measure of profits is quite

noisy.

   In Panel (c) of Figure 7, we look at the impact of leave on the likelihood of firm survival as proxied

                                                    31
by whether the firm has positive sales. No noticeable effects are apparent. Based on our preferred

2SLS estimates in Table 7, the lower bound of the 95 percent confidence interval of the effect on

the probability of firm survival is -0.05 percentage points in the event year when one percent of the

baseline workforce goes on leave (column (3)). In the year after the event year, this lower bound is

-0.04 percentage points (column (4)). Overall, we find no compelling evidence that worker absence

due to parental leave has detrimental effects on overall firm performance.

       Turning to the overall effect on coworker well-being, the previous results suggest that if anything,

an employee's going on parental leave has positive effects on coworkers' labor market outcomes: their

unemployment risk falls, while their hours and earnings increase. A potential concern here, however, is

that the increases in work hours could reflect some coworkers in fact being overworked when a colleague

goes on leave, which could have negative effects on health and/or welfare. To test for this possibility,

Panel (d) of Figure 7 provides OLS estimates for the effect of leave take-up on coworkers' receipt of

publicly paid sick days.58 We see no evidence that parental leave take-up affects coworkers' sick days.


7.6      Heterogeneity and Mechanisms

The overall results presented above suggest that the effects of parental leave are small because firms are

very effective in adjusting labor inputs to compensate for the worker on leave. However, given existing

evidence that labor markets are characterized by frictions, at least two questions emerge from these

results: How are the observed firm adjustments related to labor market frictions? And are there some

firms that are unable to adjust effectively? As discussed in Section 2, parental leave should not affect

firm costs and profits in a frictionless and competitive labor market. Moreover, this should be true for

all types of firms because all firms will be able to increase coworkers' hours and/or hire replacement

workers at the market wage. If, however, there are labor market frictions--for example, stemming from

firm- or occupation-specific human capital--the effects of parental leave might be heterogeneous with

respect to both worker and firm characteristics.
  58
   Employees on sick leave become eligible for public funds once their sickness lasts longer than two weeks, so this
measure captures longer sicknesses.




                                                        32
7.6.1      Same vs. Different Occupation Coworkers

As mentioned in Section 2, if there are labor market frictions and workers are heterogeneous, the effects

of parental leave on coworkers could be very different for different coworkers, depending on whether

they are substitutes to the worker on leave as opposed to complements. When an employee goes on

leave, we would expect firms in this case to increase wages, hours, and/or retention rates for coworkers

who are substitutes, whereas coworkers who are complements could simultaneously see decreases in

wages, hours, or retention rates. We therefore examine whether the net effects of parental leave for

coworkers mask some heterogeneous effects.

       Following previous work, we expect coworkers in the same occupation to be substitutes, while

coworkers in different occupations to be complements (J¨
                                                       ager & Heining, 2019). In Table 8, we therefore

present 2SLS estimates separately for coworkers in the same 1-digit occupation as the woman on

leave (Panel A) and for coworkers in a different occupation than the woman on leave (Panel B).

Corresponding OLS estimates are presented graphically in Appendix I. In line with the theoretical

predictions, the positive coworker effects in the overall sample are driven entirely by same-occupation

coworkers. Treated same-occupation coworkers increase their work hours and have higher earnings

in the treatment year and the year thereafter. Specifically, when one percent of the workforce is on

leave, same-occupation coworkers raise their work hours at the baseline firm by 0.17 and 0.12 percent

in the event year and in the following year, respectively. This is concurrent with a 0.28 and a 0.21

percent increase in their earnings for those time periods.59 These effect sizes are approximately twice

as large as for the overall sample of coworkers. In contrast, we detect no significant changes in the

work hours or earnings among different-occupation coworkers. Finally, we find no significant effects on

both same-occupation and different-occupation coworkers' well-being as measured by their receipt of

paid sick leave.


7.6.2      Firms with No Coworkers in the Same Occupation

The previous results suggest that the effects of parental leave are limited because firms compensate

for the absent worker along two margins: temporary hiring of new workers and increased hours and
  59
    Although the estimates for the increase in earnings are larger in magnitude than for hours (not statistically signif-
icantly, however), we do not believe that firms compensate increased hours at a higher rate than the base salary. As
discussed in Section 4, our hours measure does not include changes in overtime work, so we expect the estimates for hours
to be attenuated.



                                                           33
retention for existing workers in the same occupation as the woman on leave. To shed light on the role

of these margins of adjustment and to examine firm heterogeneity, we now focus on a subsample of

firms that by definition cannot adjust along the second margin. That is, we examine firms that do not

have any existing coworkers in the same occupation as the woman on leave. We refer to these firms as

no replacement firms.60

       In a labor market without any frictions, we would simply expect no replacement firms to respond

to parental leave more strongly on the hiring margin and fully replace the worker on leave through new

hires. However, this may not be possible if workers on parental leave cannot be seamlessly replaced

by new hires--if, for example, firm-specific human capital is important. Indeed, it is also possible that

no replacement firms are less able to rely on new hires. If a firm only has one worker in a specific

occupation, it might, for example, be more difficult to sort out qualified applicants and to attract a

temporary worker to replace this worker when on leave. Overall, we expect no replacement firms to be

less able to compensate for the worker on leave due to frictions.

       Table 9 presents 2SLS estimates for the subsample of no replacement firms.61 These firms constitute

10 percent of the firms in our main sample and we therefore have limited statistical power when looking

at these firms. Nonetheless, some interesting patterns still emerge from this analysis.

       First, no replacement firms experience fewer leave days than other firms. Over the event year and

the following year, an additional birth leads to only 247 additional leave days at no replacement firms

compared to 282 days for the main sample. This difference of 35 days is statistically significant and

may reflect the fact that workers at no replacement firms internalize that they are harder to replace.62

       Second, despite the fact that no replacement firms experience fewer leave days than the typical firm,

we see that these firms are actually less successful in replacing the lost labor input. For the overall

sample in Tables 5 and 6, we saw no changes in total hours or the wage bill excluding paid leave when

an employee takes leave. For no replacement firms in the event year, however, we estimate negative

effects for both outcomes, which are at least marginally significant in all specifications.63 Based on
  60
     To be precise, we say that a firm connected to some treatment or control event is a no replacement firm if the
corresponding treatment or control woman is the only employee in her 1-digit occupation at the firm in the baseline year.
  61
     To assess whether the effects of parental leave on no replacement firms are statistically significantly different from
the effects at other firms, Appendix Table A4 also presents 2SLS results from regressions on the full sample in which we
interact our main effect (and instrument) with an indicator for whether the firm is a no replacement firm.
  62
     Ginja et al. (2020) uncover similar findings. Because they lack data on occupation, however, their measure of whether
coworkers can replace each other is different and is based on education and field of study.
  63
     In the preferred specification in column (3), the estimated negative effect on total hours is only significant at the
10 percent level (p = 0.06). The estimated effects on hours and the wage bill excluding paid leave in the event year is


                                                            34
the preferred specification in column (3), a no replacement firm where one percent of the workforce

goes on leave experiences a 0.33 percent drop in measured total hours and a 0.45 percent drop in the

total wage bill excluding paid leave in the event year.64 Besides the fact that no replacement firms

cannot compensate for absent workers via same-occupation coworkers, we see some evidence that this

drop in labor inputs also occurs because they are less likely to hire replacement workers than other

firms--although this difference is generally not statistically significant.65

    Finally, turning to our measures of firm performance, we estimate that the loss of labor inputs at

no replacement firms is associated with drops in both firm sales and gross profits and an increase in

shutdown. However, because of the noisy nature of these measures and the significantly smaller sample

size for this subgroup, these estimates are less precise and not statistically significant at standard levels.

However, they are consistent with sizable negative effects.66 For example, the lower bound of the 95

percent confidence interval for the effect on firm sales is a 0.75 percent drop when one percent of the

workforce is on leave in the event year. In contrast, the overall point estimate in Table 7 is positive

with a standard error roughly one-third the size but is also statistically insignificant.

    Despite this limited statistical power, we view the overall results as suggesting that there are indeed

negative effects of parental leave for firms that cannot use same-occupation coworkers to compensate

for the absent worker. This highlights the importance of firm adjustments for our main results. It also

emphasizes that parental leave may have different implications for certain vulnerable firms.


7.6.3     Firm Size

Finally, we examine heterogeneous effects across firms of different sizes. Differences in the behavior of

small and large firms have received much attention in the literature and we might well expect firms of

different sizes to differ in how worker absences affect them. To shed some light on effect heterogeneity
statistically significant at least at the 5 percent level in all other specifications. These estimated effects for no replacement
firms are also statistically significant from the effects on other firms at least at the 10 percent level in all specifications
(see Table A4).
   64
      Although the difference between these two estimated effects is not statistically significant, it might seem surprising
that the total wage bill excluding paid leave drops by more than the total hours. We caution again, however, that the
estimated effect on hours may be attenuated because our measure of total hours misses changes in overtime and smaller
changes in hours for part time workers (see Section 4).
   65
      The estimated effects on both total employees and new hires is smaller for no replacement firms than for the overall
sample but mostly statistically insignificant. In most cases, however, we cannot reject that the estimated effects for no
replacement firms are the same as for other firms (see Table A4).
   66
      In unreported results, we do in fact find that the estimated negative effect on sales for no replacement firms is
statistically significant when sales is measured in absolute changes instead of scaling relative to baseline. As discussed in
footnote 34, however, we view scaling relative to baseline as the preferred approach.


                                                               35
on this dimension, we therefore compare estimated effects for the smallest firms (10 or fewer baseline

employees) and the rest of our analysis sample (firms with 11­30 baseline employees). Appendix Table

A5 summarizes the results of this analysis.67 We see little evidence that the effects of parental leave

differ with firm size. Although there are some indications that smaller firms experience fewer leave

days and hire more new workers, this difference is never significant in the preferred specification.68

For firm performance, the coefficient on the relevant interaction term is insignificant throughout and

exhibits no systematic pattern. To the extent that we can measure it, the effects of parental leave does

not seem to vary systematically with firm size.


7.7    Contrasts with Effects of Parental Leave Extensions

We close the discussion of our results by contrasting them with the results of Gallen (2019) and Ginja

et al. (2020) on the effect of parental leave extensions on firms.

    Gallen (2019) studies a parental leave reform in Denmark passed in late March 2002 but applicable

for women with births in January 2002 and later. For these women already on leave in March 2002,

the reform led to an extension of their leave period from eight to ten months on average. Gallen (2019)

studies how these leave extensions affected the women's coworkers and employers. Ginja et al. (2020)

examines a very similar Swedish policy reform in July 1989. The introduction of this reform was also

retroactive--affecting parents with children born in August 1988 and later. This reform caused women

already on leave to extend their leave duration from twelve to fourteen months on average. Ginja et al.

(2020) analyze how these leave extensions affected the employing firms.

    Both Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020) find that parental leave extensions impose significant

costs on firms and coworkers. For non-manufacturing firms, Ginja et al. (2020) document a two-year

increase labor costs after the extended leave periods ended. For manufacturing firms--the only firms

for which they have revenue data--Ginja et al. (2020) find no effect on labor costs but document a

one-year drop in sales revenue in the year after the conclusion of the extended leave. Gallen (2019) in

turn finds an increase in firm shutdown a year following the end of the extended leave. Furthermore,
  67
     Appendix Table A5 presents 2SLS results from regressions on the full sample in which we interact our main effect
(and instrument) with an indicator for whether the firm has 10 or fewer employees at baseline.
  68
     Because total number of parental leave days is measured in levels, Panel A is the preferred specification for this
outcome. Panel B is the preferred specification for number of employees and the total wage bill because these outcomes
are measured relative to baseline. Note that using a specification with a meaningful scaling is likely to be particularly
important here when making comparisons across firms of different sizes (e.g. hiring and paying one additional person
implies a larger increase relative to baseline if the firm is small).


                                                           36
Gallen (2019) finds a one-year increase in coworker sick days two years after the extended parental

leave finished and a one-year decrease two years thereafter. These findings stand in stark contrast to

our results. For the vast majority of firms, we see no indications of negative effects either during the

parental leave period or after the leave ends. Moreover, the firm adjustments we observe dissipate

completely in the first year after the worker returns from parental leave.

   In interpreting these different sets of findings, it is important to note two key distinctions in our

focus relative to this other work. First, whereas our study estimates the effects of having a worker go

on parental leave, Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020) examines the effects of experiencing longer

leaves among employees who were already eligible for a lengthy leave. This is important because

extensions of parental leave of already long durations have been shown to lead to separation from the

pre-birth employer (Rossin-Slater, 2019). In contrast, the introduction of some amount of parental leave

tends to increase the likelihood that female employees will return to their old employer after giving

birth. Consistent with this, in both Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020), the studied parental leave

extensions made the leave-eligible mothers significantly more likely to separate from their pre-birth

employers. In light of previous studies demonstrating that turnover and permanent employee absences

can be highly disruptive for firms (see, for instance, Bertheau et al. , 2019; J¨
                                                                                ager & Heining, 2019),

this may explain why Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020) find negative effects on firms after the

conclusion of the parental leave period but see no negative effects at the time of the extended leave. In

contrast, women going on parental leave in the Danish context we study are not more likely to leave

their employer than other comparable employees.

   Second, because Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020) study unexpected extensions of already

ongoing leaves, firms in their settings could not plan for the extended absence before the leave period

started. Normally, however, absences due to parental leave differ from most other employee absences

exactly in that they are highly anticipated and give firms more scope for planning and adjusting while

the pregnant employee is still working. This may also contribute to difference in results--in particular,

the fact that we see firms making successful temporary adjustments to their labor inputs already in

the year a parental leave starts.

   Overall, the comparison of our results with the estimated effects of parental leave extensions in

Gallen (2019) and Ginja et al. (2020) highlight two factors that may be key for understanding the

effects of parental leave on firms. First, particular parental leave reforms that affect the turnover rates

                                                    37
of new mothers can have effects on firms that are separate from the actual parental leave. Second,

ensuring that firms are able to anticipate and plan for upcoming leaves in advance may be particularly

important for limiting the detrimental effects of parental leave on firms.



8    Conclusion

Most governments currently offer new parents some form of parental leave. Although a large body of

literature investigates the impact of leave take-up on women's careers and children's well-being, less

is known about firms' responses to these programs. This paper aims to fill this gap in the existing

literature by being the first to estimate how firms and coworkers are affected when an employee gives

birth and goes on leave. We do this using detailed administrative data on firms and workers from

Denmark--a country with generous parental leave benefits. Our main identification strategy relies on

contrasting small firms where a female employee is about to give birth and observationally equivalent

firms with a female employee who does not give birth in the next few years. We then compare the

evolution of a multitude of firm and coworker outcomes subsequent to the birth.

    Our findings indicate that firms hire temporary workers and slightly increase retention of existing

employees in response to leave take-up. Additionally, existing workers see temporary increases in their

hours of work and earnings, as well as reductions in their unemployment risk. On net, we therefore

see no significant effects on firms' total labor inputs. Firms' total wage bills do increase temporarily

in response to the leave; however, this is completely driven by wages paid to workers on leave for

which employers are eventually reimbursed. Overall, we do not find any significant effects of having

an employee on parental leave on firms' output, gross profit, and closure or on existing employees' sick

days.

    These aggregate effects conceal some important heterogeneous responses that are critical for un-

derstanding the possible disproportionate effects of worker absence, however. In particular, for a small

subset of firms that cannot draw on existing same-occupation coworkers to compensate for the person

on leave, we do find indications of negative effects on firms. This confirms the idea that the limited

effects of parental leave overall reflect that most firms are able to very effectively compensate for a

worker on parental leave. It also underscores that parental leave can have substantial negative effects

on certain vulnerable firms.


                                                   38
   Finally, our findings also have implications for understanding the effects of worker absence on

firms more broadly, especially when contrasted with work on other types of worker absences and on

parental leave extensions. Here our findings suggest that two factors are central to determining whether

a worker absence is costly. Specifically, absences appear to be more costly if they eventually lead to

higher turnover but appear less costly if firms can anticipate the absence and plan around it. Exploring

these channels further is an important topic for future work.




                                                  39
References

Abadie, Alberto, Athey, Susan, Imbens, Guido W., & Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2017. When Should You

  Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering? NBER Working Paper, No. 24003.

Acemoglu, Daron, & Hawkins, William B. 2014. Search with Multi-Worker Firms. Theoretical Eco-

  nomics, 9(3), 583­628.

Andersen, Torben M, & Svarer, Michael. 2007. Flexicurity--Labour Market Performance in Denmark.

  CESifo Economic Studies, 53(3), 389­429.

Angelov, Nikolay, Johansson, Per, & Lindahl, Erica. 2016. Parenthood and the Gender Gap in Pay.

  Journal of Labor Economics, 34(3), 545­579.

Angrist, Joshua D. 1998. Estimating the Labor Market Impact of Voluntary Military Service Using

  Social Security Data on Military Applicants. Econometrica, 66(2), 249­288.

Appelbaum, Eileen, & Milkman, Ruth. 2011. Leaves that Pay: Employer and Worker Experiences with

  Paid Family Leave in California. Center for Economic Policy Research Policy Report. Washington

  D.C.

Asphjell, Magne K, Hensvik, Lena, & Nilsson, Peter. 2014. Businesses, Buddies, and Babies: Fertility

  and Social Interactions at Work. Uppsala University, Center for Labor Studies, Working Paper.

Azoulay, Pierre, Graff Zivin, Joshua S, & Wang, Jialan. 2010. Superstar Extinction. The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 125(2), 549­589.

Baker, Michael, & Milligan, Kevin. 2008. How Does Job-Protected Maternity Leave Affect Mothers'

  Employment? Journal of Labor Economics, 26(4), 655­691.

Baker, Michael, & Milligan, Kevin. 2010. Evidence from Maternity Leave Expansions of the Impact of

  Maternal Care on Early Child Development. Journal of Human Resources, 45(1), 1­32.

Bana, Sarah, Bedard, Kelly, Rossin-Slater, Maya, & Stearns, Jenna. 2018. Unequal Use of Social

  Insurance Benefits: The Role of Employers.




                                                40
Bartel, Ann, Rossin-Slater, Maya, Ruhm, Christopher, & Waldfogel, Jane. 2016. Assessing Rhode

  Island's Temporary Caregiver Insurance Act: Insights from a Survey of Employers. U.S. Department

  of Labor, Chief Evaluation Office Policy Report.

Bartel, Ann P, Beaulieu, Nancy D, Phibbs, Ciaran S, & Stone, Patricia W. 2014. Human Capital and

  Productivity in a Team Environment: Evidence from the Healthcare Sector. American Economic

  Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2), 231­59.

Baum, Charles L. 2003. The Effects of Maternity Leave Legislation on Mothers' Labor Supply After

  Childbirth. Southern Economic Journal, 772­799.

Bedard, Kelly, & Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2016. The Economic and Social Impacts of Paid Family Leave in

  California: Report for the California Employment Development Department. California Employment

  Development Department Policy Report.

Bennedsen, Morten, P´
                    erez-Gonz´
                             alez, Francisco, & Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2019. Do CEOs Matter: Evidence

  from CEO Hospitalization Events. Journal of Finance. Forthcoming.

Bertheau, Antoine, Cahuc, Pierre, & J¨
                                     ager, Simon. 2019. Identifying Core Parameters of Labor Market

  Models: Evidence from Unexpected Worker Separations. Working Paper.

Bertrand, Marianne, Goldin, Claudia, & Katz, Lawrence F. 2010. Dynamics of the Gender Gap for

  Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors. American Economic Journal: Applied

  Economics, 2(3), 228­55.

Blau, Francine D, & Kahn, Lawrence M. 2013. Female Labor Supply: Why is the United States Falling

  Behind? American Economic Review, 103(3), 251­56.

Buchmueller, Thomas C, DiNardo, John, & Valletta, Robert G. 2011. The Effect of an Employer

  Health Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for Labor: Evidence from

  Hawaii. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4), 25­51.

Cahuc, Pierre, Marque, Francois, & Wasmer, Etienne. 2008. A Theory of Wages and Labor Demand

  with Intra-Firm Bargaining and Matching Frictions. International Economic Review, 49(3), 943­972.




                                                 41
Card, David, Heining, J¨
                       org, & Kline, Patrick. 2013. Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West

  German Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 967­1015.

Carneiro, Pedro, Løken, Katrine V., & Salvanes, Kjell G. 2015. A Flying Start: Maternity Leave

  Benefits and Long Run Outcomes of Children. Journal of Political Economy, 123(2), 365­412.

Ciliberto, Federico, Miller, Amalia R, Nielsen, Helena Skyt, & Simonsen, Marianne. 2016. Playing the

  Fertility Game at Work: An Equilibrium Model of Peer Effects. International Economic Review,

  57(3), 827­856.

Clemens, Jeffrey, & Cutler, David M. 2014. Who Pays for Public Employee Health Costs? Journal of

  Health Economics, 38, 65­76.

Crump, Richard, Hotz, V. Joseph, Imbens, Guido W., & Mitnik, Oscar A. 2009. Dealing with Limited

  Overlap in Estimation of Average Treatment Effects. Biometrika, 96(1), 187­199.

Dahl, Gordon B., Løken, Katrine V., Mogstad, Magne, & Salvanes, Kari Vea. 2016. What is the Case

  for Paid Maternity Leave? The Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(4), 655­670.

Danzer, Natalia, & Lavy, Victor. 2018. Paid Parental Leave and Children's Schooling Outcomes. The

  Economic Journal, 128(608), 81­117.

Drexler, Alejandro, & Schoar, Antoinette. 2014. Do Relationships Matter? Evidence from Loan Officer

  Turnover. Management Science, 60(11), 2722­2736.

Dustmann, Christian, & Sch¨
                          onberg, Uta. 2012. Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Children's

  Long-Term Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(3), 190­224.

Friedrich, Benjamin U., & Hackmann, Martin B. 2019. The Returns to Nursing: Evidence from a

  Parental Leave Program.

Gallen, Yana. 2019. The effect of parental leave extensions on firms and coworkers.

Ginja, Rita, Karimi, Arizo, & Xiao, Pengpeng. 2020. Family Leave Programs: Employer Responses

  and the Gender Wage Gap.




                                                 42
Gnoth, Christian, Godehardt, D, Godehardt, E, Frank-Herrmann, P, & Freundl, G. 2003. Time to

  Pregnancy: Results of The German Prospective Study and Impact on the Management of Infertility.

  Human Reproduction, 18(9), 1959­1966.

Goldin, Claudia. 2014. A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter. American Economic Review,

  104(4), 1091­1119.

Golding, Heidi L, Gilmore, J Michael, & Goldberg, Matthew S. 2005. The Effects of Reserve Call-Ups

  on Civilian Employers.

Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits. The American Economic

  Review, 622­641.

Gruber, Jonathan, & Kleiner, Samuel A. 2012. Do Strikes Kill? Evidence from New York State.

  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(1), 127­57.

Herrmann, Mariesa A, & Rockoff, Jonah E. 2012. Does Menstruation Explain Gender Gaps in Work

  Absenteeism? Journal of Human Resources, 47(2), 493­508.

Isen, Adam. 2013. Dying to Know: Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Product? Unpublished.

J¨
 ager, Simon, & Heining, J¨
                          org. 2019. How Substitutable Are Workers? Evidence from Worker Deaths.

  Working Paper.

Jaravel, Xavier, Petkova, Neviana, & Bell, Alex. 2018. Team-Specific Capital and Innovation. American

  Economic Review, 108(4), 1034­73.

Kaas, Leo, & Kircher, Philipp. 2015. Efficient Firm Dynamics in a Frictional Labor Market. American

  Economic Review, 105(10), 3030­60.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Landais, Camille, & Søgaard, Jakob Egholt. 2019. Children and Gender

  Inequality: Evidence from Denmark. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(4), 181­

  209.

Kolstad, Jonathan T, & Kowalski, Amanda E. 2016. Mandate-Based Health Reform and the Labor

  Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform. Journal of Health Economics, 47, 81­106.


                                                 43
Krueger, Alan B, & Mas, Alexandre. 2004. Strikes, Scabs, and Tread Separations: Labor Strife and the

  Production of Defective Bridgestone Firestone Tires. Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 253­289.

Lalive, Rafael, & Zweim¨
                       uller, Josef. 2009. How Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and Return to

  Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3),

  1363­1402.

Lequien, Laurent. 2012. The Impact of Parental Leave Duration on Later Wages. Annals of Economics
                           ´
  and Statistics/ANNALES D'ECONOMIE ET DE STATISTIQUE, 267­285.

Lerner, Sharon, & Appelbaum, Eileen. 2014. Business as Usual: New Jersey Employers' Experiences

  with Family Leave Insurance. Center for Economic Policy Research Policy Report. Washington D.C.

Lund, Christian Giødesen, & Vejlin, Rune. 2016. Documenting and Improving the Hourly Wage Mea-

  sure in the Danish IDA Database. Danish Journal of Economics.

Lundborg, Petter, Plug, Erik, & Rasmussen, Astrid W¨
                                                   urtz. 2017. Can Women Have Children and a

  Career? IV Evidence from IVF Treatments. American Economic Review, 107(6), 1611­37.

Mas, Alexandre. 2008. Labour Unrest and the Quality of Production: Evidence from the Construction

  Equipment Resale Market. The Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 229­258.

Mosher, William D, Jones, Jo, & Abma, Joyce C. 2012. Intended and Unintended Births in the United

  States; 1982-2010.

Olivetti, Claudia, & Petrongolo, Barbara. 2017. The Economic Consequences of Family Policies:

  Lessons from a Century of Legislation in High-Income Countries. Journal of Economic Perspec-

  tives, 31(1), 205­30.

Pichler, Stefan, & Ziebarth, Nicolas R. 2018. Labor Market Effects of US Sick Pay Mandates. Journal

  of Human Resources, 0117­8514R2.

Rasmussen, Astrid W¨
                   urtz. 2010. Increasing the Length of Parents' Birth-Related Leave: The Effect

  on Children's Long-Term Educational Outcomes. Labour Economics, 17(1), 91­100.

Rice, William R. 2018. The High Abortion Cost of Human Reproduction. bioRxiv.


                                                 44
Rossin, Maya. 2011. The Effects of Maternity Leave on Children's Birth and Infant Health Outcomes

  in the United States. Journal of Health Economics, 30(2), 221­239.

Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2019. Maternity and Family Leave Policy. In: Averett, S.L., Argys, M., Hoffman,

  S.D. (Eds.), Oxford Handbook on the Economics of Women, New York: Oxford University Press.

  Forthcoming.

Ruhm, Christopher. 1998. The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates: Lessons from

  Europe. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 285­317.

Sch¨
   onberg, Uta, & Ludsteck, Johannes. 2014. Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Mothers'

  Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(3), 469­505.

Song, Jae, Price, David J, Guvenen, Fatih, Bloom, Nicholas, & von Wachter, Till. 2018. Firming Up

  Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1), 1­50.

Stole, Lars A, & Zwiebel, Jeffrey. 1996a. Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts. The

  Review of Economic Studies, 63(3), 375­410.

Stole, Lars A, & Zwiebel, Jeffrey. 1996b. Organizational Design and Technology Choice under Intrafirm

  Bargaining. The American Economic Review, 195­222.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits. The American Economic

  Review, 79(2), 177­183.

Te Velde, Egbert R, Eijkemans, R, & Habbema, HDF. 2000. Variation in Couple Fecundity and Time

  to Pregnancy, An Essential Concept in Human Reproduction. The Lancet, 355(9219), 1928­1929.

The San Diego Union-Tribune, Jennifer Barrera. 2017 (6).        Commentary: Parental leave man-

  date hurts small business. url: https://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/opinion/commentary/

  sd-utbg-parental-leave-small-businesses-20170627-story.html. Accessed: 2019-12-09.




                                                 45
                                       Figure 1: Definition of treatment and control samples

                                                Baseline                                                 Event
                                                 year                                                    year

                                                 t = -2                    t = -1                        t=0                         t=1

Treatment events                             Woman w is                   Woman w                   Woman w                     Woman w
(firm f , woman w)                           with firm f                 has no birth               gives birth                has no birth

   Control events                           Woman w is                    Woman w                    Woman w                    Woman w
(firm f , woman w )                         with firm f                  has no birth               has no birth               has no birth

          Notes: This figure summarizes the construction of the treatment and control samples as explained in Subsection
          5.1.


                     Figure 2: Histogram of the duration of women's prenatal and postnatal leave

                         (a) Prenatal leave                                                               (b) Postnatal leave
                                                                                        28
   16




                                                                                        24
   12




                                                                                        20
Percent




                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                          16
8




                                                                                    12  8
   4




                                                                                        4
   0




                                                                                        0




           0    30      60       90       120       150      180   210   240                    0   60     120       180         240       300   360
                             Length of prenatal leave (days)                                                Length of post-birth leave (days)



          Notes: The histograms illustrate the distributions of the duration of prenatal and postnatal leave, respectively,
          taken among mothers in our estimation sample; it includes both paid and unpaid leave.




                                                                               46
                      Figure 3: Estimates for firms total births and parental leave days, OLS




                                                                           160
      .8




                                                                           120
      .6




                                                                    Leave days at firm
Births at firm




                                                                            80
      .2.4




                                                                  40
      0




                                                                           0




                 -4   -3     -2          -1          0   1   2                           -4    -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                  Time since birth                                                          Time since birth


                           (a) Births at firm                                                 (b) Parental leave days at firm

      Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
      years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, implying
      that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on standard
      errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                             47
                                                            Figure 4: Effects on employment outcomes, OLS




                                                                                                                                      .6
                 8
Employees at firm, pct. of baseline




                                                                                                                                      .4
                                 6




                                                                                                                         New hires at firm
                                                                                                                                     .2
          2          4




                                                                                                                           0          -.2
 0




                                                                                                                                      -.4
                 -2




                                      -4     -3      -2          -1                               0        1         2                                  -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                           (a) Number of employees at firm                                                                                            (b) New hires at firm



                                                                                                                                      .06
                 .8
                 .6




                                                                                                                                                  .04
                                                                                                                         Coworker with baseline firm
                 .4
 Turnover at firm




                                                                                                                                    .02
0      .2




                                                                                                                         0
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                      -.02
                 -.4




                                      -4     -3      -2          -1                               0        1         2                                  -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                                  (c) Turnover at firm                                                                                  (d) Likelihood coworkers with baseline firm
                                                                           .02      .015
                                                               Coworker unemployment
                                                                 .005      .01
                                                                           0




                                                                                           -4         -3       -2          -1                                0        1         2
                                                                                                                    Time since birth


                                                                                                (e) Coworkers' share of year unemployed

               Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
               years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
               implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
               standard errors clustered at the firm level.
                                                                                                                    48
                                                                       Figure 5: Effects on hours of work, OLS
               3




                                                                                                          4
                               2
 Coworker hours, pct of baseline




                                                                                           Hours at firm, pct. of baseline
                                                                                                                        2
                    1




                                                                                                          0
          0




                                                                                            -2
-1             -2




                                                                                                          -4




                                   -4      -3      -2          -1          0    1      2                                     -4   -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                        Time since birth                                                                      Time since birth


                                                (a) Coworker hours                                                                     (b) Hours at firm

                                   Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
                                   years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
                                   implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
                                   standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                           49
                                                  Figure 6: Effects on wage costs and earnings, OLS
             4




                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                          Wage bill ex. leave, pct. of baseline
                           2




                                                                                                                                                         2
 Wage bill, pct. of baseline
             0




                                                                                                                                           0
-2




                                                                                                                            -2
             -4




                                                                                                                                            -4
                               -4   -3      -2          -1                                    0           1           2                                           -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                 Time since birth                                                                                                                        Time since birth


                                         (a) Firms' wage bill                                                                                                     (b) Firms' wage bill (excluding paid leave)
                                                                    3
                                                    Coworker earnings, pct of baseline
                                                     -1       0     -2  1           2




                                                                                         -4       -3          -2          -1                                           0        1        2
                                                                                                                   Time since birth


                                                                                                       (c) Coworkers' earnings

            Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
            years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
            implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
            standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                                                     50
                                  Figure 7: Effect on firms' overall performance and coworkers' sick leave, OLS




                                                                                       1000
           4




                                                                                       500
 Sales, pct of baseline




                                                                               Gross profits
                0




                                                                                    0
-4




                                                                                       -500
                                                                                       -1000
           -8




                          -4      -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                       -4      -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                Time since birth                                                        Time since birth


                                       (a) Firms' total sales                                           (b) Firms' gross profits (1000 DKK)
           .03




                                                                                       .04
           .02




                                                                                             .02
                                                                               Sick days, any
Nonzero sales
 0       .01




                                                                                       0
           -.01
           -.02




                                                                                       -.02




                          -4      -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                       -4      -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                Time since birth                                                        Time since birth


                                 (c) Likelihood of firm survival                                   (d) Likelihood of coworkers taking sick leave

                          Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
                          years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
                          implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
                          standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                               51
         Table 1: Overview of the Danish parental leave system


                              Prebirth                        Postbirth
                            4 weeks total                  46 weeks totalb
                                                     First part         Second part

Legal minimum

Job protection:                   Yes                    Yes                 Yes

Wage replacement:            UI payment             UI payment          UI payment

Typical contract with leave benefitsa

Job protection:                   Yes                    Yes                 Yes

Wage replacement:         Fully paid, firm       Fully paid, firm       UI payment
                            reimbursed             reimbursed

Notes: The table summarizes the minimum parental leave benefits available to
all new mothers as well as the benefits available to new mothers on a typical
employment contract. The table shows available benefits assuming that the father
does not take any of the shared leave (on average fathers only take around three
weeks of the shared leave).
a
  The typical contract refers to the roughly three-quarters of firms that have a
collective bargaining agreement. Mothers under this agreement are paid full wage
during the first fourteen weeks of leave after delivery; fathers are eligible to take
two weeks of leave with similar compensation rules as mothers' leave during this
period (and the vast majority do). In addition, parents under collective bargaining
agreements have five weeks each plus three weeks with full wages that they can
split as they wish.
b
  The first part of post-birth leave refers to the part where mothers are compensated
their full wage (see note (a)). Regardless of being under a collective bargaining
agreement, the parental leave funds reimburse 2 weeks to the mother following
birth, 2 weeks to the father following birth, and 25 weeks to the parents collectively,
which the parents can split as they wish. The parental leave funds top up on the
hourly wage paid by the employer from the UI level up to a maximum hourly wage
in case the employer pays the employee a wage that is higher than the UI level.




                                          52
       Table 2: The baseline observables conditioned on in the empirical analysis



Woman's labor market                       Quintiles of earnings, education group (six groups),
characteristics                            indicator for having at least two years of tenure with
                                           the firm, quintiles of age


Woman's fertility his-                     Total number of children, number of two-year-old
tory                                       children, number of one-year-old children, number of
                                           newborns


Firm size                                  Quintiles of the number of employees, quintiles of
                                           sales


Additional firm charac-                    Quintiles of share of female employees, quintiles of
teristics                                  average number of children per employee

Notes: This table lists the variables on which we do exact matching. For the education grouping, we use the
standard six Danish education groups; we treat missing education information as a separate category.




                                                    53
                                            Table 3: Sample selection


                                                    Treatment events        Control events       Total unique firms

Baseline sample:                                          218,385               1,270,085                79,864

Restricted to active firms:                               216,993               1,260,230                75,024
Restricted to small firms:                                 35,499                226,356                 58,401
Restricted to private firms:                               31,630                203,318                 54,500
Excluding sale and wage bill outliers:                    24,571                 160,516                 45,573
Excluding extreme growth/decline firms:                   23,762                 155,659                 44,180

Applying trimming:                                          9,941                21,982                  16,086
After matching/reweighing:                                  9,941                 9,941                  16,086
Notes: The table illustrates the selection of the final sample of matched treatment and control events. Sample
restricted to active firms: based on sales, hours and total wage bill, the firm must be active in the baseline year.
Specifically, we require that total hours in the baseline year correspond to at least one full time employee and that
the firm either had positive sales or positive wage payments in the year prior to the baseline year. Restricted to
small firms: the stock of employees is between three and 30 in the baseline year, and the total number of employment
relationships is less than 60 in the baseline year. Restricted to private firms: the firm must be in the private sector.
Excluding sale and wage bill outliers: the firm must not be an extreme outlier in terms of sales levels or wage bills ­
firms with outlier sales or wage bills relative to their employment are excluded. Specifically, sales per employee must
be between 10,000 DKK (1,300 EUR or 1,500 USD) and 100 million DKK (thirteen million EUR or fifteen million
USD) and wages per worker must be between 10,000 DKK (1,300 EUR or 1,500 USD) and one million DKK (130,000
EUR or 150,000 USD). Excluding extreme growth/decline firms: the firm must not be an extreme outlier in terms of
growth.




                                                          54
Table 4: Summary statistics of the firm and coworker samples, baseline year


                                                Observations       Mean     Standard
                                                (unweighted)                Deviation
                         Panel A--Firm sample
Births at firm                           31,923                    0.788       1.050
Pregnancies at firm                      31,923                    1.394       1.557
Leave days at firm                       31,923                    137.3       195.6
Number of employees                      31,923                    12.94       7.932
New hires                                31,923                    3.711       3.269
Turnover at firm                         31,923                    3.671       4.053
Wage bill (1000 DKK)                     31,923                    3,369       2,998
Sales (1000 DKK)                         31,923                   18,476      40,077
Purchases (1000 DKK)                     31,923                   12,587      32,892
Gross profits (1000 DKK)                 31,923                   2,520       17,433
Workforce share women                    31,923                    0.647       0.278
Workforce avg. age                       31,923                    33.87       6.435
Workforce avg. years schooling           31,923                    11.61       1.281
Workforce avg. years education           31,923                    12.29       5.327
                          Panel B--Coworker sample
Coworker   still with baseline firm         268,500                1.000      0.0000
Coworker   unemployment (yearly share)      268,500               0.0146      0.0614
Coworker   hours (FTE)                      268,500               0.930       0.135
Coworker   earnings (1000 DKK)              268,500                304.0       187.1
Notes: The table shows summary statistics for the matched firm (Panel A) and coworker
(Panel B) samples only for the baseline year used in the analysis. Means and standard
deviations are computed with weights. The total number of observations displayed is
unweighted.




                                          55
                    Table 5: Effects on labor inputs and employment, 2SLS


                                                                      Absolute effect                Relative effect
                                                                      Effect of one             Effect of one additional
                                                                     additional birth           birth per 100 employees

                                                                  at t = 0       at t = 1        at t = 0        at t = 1
                                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)

A) Firm outcomes

Parental leave days at firm                                       195.6**         86.34**        11.08**         4.889**
                                                                  (4.773)         (4.545)        (0.256)         (0.246)
Number of employees at firm (pct. rel. to baseline)               7.324**          1.170         0.627**          0.131
                                                                  (0.926)         (1.123)        (0.0785)        (0.0937)
New hires at firm                                                 0.350**         -0.146        0.0224**         -0.00371
                                                                  (0.0685)       (0.0766)       (0.00283)       (0.00305)
Turnover at firm                                                  -0.260**       0.362**        -0.0116**       0.0234**
                                                                  (0.0849)       (0.0906)       (0.00331)       (0.00361)
Hours at firm (pct. rel. to baseline)                              -0.283          0.652          -0.0453         0.0524
                                                                  (0.891)         (1.082)        (0.0711)        (0.0856)
F -stat                                                            2,211           2,211           2,312           2,312
Observations                                                       31,923         31,923          31,923          31,923
Observations (weighted)                                            19,882         19,882          19,882          19,882
Clusters (firms)                                                   16,086         16,086          16,086          16,086


B) Coworker outcomes

Coworker with baseline firm                                       0.00943         0.00772        0.00127*       0.000709
                                                                 (0.00632)       (0.00678)      (0.000560)     (0.000589)
Coworker share of year unemployed                                 -0.00249*     -0.00247**      -0.000201*     -0.000254*
                                                                 (0.000861)     (0.000894)      (9.62e-05)     (0.000103)
Coworker hours (pct. rel. to baseline)                            0.859**          0.269         0.103**          0.0356
                                                                  (0.301)         (0.331)        (0.0337)        (0.0360)
F -stat                                                            964.2           968.4           3,028           3,011
Observations                                                      268,500         267,307        268,500         267,307
Observations (weighted)                                           167,653         168,416        166,580         167,653
Clusters (firms)                                                  15,412          15,408         15,412          15,408
Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show 2SLS estimates
from regressions in which the number of births at the firm in the event year is instrumented by the treatment dummy.
Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from similar regressions but in which both the number of births at the firm in the
event year and the treatment dummy is divided by the number of baseline employees (measured in hundreds), and where
dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees are included as controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the
outcome variable is measured in the event year (Time 0). In Columns (2) and (4) the outcome variable is measured in the
following year (Time 1). Panel A uses firm-level data, while Panel B uses coworker-level data. In Panel B, the number
of observations changes between columns because a small number of coworkers drop out of the original administrative
data after the event year. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on the matched and reweighted samples. For each
panel and column, the F-stat from the first stage regression is listed. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.




                                                            56
                         Table 6: Effects on labor costs and earnings, 2SLS



                                                                        Absolute effect                Relative effect
                                                                         Effect of one            Effect of one additional
                                                                        additional birth          birth per 100 employees

                                                                   at t = 0       at t = 1           at t = 0       at t = 1
                                                                      (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)

A) Firm outcomes

Firm's wage bill (pct. rel. to baseline)                           3.519**          1.225           0.276**          0.0903
                                                                   (0.901)         (1.151)          (0.0719)        (0.0894)
Firm's wage bill excl. paid leave (pct. rel. to baseline)            -1.342         0.377            -0.135           0.219
                                                                    (0.925)        (1.159)          (0.0728)        (0.0902)
F -stat                                                              2,211          2,202             2,312           2,312
Observations                                                        31,923         31,923             31,923         31,923
Observations (weighted)                                             19,882         19,882             19,882         19,882
Clusters (firms)                                                    16,086         16,086             16,086         16,086


B) Coworker outcomes

Coworkers' earnings (pct. rel. to baseline)                        1.124**          0.641           0.136**          0.0880
                                                                   (0.388)         (0.449)          (0.0440)        (0.0504)
F -stat                                                              964.2          968.4             3,028           3,011
Observations                                                       268,500         267,307           268,500        267,307
Observations (weighted)                                            168,416         167,653           168,416        167,653
Clusters (firms)                                                   15,412           15,408           15,412         15,408
Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show 2SLS estimates from
regressions in which the number of births at the firm in the event year is instrumented by the treatment dummy. Columns (3)
and (4) show estimates from similar regressions but in which both the number of births at the firm in the event year and the
treatment dummy is divided by the number of baseline employees (measured in hundreds), and where dummy variables for
each possible number of baseline employees are included as controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the outcome variable is measured
in the event year (Time 0). In Columns (2) and (4) the outcome variable is measured in the following year (Time 1). Panel
A uses firm-level data, while Panel B uses coworker-level data. In Panel B, the number of observations changes between
columns because a small number of coworkers drop out of the original administrative data after the event year. Throughout,
the analysis is conducted on the matched and reweighted samples. For each panel and column, the F-stat from the first stage
regression is listed. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.




                                                             57
Table 7: Effects on firms' overall performance and coworkers' sick days, 2SLS


                                                    Absolute effect                Relative effect
                                                    Effect of one            Effect of one additional
                                                   additional birth          birth per 100 employees

                                                 at t = 0      at t = 1       at t = 0         at t = 1
                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)

     A) Firm outcomes

     Firm sales (pct. rel. to baseline)           -0.659         -0.870        0.0270          0.0146
                                                 (1.274)        (1.535)        (0.103)         (0.109)
     Gross profits (1000 DKKs)                    -98.09         -230.0         0.757           -1.500
                                                 (217.7)        (246.7)        (6.076)         (6.781)
     Nonzero sales                               0.00354       0.00668        0.000245        0.000528
                                                (0.00486)     (0.00620)      (0.000374)      (0.000466)
     F -stat                                      2,211          2,211          2,312           2,312
     Observations                                31,923         31,923         31,923          31,923
     Observations (weighted)                     19,882         19,882         19,882          19,882
     Clusters (firms)                            16,086         16,086         16,086          16,086


     B) Coworker outcomes

     Coworkers, any sick days                    0.0572         0.0700         0.0165          0.0265
                                                 (0.204)        (0.215)       (0.0252)        (0.0283)
     F -stat                                      964.2          968.4          3,028           3,011
     Observations                                268,500       267,307        268,500          267,307
     Observations (weighted)                     168,416       167,653        168,416          167,653
     Clusters (firms)                            15,412        15,408         15,412           15,408
     Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1)
     and (2) show 2SLS estimates from regressions in which the number of births at the firm in
     the event year is instrumented by the treatment dummy. Columns (3) and (4) show estimates
     from similar regressions but in which both the number of births at the firm in the event year and
     the treatment dummy is divided by the number of baseline employees (measured in hundreds),
     and where dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees are included as
     controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the outcome variable is measured in the event year (Time
     0). In Columns (2) and (4) the outcome variable is measured in the following year (Time 1).
     Panel A uses firm-level data, while Panel B uses coworker-level data. In Panel B, the number
     of observations changes between columns because a small number of coworkers drop out of the
     original administrative data after the event year. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on
     the matched and reweighted samples. For each panel and column, the F-stat from the first
     stage regression is listed. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. ** p
     <0.01 * p <0.05.




                                                      58
Table 8: Effects on outcomes of coworkers in same and different occupations as women on leave, 2SLS


                                                                         Absolute effect                  Relative effect
                                                                          Effect of one             Effect of one additional
                                                                         additional birth           birth per 100 employees

                                                                      at t = 0        at t = 1        at t = 0        at t = 1
                                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

           A) Same-occupation coworkers

           Coworker with baseline firm                                0.00976         0.00861        0.00141*        0.000777
                                                                     (0.00818)       (0.00854)      (0.000696)      (0.000721)
           Share of year unemployed                                 -0.00334        -0.00324         -0.000247       -0.000269
                                                                     (0.00127)      (0.00132)       (0.000134)      (0.000140)
           Hours at baseline firm (pct. rel. to baseline)             1.611**         1.086*         0.172**           0.116*
                                                                      (0.445)         (0.482)        (0.0469)         (0.0504)
           Earnings (pct. rel. to baseline)                           2.484**         1.900**        0.275**          0.210**
                                                                      (0.563)         (0.639)        (0.0604)         (0.0697)
           Any sick days                                              0.0932           0.138          0.0334           0.0167
                                                                      (0.308)         (0.343)        (0.0356)         (0.0431)
           F -stat                                                     645.1            648.8          1,824           1,810
           Observations                                               121,525         121,007         121,525         119,311
           Observations (weighted)                                    76,153           75,821         76,153          75,821
           Clusters (firms)                                           12,535          12,518          12,535          12,518



           B) Different-occupation coworkers

           Coworker with baseline firm                                0.00941         0.00762         0.00120        0.000770
                                                                     (0.00723)       (0.00789)      (0.000726)      (0.000768)
           Share of year unemployed                                  -0.00142        -0.00222       -0.000185       -0.000287
                                                                     (0.00112)       (0.00118)      (0.000136)      (0.000148)
           Hours at baseline firm (pct. rel. to baseline)              0.298          -0.288          0.0510          -0.0287
                                                                      (0.369)         (0.402)        (0.0455)         (0.0488)
           Earnings (pct. rel. to baseline)                            0.116          -0.264         0.00702          -0.0229
                                                                      (0.487)         (0.578)        (0.0603)         (0.0698)
           Any sick days                                             -0.00596         0.0149         -0.00881          0.0319
                                                                      (0.270)         (0.270)        (0.0353)         (0.0364)
           F -stat                                                     772.6            775.1          2,147           2,120
           Observations                                               145,586         144,920         145,586         144,920
           Observations (weighted)                                    91,391           90,966         91,391          90,966
           Clusters (firms)                                           13,059          13,053          13,059          13,053
           Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show 2SLS
           estimates from regressions in which the number of births at the firm in the event year is instrumented by the
           treatment dummy. Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from similar regressions but in which both the number
           of births at the firm in the event year and the treatment dummy is divided by the number of baseline employees
           (measured in hundreds), and where dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees are included
           as controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the outcome variable is measured in the event year (Time 0). In Columns
           (2) and (4) the outcome variable is measured in the following year (Time 1). Both panels use coworker-level
           data. Panel A shows effects for coworkers who are in the same-(1-digit) occupation as women on leave; while
           Panel B shows the effects for different-occupation coworkers. The number of observations changes between
           columns because a small number of coworkers drop out of the original administrative data after the event year.
           Throughout, the analysis is conducted on the matched and reweighted samples. For each panel and column, the
           F-stat from the first stage regression is listed. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.
           ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.


                                                                    59
                Table 9: Effects on outcomes of no replacement firms, 2SLS


                                                                       Absolute effect              Relative effect
                                                                       Effect of one          Effect of one additional
                                                                      additional birth        birth per 100 employees

                                                                    at t = 0     at t = 1       at t = 0        at t = 1
                                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)

A) Labor inputs

Parental leave days at firm                                          184.8**      62.48**       8.174**         2.763**
                                                                     (12.00)      (11.36)       (0.445)         (0.472)
Number of employees at firm (pct. rel. to baseline)                   2.707        -2.219        0.285          -0.0325
                                                                     (3.527)      (4.115)       (0.195)         (0.223)
New hires at firm                                                     0.123       0.00275       0.0117*         -0.00183
                                                                     (0.176)      (0.190)      (0.00589)       (0.00588)
Turnover at firm                                                    -0.608**       -0.406      -0.0193**        -0.00497
                                                                     (0.213)      (0.224)      (0.00702)       (0.00750)
Hours at firm (pct. rel. to baseline)                                -7.178*       -5.204        -0.332          -0.195
                                                                     (3.309)      (3.899)       (0.175)         (0.202)
B) Labor costs

Firm's wage bill (pct. rel. to baseline)                              -1.532       -3.792       -0.0677          -0.191
                                                                     (3.371)      (4.247)       (0.180)         (0.218)
Firm's wage bill excl. paid leave (pct. rel. to baseline)            -8.379*       -4.806       -0.453*          -0.243
                                                                     (3.456)      (4.247)       (0.181)         (0.218)
C) Overall performance

Firm sales (pct. rel. to baseline)                                    -5.085       -4.148        -0.173          -0.243
                                                                     (5.732)      (6.154)       (0.297)         (0.315)
Gross profits (1000 DKKs)                                             -486.9       -197.1        -8.101          -0.931
                                                                     (493.1)      (421.7)       (9.420)         (9.622)
Nonzero sales                                                       -0.00863     -0.00396      -0.000783       -0.000647
                                                                    (0.0172)     (0.0214)     (0.000925)       (0.00114)
F -stat                                                               306.5        306.5         306.5           306.5
Observations                                                          3,191        3,191         3,191           3,191
Observations (weighted)                                               2,010        2,010         2,010           2,010
Clusters (firms)                                                      2,718        2,718         2,718           2,718

Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show 2SLS estimates
from regressions in which the number of births at the firm in the event year is instrumented by the treatment dummy.
Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from similar regressions but in which both the number of births at the firm in the
event year and the treatment dummy is divided by the number of baseline employees (measured in hundreds), and where
dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees are included as controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the
outcome variable is measured in the event year (Time 0). In Columns (2) and (4) the outcome variable is measured in
the following year (Time 1). All panels use firm-level data, and show effects for firms which do not employ other workers
in the same 1-digit occupation as the woman on leave at baseline. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on the matched
and reweighted samples. For each panel and column, the F-stat from the first stage regression is listed. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.




                                                           60
Appendices

A   Supplementary Tables and Figures

             Figure A1: Industry composition of treatment and control samples




               Agriculture, fishery and mining

              Business and financial services

                                  Construction

                                Manufacturing

                                         Other

                            Personal services

                Retail, hotels and restaurants

           Transport and telecommunication


                                                 0        .1      .2        .3         .4         .5
                                                                 Share in industry

                                                               Treatment                Control



       The figure shows the industrial composition of the matched and reweighted treatment and
       control samples across one-digit industries. Because it contains a very small number of firms,
       the category "Electricity and water supply" has been lumped into the "Other" category for
       reasons of data confidentiality. Industries in the figure are ordered according to the number of
       firms in the treatment group. The differences in industry distribution across the two samples
       are not statistically significant (p = 0.92)




                                                     61
                                                                  Table A1: Maternity and parental leaves across countries


                            Maternity leave                Amount of benefits                     Parental leave                 Amount of benefits                                      Source of
     Country               length (in weeks)              % of previous earnings)               length (in weeks)              (% of previous earnings)                                   funding

     Austria                       16                              100                                 104                             flat rate                                        social insurance
     Canada                   17 (federal)                   55% for 15 weeks                           37                                55                                            social insurance
     Denmark                       18                              100                                  32                                100                                      public funds + employers
     Finland                       18                               70                                  26                                 70                                           social insurance
     France                        16                              100                                 156              flat rate for 26 weeks for first child                          social insurance




62
     Germany                       14                              100                                 156                                 67                                    social insurance + employers
     Italy                         22                               80                                  26                                 30                                           social insurance
     Norway*                                                                                        49 or 59            100% if 49 weeks, 80% if 59 weeks                               social insurance
     Spain                         16                             100                                  156                             unpaid                                           social insurance
     Sweden                        14                              80                                   80            80% for 65 weeks, flat rate for 15 weeks                          social insurance
     Switzerland                   14                      80% up to ceiling                             ­                                  ­                           social security + mandatory private insurance
     United Kingdom                52             90% for 6 weeks; flat rate weeks 7­39                 13                             unpaid                          public funds reimburse employers for up to 92%
     United States                 ­                               ­                               12 (federal)                        unpaid                                                   ­
     Notes: This table shows the duration and amount of cash benefits awarded under statutory maternity and parental leave programs in 2013 across several countries. Maternity
     leave length includes both prebirth and postbirth leaves; *In Norway, fourteen weeks of parental leave are reserved exclusively for mothers and another fourteen weeks for
     fathers. Source: ILO (2014)
Table A2: Summary statistics of the firm and coworker samples, all seven years


                                                  Observations       Mean       Standard
                                                  (unweighted)                  Deviation
                           Panel A - Firm sample
 Births at firm                             31,923                   0.788         1.050
 Pregnancies at firm                        31,923                    1.394        1.557
 Leave days at firm                         31,923                   137.3         195.6
 Employees                                  31,923                   12.94         7.932
 New hires                                  31,923                    3.711        3.269
 Turnover at firm                           31,923                    3.671        4.053
 Wage bill (1000 DKK)                       31,923                   3,369         2,998
 Sales (1000 DKK)                           31,923                   18,476       40,077
 Purchases (1000 DKK)                       31,923                   12,587       32,892
 Gross profits (1000 DKK)                   31,923                   2,520        17,433
 Workforce share women                      31,923                   0.647        0.278
 Workforce avg. age                         31,923                   33.87         6.435
 Workforce avg. years schooling             31,923                    11.61        1.281
 Workforce avg. years experience            31,923                    12.29        5.327

                              Panel B - Coworker sample
 Coworker    still with baseline firm          1,858,924              0.691        0.462
 Coworker    unemployment (yearly share)       1,858,924             0.0264        0.104
 Coworker    hours (FTE)                       1,858,924             0.801         0.320
 Coworker    earnings (1000 DKK)               1,858,924              280.8        217.8
 Notes: The table shows summary statistics for the matched firm (Panel A) and coworker
 (Panel B) samples for all the years used in the analysis (from four years prior to the event
 year and until two years after the event year). Means and standard deviations are computed
 with weights. The total number of observations shown is unweighted.




                                             63
                            Table A3: Covariate balance at baseline


                                      Treatment         Control        Difference       Observations

Births at firm                            0.80              0.78           0.02            31,923
                                         (1.07)           (1.03)          (0.01)
Leave days at firm                       139.35           135.33           4.03            31,923
                                        (197.79)         (193.36)         (2.74)
New hires                                  3.70             3.73          -0.03            31,923
                                         (3.29)           (3.24)          (0.04)
Hours (FTEs)                              10.61            10.59           0.02            31,923
                                         (7.31)           (7.28)          (0.10)
Workforce avg. years schooling           11.62            11.62            0.00            31,923
                                         (1.28)           (1.28)          (0.02)
Workforce avg. age                       33.78             33.84          -0.06            31,923
                                         (6.34)           (6.39)          (0.09)
Workforce avg. experience                 12.24            12.26          -0.02            31,923
                                         (5.25)           (5.30)          (0.07)
Wage bill (1000 DKKs)                   3359.66          3379.13         -19.47            31,923
                                       (2991.40)        (3004.30)        (39.50)
Purchases (1000 DKKs)                  12640.45         12532.66         107.79            31,923
                                      (34511.73)       (31189.09)       (467.58)
Profits (1000 DKKs)                     9175.89          8839.45         335.99            31,923
                                      (28535.46)       (27927.64)       (395.10)
Event year                              2007.09          2007.08          -0.00            31,923
                                         (2.82)           (2.85)          (0.04)
Notes: The table shows means and standard deviations for the firm- and event-specific
variables in the baseline year across the matched and reweighted sample of treatment
and control events. The table also shows the difference in means between the two
samples along with the standard error of this difference computed based on clustering
at the firm level. ** p < 0.01 * p < 0.05.




                                                  64
                                 Table A4: Effects on firm outcomes based on whether women on leave have no replacement, 2SLS

                                                                  Parental          Number of                                         Hours at        Firm's wage         Firm's wage             Firm
                                                                 leave days          employees         New hires      Turnover        firm (pct.       bill (pct.           bill excl.         sales (pct.     Gross profits      Nonzero
                                                                   at firm         at firm (pct.        at firm        at firm          rel. to          rel. to         paid leave (pct         rel. to       (1000 DKKs)         sales
                                                                                 rel. to baseline)                                   to baseline)     to baseline)      rel. to baseline)     to baseline)
                                                                      (1)               (2)                (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)                (7)                 (8)               (9)            (10)

     A) Absolute effect
     at t=0
     Effect of one additional birth                                196.7**            7.819**           0.383**         -0.223*          0.461           4.062**              -0.584              -0.184            -62.75        0.00486
                                                                   (5.109)            (0.952)           (0.0739)       (0.0914)         (0.921)          (0.928)             (0.954)             (1.271)           (231.3)       (0.00506)
     Effect of one additional birth × no replacement                -11.85             -5.113            -0.259          -0.386         -7.639*           -5.594             -7.795*              -4.901            -364.3         -0.0135
                                                                   (13.05)            (3.650)           (0.192)         (0.232)         (3.434)          (3.492)             (3.583)             (5.876)           (528.6)        (0.0179)
     at t=1
     Effect of one additional birth                                88.88**             1.534             -0.162*       0.445**           1.282            1.764               0.934               -0.519            -234.6        0.00784
                                                                   (4.884)            (1.160)           (0.0821)       (0.0974)         (1.122)          (1.189)             (1.198)             (1.568)           (263.9)       (0.00648)
     Effect of one additional birth × no replacement               -26.40*             -3.753            0.165        -0.851***          -6.486           -5.555              -5.740              -3.630            46.03          -0.0118
                                                                   (12.38)            (4.268)           (0.206)        (0.244)          (4.057)          (4.408)             (4.411)             (6.360)           (468.8)        (0.0224)


     B) Relative effect




65
     at t=0
     Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees              11.70**           0.704**           0.0247**      -0.00999**         0.0167           0.349**             -0.0676             0.0690             2.336         0.000477
                                                                   (0.298)           (0.0848)          (0.0032)       (0.00373)        (0.0775)          (0.0780)           (0.0792)             (0.108)           (7.027)       (0.000407)
     Effect of one additional birth
     per 100 employees × no replacement                            -3.525**           -0.419*            -0.0130       -0.00932          -0.349          -0.417*             -0.385*              -0.242            -7.858        -0.00126
                                                                    (0.539)           (0.211)           (0.0067)      (0.00797)         (0.190)          (0.195)             (0196)              (0.316)           (11.66)       (0.00101)
     at t=1
     Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees              5.348**             0.167            -0.00401      0.0296**          0.106             0.151              0.0789              0.0716             -1.878        0.000796
                                                                   (0.281)            (0.103)          (0.00347)      (0.00409)        (0.0943)          (0.0976)           (0.0986)             (0.115)           (7.908)       (0.000509)
     Effect of one additional birth
     per 100 employees ×no replacement                             -2.585**            -0.200           0.00218       -0.0345**          -0.301           -0.342              -0.322              -0.315            1.302         -0.00144
                                                                    (0.551)           (0.244)          (0.00683)      (0.00854)         (0.222)          (0.238)             (0.239)             (0.335)           (12.34)       (0.00125)

     Observations                                                   31,923            31,923             31,923         31,923          31,923            31,923             31,923              31,923            31,923         31,923
     Observations (weighted)                                        19,882            19,882             19,882         19,882          19,882            19,882             19,882              19,882            19,882         19,882
     Clusters (firms)                                               16,082            16,082             16,082         16,082          16,082            16,082             16,082              16,082            16,082         16,082
     Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns refer to different outcome variables. In each regression, the outcome is the change in the relevant outcome between baseline
     and either the event year (t = 0) or the year after (t = 1). In Panel A, the regressors of interest are the number of births at the firm in the event year (Effect of one additional birth) and the interaction between
     the number of births at the firm in the event year and an indicator variable for whether the firm does not employ other workers in the same 1-digit occupation as the woman on leave at baseline (Effect of one
     additional birth X no replacement). In addition, an indicator for does not employ other workers in the same 1-digit occupation as the woman on leave at baseline is included in the regression as a control. The
     regression is estimated by 2SLS using treatment status and its interaction with the indicator variable for whether the firm does not employ other workers in the same 1-digit occupation as the woman on leave at
     baseline as instruments. In Panel B, the regressors of interest are the number of births at the firm in the event year divided by the number of employees at baseline (Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees),
     and the interaction between the number of births in the event year divided by the number of employees at baseline and an indicator variable for whether the firm does not employ other workers in the same 1-digit
     occupation as the woman on leave at baseline (Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees X no replacement). In addition, the indicator variable for whether the firm does not employ other workers in the same
     1-digit occupation as the woman on leave at baseline is included in the regression as a control along with a full set of dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees. The regression is estimated by
     2SLS using treatment status divided by the number of employees at baseline and its interaction with the indicator variable for whether the firm does not employ other workers in the same 1-digit occupation as the
     woman on leave at baseline as instruments. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on the matched and reweighted samples. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.
                                                                              Table A5: Heterogeneous effects by firm size

                                                                   Parental         Number of                                         Hours at        Firm's wage        Firm's wage              Firm
                                                                  leave days         employees         New hires       Turnover       firm (pct.       bill (pct.          bill excl.          sales (pct.     Gross profits       Nonzero
                                                                    at firm        at firm (pct.        at firm         at firm         rel. to          rel. to        paid leave (pct          rel. to       (1000 DKKs)          sales
                                                                                 rel. to baseline)                                   to baseline)     to baseline)     rel. to baseline)      to baseline)
                                                                      (1)                (2)                (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)                 (7)                 (8)               (9)             (10)

     A) Absolute effect
     at t=0
     Effect of one additional birth                                 193.4**            2.938*            0.287*         -0.343*         -0.882            1.029               -1.386             -3.132             -276.1          -0.00480
                                                                    (7.180)            (1.088)           (0.116)        (0.145)        (1.082)           (1.110)             (1.139)            (1.609)            (392.3)         (0.00611)
     Effect of one additional birth × small firm                     2.942            9.361**             0.143          0.185          1.321           5.348**               0.152             5.351*              381.8           0.0182
                                                                    (8.832)           (1.878)            (0.131)        (0.162)        (1.805)          (1.827)              (1.865)            (2.581)            (409.5)         (0.00981)
     at t=1
     Effect of one additional birth                                 82.36**            -0.0442           -0.282*         0.251          -0.370           -0.0825              -0.540             -3.485             -519.5         -0.00405
                                                                    (7.095)            (1.355)           (0.131)        (0.156)        (1.328)           (1.430)             (1.435)            (2.082)            (445.3)         (0.0080)
     Effect of one additional birth × small firm                     7.706              2.630             0.285          0.239          2.220             2.848               2.015              5.678              622.4           0.0234
                                                                    (8.748)            (2.273)           (0.147)        (0.173)        (2.182)           (2.315)             (2.329)            (3.071)            (460.9)         (0.0125)


     B) Relative effect




66
     at t=0
     Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees               30.99**           0.556**           0.0471**       -0.0520*         -0.127            0.214               -0.213             -0.464             -32.86         -0.000957
                                                                    (1.147)           (0.191)           (0.0175)       (0.0216)        (0.190)           (0.194)             (0.199)            (0.305)            (55.20)         (0.00110)
     Effect of one additional birth
     per 100 employees × small firm                                -21.87**            0.0803             -0.0271      0.0444*         0.0903            0.0678              0.0857              0.539              36.92           0.00132
                                                                    (1.171)            (0.208)           (0.0177)      (0.0218)        (0.205)           (0.209)             (0.213)            (0.324)            (55.32)         (0.00117)
     at t=1
     Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees               13.08**            0.0336           -0.0431*        0.0445         -0.0298          0.00883              -0.0739             -0.542             -62.01         -0.000807
                                                                    (1.131)            (0.236)          (0.0194)       (0.0232)        (0.234)          (0.251)              (0.251)            (0.389)            (60.94)         (0.00141)
     Effect of one additional birth
     per 100 employees × small firm                                -8.991**             0.107            0.0433*        -0.0232        0.0904            0.0895               0.105              0.612              66.46           0.00147
                                                                    (1.157)            (0.256)           (0.0196)      (0.0234)        (0.251)           (0.268)             (0.268)            (0.406)            (61.02)         (0.00149)

     Observations                                                   31,923             31,923             31,923        31,923          31,923           31,923              31,923              31,923            31,923           31,923
     Observations (weighted)                                        19,882             19,882             19,882        19,882          19,882           19,882              19,882              19,882            19,882           19,882
     Clusters (firms)                                               16,082             16,082             16,082        16,082          16,082           16,082              16,082              16,082            16,082           16,082
     Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns refer to different outcome variables. In each regression, the outcome is the change in the relevant outcome between baseline
     and either the event year (t = 0) or the year after (t = 1). In Panel A, the regressors of interest are the number of births at the firm in the event year (Effect of one additional birth) and the interaction between the
     number of births at the firm in the event year and an indicator variable for whether the firm had ten or fewer employees in the baseline year (Effect of one additional birth X small firm). In addition, the indicator
     variable for whether the firm had ten or fewer employees is included in the regression as a control. The regression is estimated by 2SLS using treatment status and its interaction with the indicator variable for
     whether the firm had ten or fewer employees in the baseline year as instruments. In Panel B, the regressors of interest are the number of births at the firm in the event year divided by the number of employees at
     baseline (Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees), and the interaction between the number of births in the event year divided by the number of employees at baseline and an indicator variable for whether
     the firm had ten or fewer employees in the baseline year (Effect of one additional birth per 100 employees X small firm). In addition, the indicator variable for whether the firm had ten or fewer employees is
     included in the regression as a control along with a full set of dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees. The regression is estimated by 2SLS using treatment status divided by the number of
     employees at baseline and its interaction with the indicator variable for whether the firm had ten or fewer employees in the baseline year as instruments. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on the matched and
     reweighted samples. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.
B     Comparing Outcomes for Treatment and Control Women

This section compares the evolution of treatment and control women's own outcomes around the time

of the potential birth event using a natural adaptation of our main difference-in-difference specification.

We emphasize that the point of this analysis is to descriptively compare treatment and control women's

behavior around the event year rather than to provide causal estimates of the effect of child birth.

    Let i index the individual woman (the potential mother), f the firm at which the woman is employed

in the baseline year, e the potential birth event, t event time, and yeif t the individual woman's outcome.

Our dynamic difference-in-differences specification for the potential mother is just a natural adaptation

of the firm-level OLS specification (1):


                       yeif t =e +        k 1t=k +        k 1t=k · T reatmente + eif t                 (5)
                                     kT              kT

                              T = {-4, -3, -1, 0, 1, 2}.


Note that we only present the OLS specification, as compliance is complete at the individual level.

    Appendix Figure A2 shows no pre-trends three to four years before the event for any of the outcomes.

This is consistent with previous evidence from Kleven et al. (2019) (see Footnote 43). Meanwhile, in

the year before childbirth, the event year, and the following one year (i.e. in the time up to conception,

during pregnancy, and during parental leave), there are some relevant differences between treatment

and control women. Women who give birth are eleven percentage points more likely to stay with the

baseline firm in the event year than control women (Figure A2(a)); in levels, 61.9 percent of treatment

women and 50.8 percent of control women are still with their baseline firm in the event year. This

difference in the likelihood of being with the baseline firm may to some extent be mechanical, as firms

typically cannot fire a woman who is pregnant or on parental leave. Alternatively, women may well

be less motivated to search for a new employer immediately at the time of childbirth. The result

that treatment women are more likely to stay with their employer, might seem puzzling given existing

evidence that women start to sort into certain types of firms and jobs after the birth of their first

child (see for example (Kleven et al. , 2019)). It merely reflects, however, that most of the sorting is

happening through churn and not through higher separation rates for mothers (see Footnote 39).

    Figure A2(c) and A2(d) show that treatment women experience a large drop in their earnings in


                                                      67
                                                                                   Figure A2: Effect on Potential Mothers
                     .4




                                                                                                                                .2
                                      .35
  Potential mother with baseline firm




                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                           Potential mother hours (FTEs)
                         .25   .3




                                                                                                                             -.2
                   .2




                                                                                                                    -.4
      .1    .15




                                                                                                         -.6
.05                  0




                                                                                                                                -.8
                                               -4         -3       -2          -1          0   1     2                                                     -4        -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                                        Time since birth                                                                                         Time since birth


                                                               (a) With baseline firm                                                                                     (b) Hours (FTE)
                                                                                                                                20
                                          20
Potential mother earnings, pct. of baseline




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                  Potential mother earnings, ex. leave
                                    10




                                                                                                         -160 -140 -120 -100 -80 -60 -40 -20
  -40 -30 -20 -10            0




                                               -4         -3       -2          -1          0   1     2                                                     -4        -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                                        Time since birth                                                                                         Time since birth


                                                    (c) Earnings (incl. leave) rel. to baseline                                                                 (d) Earnings ex. leave (in 1,000 DKK)

                  Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control women from four
                  years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
                  implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
                  standard errors clustered at the firm level. The graphs show the differences in the outcomes of the potential mothers
                  (i.e. treatment and control women).




                                                                                                    68
the year of childbirth and the following year. Two years after childbirth, earnings recover somewhat

and are 20 percent lower than at baseline which is of similar magnitude as found by Kleven et al.

(2019). Finally, Figure A2(b) shows that treatment women tend to work slightly more hours in the

year preceding childbirth and much fewer hours during the event year and the following year due to

parental leave take-up. The difference between treatment and control women seems to almost disappear

two years after childbirth.




                                                69
C       Effects on Coworker Fertility and Leave-Taking

A parallel literature (e.g., Asphjell et al. , 2014; Ciliberto et al. , 2016) shows the existence of workplace

peer effects in the incidence and timing of pregnancy and parental leave. For example, Asphjell et al.

(2014) find that the likelihood that an individual in Swedish firms has a first child increases by 9 percent

13 to 24 months after a coworker's child is born. In our setting, the interpretation of our main results

could potentially change if a woman's leave-taking increases the probability that another worker will

take leave in the following years. Specifically, these within-firm peer effects might capture the effect of

multiple workers going on leave also outside the event year in our estimates.

      To investigate the extent of peer effects in our setting, we examine whether a female employee

giving birth affects her coworkers' pregnancy and leave take-up. Panels (a) and (b) of Appendix Figure

A3 plot OLS estimates of the differences between treated and control firms in coworkers' number of

births and parental leave days, respectively. There is a very small positive effect on the number of

births in the event year, but not in other years. The corresponding 2SLS estimate, reported in column

(1), Panel A of Appendix Table A6, indicates that coworkers have a mere 0.005 additional births in

the event year. In the following year, we find no statistically significant effects, and the upper bound

of the 95 percent confidence interval is a 0.003 increase in the number of coworker childbirths. We

also find no statistically significant impacts on coworkers' parental leave days,69 and our 95 percent

confidence intervals exclude increases that are larger than 1.2 days in both the event year and the

following year (column (1) and (2), Panel A of Appendix Table A6). We further show OLS (Panels

(c) through (f) of Appendix Figure A3) and 2SLS estimates (Panels B and C of Appendix Table A6)

of the treatment effect on these outcomes for coworkers who are respectively in similar occupations

and different occupations than employees on leave. These results are similar to the main estimates.

Moreover, they are not different for same-occupation versus different-occupation workers.

      Taken together, these estimates dampen the concern that coworker peer effects could be driving

our main results.




 69
      The magnitude is consistent with the effect on births.


                                                               70
                            Figure A3: Effects on coworkers' fertility and parental leave days, OLS
       .04




                                                                                    8
       .03




                                                                                              6
                                                                          Coworker leave days
Coworker births
          .02




                                                                                    4
 .01




                                                                                    2
       0




                                                                                    0
       -.01




                  -4       -3        -2          -1          0   1   2                            -4       -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                          Time since birth                                                              Time since birth


                                (a) Births, all coworkers                                              (b) Parental leave days, all coworkers
       .04




                                                                                    8
       .03




                                                                                    6
                                                                          Coworker leave days
Coworker births
          .02




                                                                                     4
 .01




                                                                          2
       0




                                                                                    0
       -.01




                  -4       -3        -2          -1          0   1   2                            -4       -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                          Time since birth                                                              Time since birth


                       (c) Births, same-occupation coworkers                (d) Parental leave days, same-occupation coworkers
       .04




                                                                                    8
       .03




                                                                                    6
                                                                          Coworker leave days
Coworker births
          .02




                                                                                     4
 .01




                                                                          2
       0




                                                                                    0
       -.01




                  -4       -3        -2          -1          0   1   2                            -4       -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                          Time since birth                                                              Time since birth


                   (e) Births, different-occupation coworkers            (f) Parental leave days, different-occupation coworkers

      Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
      years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year; which
      implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
      standard errors clustered at the firm level.
                                                                     71
Table A6: Effects on fertility and leave days of coworkers of women on leave, 2SLS


                                                          Absolute effect                Relative effect
                                                          Effect of one            Effect of one additional
                                                         additional birth          birth per 100 employees

                                                      at t = 0       at t = 1        at t = 0        at t = 1
                                                         (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)

    A) All coworkers

    Number of births                                 0.00497**       0.000019      0.000735**       0.000178
                                                     (0.00179)       (0.00172)     (0.000217)      (0.000206)
    Leave days                                          0.470          0.593          0.0319          0.0779
                                                       (0.323)        (0.311)        (0.0434)        (0.0425)
    F -stat                                             964.2          968.4           3,028          3,015
    Observations                                       268,500        267,307        268,500         267,307
    Observations (weighted)                            168,416        167,653        168,416         167,653
    Clusters (firms)                                   15,412         15,408         15,412          15,408



    B) Same-occupation coworkers

    Number of births                                  0.00629*       0.000229       0.000731*       0.000224
                                                      (0.0028)       (0.00277)      (0.000326)     (0.000308)
    Leave days                                          0.774          0.698          0.0156          0.100
                                                       (0.561)        (0.540)        (0.0696)        (0.0702)
    F -stat                                             645.1          648.8           1,824          1,810
    Observations                                       121,525        121,007        121,525         121,007
    Observations (weighted)                            76,153          75,821        76,153          75,821
    Clusters (firms)                                   12,535         12,518         12,535          12,518



    C) Different-occupation coworkers

    Number of births                                   0.00376      -0.000352       0.000688*       0.000105
                                                      (0.00230)     (0.00214)       (0.000291)     (0.000271)
    Leave days                                          0.190          0.459         -0.0179          0.0438
                                                       (0.350)        (0.337)        (0.0511)        (0.0468)
    F -stat                                             772.6          775.1           2,147          2,137
    Observations                                       145,586        144,920        145,586         144,920
    Observations (weights)                             91,391         90,966          91,391         90,966
    Clusters (firms)                                   13,059         13,053         13,0599         13,053
    Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show
    2SLS estimates from regressions in which the number of births at the firm in the event year is instru-
    mented by the treatment dummy. Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from similar regressions but in
    which both the number of births at the firm in the event year and the treatment dummy is divided by the
    number of baseline employees (measured in hundreds), and where dummy variables for each possible number
    of baseline employees are included as controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the outcome variable is measured in
    the event year (Time 0). In Columns (2) and (4) the outcome variable is measured in the following year
    (Time 1). All panels use coworker-level data. Panel A shows estimates for all coworkers. Panel B limits the
    sample to coworkers who are in the same occupation as the woman on leave, while Panel C shows estimates
    for coworkers in different occupations than the woman on leave. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on
    the matched and reweighted samples. For each panel and column, the F-stat from the first stage regression
    is listed. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.




                                                        72
D     Coworker Analysis, Specifications

This section presents additional details of the specifications used in the coworker analysis. Let c index

individuals in our coworker sample (see Section 5.4). In the baseline year, each coworker c is employed

at some firm f that is part of a potential birth event e. Let t index event time and let yecf t be

some coworker outcome. Our dynamic difference-in-differences specification for coworkers is then just

a natural adaptation of the firm-level OLS specification (1):


                       yecf t =e +        k 1t=k +          k 1t=k · T reatmente + ef t               (6)
                                     kT              kT

                              T = {-4, -3, -1, 0, 1, 2}


Our 2SLS specification for estimating the (absolute) effect of an additional birth on coworkers is a

natural adaptation of specification (3):


                                     yecf =      0   + µ0 BirthsInEventY earef + ecf                  (7)


                   BirthsInEventY earef = 0 + 1 T reatmente + ecf                         (7, First Stage)


Our 2SLS specification for estimating the (relative) effect of one percent of the workforce giving birth

is a natural adaptation of specification (4):

                                                BirthsInEventY earef
                            yecf =    0   + 0                        + ecf                            (8)
                                                BaselineEmployeesef

            BirthsInEventY earef             T reatmente
                                 = 0 + 1                     + ecf                        (8, First Stage)
            BaselineEmployeesef          BaselineEmployeesef

When estimating each of the coworker specifications, we apply the reweighting described in Section

5.6.2. Specifically, each coworker receives the weight associated with his or her event (so coworkers at

treatment firms all receive a weight of one).




                                                       73
E     Estimates Using a Purely Regression-Based Approach

In our main analysis, we use a matching and reweighting procedure to condition on baseline observables.

As is well known, matching and reweighting estimators exhibit an equivalence with linear regression

using control variables modulo some issues regarding heterogeneous treatment effects and the weighting

of different observations (Angrist, 1998). Accordingly, it is possible to implement our empirical strategy

as a standard linear regression if one includes a particular set of control variables. We verify that this

purely regression-based approach yields similar results in this appendix.

    Adopting the same notation as in Section 5.3, we consider the following dynamic difference-in-

differences specification:


                Yef t =e +         k 1t=k +        k 1t=k · T reatmente +           k 1t=k · Xe + ef t                (9)
                              kT              kT                               kT

                        T = {-4, -3, -1, 0, 1, 2}.


This specification is identical to that used in the main text, except for the fact that a vector of event-

specific baseline characteristics, Xe , has been interacted with the event time dummies and added as

controls. Because these added interaction terms will absorb any differences in time trends that are re-

lated to baseline characteristics, estimating the specification above (without any reweighting) represents

an alternative way to condition out baseline observables in our difference-in-differences analysis.

    In order for this type of regression to be equivalent to the reweighting used in our main analysis, we

need to choose the vector of characteristics Xe in a very specific way (see Angrist (1998) for details).

In particular, we partition our sample into a very large number of cells based on all possible values of

all the observables we condition on in our main analysis70 and let Xe consist of an exhaustive set of

dummies indicating which of the cells event e belongs to.

    Appendix Figures A4 to A8 show OLS estimates from this alternative regression-based approach.

We see that they are virtually indistinguishable from the results presented in the main text.



   70
      For an example, assume that we only condition on women's quintile of earnings and education group, along with
firm's quintile of employees. In this case, the first cell would consist of all events in which the woman is in the bottom
quintile of earnings and in the bottom education group, and the firm is in the bottom quintile in terms of employees.
The second cell would consist of all events in which the woman is in the bottom quintile of earnings and in the bottom
education group, while the firm is in the second-to-last quintile in terms of employees, and so on.


                                                           74
                       Figure A4: Effects on births and leave days, regression with controls, OLS




                                                                                160
       .8




                                                                                120
       .6




                                                                      Leave days at firm
Births at firm
        .4




                                                                              80
       .2




                                                                                40
       0




                                                                                0
                  -4    -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                            -4      -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                      Time since birth                                                            Time since birth


                              (a) Births at firm                                                    (b) Parental leave days at firm
       .04




                                                                                8
       .03




                                                                                          6
                                                                      Coworker leave days
Coworker births
          .02




                                                                                4
 .01




                                                                                2
       0




                                                                                0
       -.01




                  -4    -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                            -4      -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                      Time since birth                                                            Time since birth


                             (c) Coworkers' births                                                 (d) Coworkers' parental leave days

      Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
      years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
      implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
      standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                 75
                                           Figure A5: Effects on employment outcomes, regression with controls, OLS




                                                                                                                                     .6
                 8
Employees at firm, pct. of baseline




                                                                                                                                     .4
                                 6




                                                                                                                        New hires at firm
                                                                                                                                    .2
          2          4




                                                                                                                          0          -.2
 0




                                                                                                                                     -.4
                 -2




                                      -4     -3      -2          -1                              0        1         2                                  -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                    Time since birth


                                           (a) Number of employees at firm                                                                                           (b) New hires at firm



                                                                                                                                     .06
                 .8
                 .6




                                                                                                                                                 .04
                                                                                                                        Coworker with baseline firm
                 .4
 Turnover at firm




                                                                                                                                   .02
0      .2




                                                                                                                        0
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                     -.02
                 -.4




                                      -4     -3      -2          -1                              0        1         2                                  -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                    Time since birth


                                                  (c) Turnover at firm                                                                                 (d) Likelihood coworkers with baseline firm
                                                                          .02      .015
                                                               Coworker unemployment
                                                                .005      0.01




                                                                                          -4         -3       -2          -1                                0        1         2
                                                                                                                   Time since birth


                                                                                               (e) Coworkers' share of year unemployed

               Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
               years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
               implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
               standard errors clustered at the firm level.
                                                                                                                   76
                                             Figure A6: Effects on hours of work, regression with controls, OLS
               3




                                                                                                     4
                               2
 Coworker hours, pct of baseline




                                                                                      Hours at firm, pct. of baseline
                                                                                                                   2
                    1




                                                                                                     0
          0




                                                                                       -2
-1             -2




                                                                                                     -4




                                   -4   -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                                      -4   -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                      Time since birth                                                                   Time since birth


                                              (a) Coworker hours                                                                  (b) Hours at firm

             Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
             years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
             implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
             standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                 77
                                        Figure A7: Effects on costs of labor supply adjustments, regression with controls, OLS
                  4




                                                                                                             3
                                                                                             Coworker earnings, pct of baseline
                                                                                                                             2
                           2
 Wage bill, pct. of baseline




                                                                                                                 1
             0




                                                                                                       0
-2




                                                                                              -1
                  -4




                                                                                                             -2
                                        -4      -3      -2          -1          0   1   2                                         -4      -3        -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                             Time since birth                                                                            Time since birth


                                                     (a) Firms' wage bill                                                                      (b) Coworkers' earnings
                                                                                                             .04
                  4
Wage bill ex. leave, pct. of baseline
                               2




                                                                                                           .02
                                                                                             Sick days, any
                 0




                                                                                                             0
  -2




                                                                                                             -.02
                  -4




                                        -4      -3      -2          -1          0   1   2                                         -4      -3        -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                             Time since birth                                                                            Time since birth


                                         (c) Firms' wage bill (excluding paid leave)                                              (d) Likelihood of coworkers taking sick leave

               Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
               years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
               implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
               standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                        78
                               Figure A8: Effect on firms' overall performance, regression with controls, OLS




                                                                                                        1000
           4




                                                                                                        500
 Sales, pct of baseline




                                                                                                  Gross profits
                0




                                                                                                       0
-4




                                                                                                        -500
                                                                                                        -1000
           -8




                          -4      -3       -2          -1               0         1           2                   -4       -3        -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                Time since birth                                                                          Time since birth


                                       (a) Firms' total sales                                                                   (b) Firms' gross profits
                                                         .03
                                                         .02
                                                   Nonzero sales
                                                    0       .01
                                                         -.01
                                                         -.02




                                                                   -4       -3        -2          -1                   0        1         2
                                                                                           Time since birth


                                                                            (c) Likelihood of firm survival

         Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
         years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
         implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
         standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                             79
F       Results Using Coarser Set of Baseline Covariates

As discussed in Section 5.6.2, our main results use a very detailed matching and reweighting procedure

to condition on baseline observables. This detailed procedure gives us confidence that the treatment

and control firms are ex-ante similar to ensure internal validity. As we have seen, however, it also

forces us to trim away some of our sample to guard against non-overlapping support issues. This raises

questions about external validity and whether our sample is representative of smaller firms.

      To examine how the large degree of trimming affects results, we conduct additional analyses in

which we use a coarser matching and reweighting procedure. Specifically, we restrict our set of baseline

observables to: (i) a set of indicators for having any children aged zero, one, two, and three or more

years instead of the number of children in each age group, and (ii) quartiles instead of quintiles for

all continuous variables that we match on (for example, quartiles instead of quintiles of the average

number of children per employee). Using this coarser set of observables results in fewer observations'

being trimmed. Of the initial 23,762 treatment events, 14,289 (60.1 percent) now remain after the

trimming.71 However, the coarser set of baseline observables implies that the treatment and control

groups will be less comparable.

      For all our main outcomes, Appendix Figures A9 to A13 report OLS estimates of the impact of

treatment as a function of distance to the event year, using the coarsened sample. Reassuringly, the

results are similar to those from our main analysis. We note, however, that some of our validity checks

fail when using this alternative coarser approach. Specifically, we see in Appendix Table A7 that leave

days and profits at the firm are no longer balanced across the (weighted) treatment and control samples

in the baseline year. We also see some indications of pre-treatment trends in the figures. In particular,

for leave days and firm total sales, these trends are statistically different from zero.




 71
      Of the initial 155,659 control events, 38,574 remain after trimming when using the coarser set of baseline covariates.


                                                             80
Table A7: Covariate balance table conditioning on coarser set of observables


                                          Treatment         Control         Difference
 Births at firm                                0.84            0.82             0.02
                                             (1.07)          (1.06)           ( 0.01)
 Leave days at firm                          149.77          143.36           6.41**
                                            (201.66)        (199.69)           (2.40)
 New hires                                     3.74            3.79            -0.06
                                             (3.32)          (3.31)            (0.04)
 Hours (FTEs)                                 10.65           10.62             0.03
                                             (7.16)          (7.17)            (0.08)
 Workforce avg. years schooling               11.70          11.68              0.02
                                             (1.34)          (1.33)            (0.02)
 Workforce avg. age                           34.25           34.37            -0.12
                                             (6.29)          (6.43)            (0.07)
 Workforce avg. experience                    12.45           12.53            -0.08
                                             (5.22)          (5.32)            (0.06)
 Wage bill (1000 DKKs)                      3,408.95        3,417.60           -8.65
                                           (2946.04)       (2981.50)          (33.57)
 Purchases (1000 DKKs)                     12,323.86       12,441.00         -117.75
                                          (32426.32)      (31567.84)         (352.27)
 Profits (1000 DKKs)                       11,697.04       10,834.22        862.81**
                                          (32020.01)      (29999.78)         (349.44)
 Event year                                 2007.12         2007.13            -0.00
                                             (2.82)          (2.88)            (0.03)
 Notes: The table shows means and standard deviations for the firm and event-specific
 variables in the baseline year across the coarsened sample of treatment and control
 events. The table also shows the difference in means between the two samples along
 with the standard error of this difference computed based on clustering at the firm level.
 The number of observations is 52,863. ** p < 0.01 * p < 0.05.




                                            81
     Figure A9: Effects on births and leave days, conditioning on coarser set of observables, OLS




                                                                               160
       .8




                                                                               120
       .6




                                                                       Leave days at firm
Births at firm




                                                                               80
        .4




                                                                     40
       .2
       0




                                                                               0
                  -4   -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                             -4      -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                     Time since birth                                                             Time since birth


                             (a) Births at firm                                                     (b) Parental leave days at firm
       .04




                                                                               8
       .03




                                                                                          6
                                                                      Coworker leave days
Coworker births
          .02




                                                                                4
 .01




                                                                     2
       0




                                                                               0
       -.01




                  -4   -3       -2          -1          0   1   2                             -4      -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                     Time since birth                                                             Time since birth


                            (c) Coworkers' births                                                  (d) Coworkers' parental leave days

      Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
      years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
      implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
      standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                82
Figure A10: Effects on employment outcomes, conditioning on coarser set of observables, OLS




                                                                                                                                      .6
                 8
Employees at firm, pct. of baseline




                                                                                                                                      .4
                                 6




                                                                                                                         New hires at firm
                                                                                                                                     .2
          2          4




                                                                                                                           0          -.2
 0




                                                                                                                                      -.4
                 -2




                                      -4     -3      -2          -1                               0        1         2                                  -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                           (a) Number of employees at firm                                                                                            (b) New hires at firm



                                                                                                                                      .06
                 .8
                 .6




                                                                                                                                                  .04
                                                                                                                         Coworker with baseline firm
                 .4
 Turnover at firm




                                                                                                                                    .02
0      .2




                                                                                                                         0
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                      -.02
                 -.4




                                      -4     -3      -2          -1                               0        1         2                                  -4       -3       -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                                  (c) Turnover at firm                                                                                  (d) Likelihood coworkers with baseline firm
                                                                           .02      .015
                                                               Coworker unemployment
                                                                 .005      .01
                                                                           0




                                                                                           -4         -3       -2          -1                                0        1         2
                                                                                                                    Time since birth


                                                                                                (e) Coworkers' share of year unemployed

               Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
               years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
               implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
               standard errors clustered at the firm level.
                                                                                                                    83
                                   Figure A11: Effects on hours of work, conditioning on coarser set of observables, OLS
               3




                                                                                                     4
                               2
 Coworker hours, pct of baseline




                                                                                      Hours at firm, pct. of baseline
                                                                                                                   2
                    1




                                                                                                     0
          0




                                                                                       -2
-1             -2




                                                                                                     -4




                                   -4    -3      -2          -1          0   1   2                                      -4   -3     -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                      Time since birth                                                                   Time since birth


                                              (a) Coworker hours                                                                  (b) Hours at firm

             Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
             years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
             implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
             standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                 84
Figure A12: Effects on costs of labor supply adjustments, conditioning on coarser set of observables,
OLS




                                                                                                                3
                     4




                                                                                                Coworker earnings, pct of baseline
                                                                                                                                2
     Wage bill, pct. of baseline
                             2




                                                                                                                    1
                0




                                                                                                          0
   -2




                                                                                                 -1
                     -4




                                                                                                                -2

                                           -4      -3      -2          -1          0   1   2                                         -4      -3        -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                                Time since birth                                                                            Time since birth


                                                        (a) Firms' wage bill                                                                      (b) Coworkers' earnings
                                                                                                                .04
                     4
   Wage bill ex. leave, pct. of baseline
                                  2




                                                                                                              .02
                                                                                                Sick days, any
                    0




                                                                                                                0
     -2




                                                                                                                -.02
                     -4




                                           -4      -3      -2          -1          0   1   2                                         -4      -3        -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                                Time since birth                                                                            Time since birth


                                            (c) Firms' wage bill (excluding paid leave)                                              (d) Likelihood of coworkers taking sick leave

                  Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
                  years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
                  implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
                  standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                           85
Figure A13: Effect on firms' overall performance, conditioning on coarser set of observables, OLS




                                                                                                      1000
            4




                                                                                                      500
  Sales, pct of baseline




                                                                                                Gross profits
                 0




                                                                                                     0
 -4




                                                                                                      -500
                                                                                                      -1000
            -8




                           -4   -3       -2          -1               0         1           2                   -4       -3        -2          -1          0   1   2
                                              Time since birth                                                                          Time since birth


                                     (a) Firms' total sales                                                                   (b) Firms' gross profits
                                                       .03
                                                       .02
                                                 Nonzero sales
                                                  0       .01
                                                       -.01
                                                       -.02




                                                                 -4       -3        -2          -1                   0        1         2
                                                                                         Time since birth


                                                                          (c) Likelihood of firm survival

          Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
          years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
          implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
          standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                           86
G        Representativeness of Firms in Analysis Sample

In constructing our main analysis sample, we apply a number of sample restrictions. Perhaps most

notably, we restrict our attention to small firms, require that both treatment and control firms have

at least one young female employee at the baseline, and trim observations with extreme weighting

values when applying our matching and reweighting procedure. To understand what types of firms we

cover in our main analysis, this section compares our sample of treatment firms to both the universe of

private sector firms in Denmark and to the subset of those firms that satisfy our firm size restriction.

Appendix Table A8 compares baseline characteristics across the three groups of firms. The appendix

table indicates that our treatment firms experience more births per employee (0.064 as opposed to

0.053 for the universe of small firms) and more leave days (14.34 as opposed to 5.4). Furthermore, the

share of women at our treatment firms is higher than in other samples (at 0.645 versus 0.34). While

all the treated firms naturally have at least one female employee, 27.5 respectively 14.8 percent of all

firms and the size-restricted sample do not employ any women (not reported in the table). Meanwhile,

the number of children per employee is lower in our sample compared to the universe of private sector

firms (1.3 versus 1.7). However, the characteristics of firms in our treatment sample are comparable

to the universe of private and small firms in Denmark. Specifically, work hours and the wage bill

per employee are comparable across the three samples, while sales and purchases per employee in the

treatment sample are only slightly smaller in magnitude relative to the other samples.

       We further compare the 1-digit industry composition of the three groups of firms in Appendix Figure

A14. Compared to the universe of private and small firms, some industries--such as retail, hotels, and

restaurants, as well as personal services--are overrepresented in our treatment sample. This is because

women are more likely to work in these types of industries. Nonetheless, the figures highlight that the

majority of industries are represented in our treatment sample.72




  72
    The only exception is the "electricity and water supply" industry. However, even among the universe of private firms
and small firms, the share of firms belonging to this industry is very small.


                                                          87
 Table A8: Baseline characteristics compared to universe of private and small firms


                                             All Firms      Size Restricted       Treatment Sample

Hours per employee (FTEs)                       0.819              0.815                   0.805
                                               (0.589)            (0.273)                 (0.219)
Wage bill per employee                        263.081            259.880                 242.408
                                             (248.856)          (137.299)               (116.204)
Sales per employee                           1476.184           1326.930                1223.234
                                            (2912.755)         (2752.943)              (1942.579)
Purchases per employee                       1026.216            913.212                 825.708
                                            (2759.786)         (2348.753)              (1687.450)
Births per employee                             0.058              0.053                   0.064
                                               (0.189)            (0.105)                 (0.092)
Leave days per employee                         5.671              5.398                  14.343
                                              (28.347)           (15.627)                (24.223)
Children per employee                           2.052              1.742                   1.306
                                               (3.410)            (1.176)                 (0.819)
Share women                                     0.335              0.344                   0.645
                                               (0.361)            (0.322)                 (0.278)
Employee avg. age                              38.468             37.670                  33.887
                                              (10.278)            (8.224)                 (6.471)
Employee avg. experience (years)               15.149             15.186                  12.296
                                               (8.366)            (7.023)                 (5.351)
Employee avg. schooling (years)                11.424             11.404                  11.604
                                               (1.784)            (1.446)                 (1.290)
Observations                                 1,320,921           668,182                  9,956
Notes: The table shows means and standard deviations for all firm-years for the firm
and event-specific variables in all firms (the column All Firms ) and size restricted firms
(the column Size Restricted ). The last column (Treatment Sample ) shows these statis-
tics for treated firms in the baseline year only, explaining the differences in number of
observations.




                                                   88
                               Figure A14: Industry composition by sample restrictions



  Agriculture, fishery and mining                                                           Agriculture, fishery and mining

 Business and financial services                                                           Business and financial services

                    Construction                                                                               Construction

                  Manufacturing                                                                               Manufacturing

                           Other                                                                                       Other

              Personal services                                                                          Personal services

   Retail, hotels and restaurants                                                            Retail, hotels and restaurants

Transport and telecommunication                                                           Transport and telecommunication


                                    0       10       20        30       40           50                                        0   10   20        30   40   50
                                                          Percent                                                                            Percent


                              (a) All firms                                                                         (b) Size Restricted



                                          Agriculture, fishery and mining

                                         Business and financial services

                                                            Construction

                                                           Manufacturing

                                                                    Other

                                                      Personal services

                                           Retail, hotels and restaurants

                                        Transport and telecommunication


                                                                            0        10        20        30       40       50
                                                                                                    Percent


                                                               (c) Treatment Sample

   Notes: The figure shows the industrial composition across 1-digit industries. Because it contains a very small number
   of firms, the category "Electricity and water supply" has been lumped into the "Other" category for reasons of data
   confidentiality.




                                                                                89
H        Effects on Workforce Characteristics

Our main analysis suggests that total labor inputs are, in net, relatively unaffected when an employee

goes on leave. This result is based on measuring the quantity of labor inputs (hours). In practice, there

could be important losses of productivity if the quality of labor inputs changes. However, as is typical,

we do not have good measures of productivity at the individual level. As the next-best alternative to

characterizing the replacement worker and understanding how the quality of the workforce is affected,

we look for changes in workforce characteristics (Appendix Figure A15 and Appendix Table A9).

       We first find that in the event year, one additional female employee giving birth at the firm lowers

the share of women by one percentage point, indicating that a leave-taking woman is replaced by

temporary worker of either gender.73 We also detect small changes in other characteristics. The

average age of the workforce rises by 0.731 percent in the event year when an additional employee

gives birth. This is concurrent with a 0.237 percent drop in the workforce's average years of education

and an increase of 0.08 years in average experience. These results indicate that temporary workers

are on average older than the women who go on leave, and that older workers typically have more

years of experience but fewer years of schooling. Our findings suggest that the characteristics of the

firm's workforce are not substantially altered when an additional woman gives birth. Taken together,

it is difficult to speculate on the expected effect on productivity as some changes in worker traits are

associated with productivity gains (e.g., experience), whereas some are associated with productivity

losses (e.g., education). Furthermore, given that temporary employees exit the firm after leave-takers

return to their jobs, any changes appear temporary.




  73
     As previously mentioned, when computing workforce shares and averages, we weight each employee by his or her
hours worked at the firm. Accordingly, average workforce characteristics are undefined in years in which firms have zero
work hours. However, there is no differential attrition between treatment and control groups, since leave-taking has no
effect on firm shutdown (i.e., the probability of having zero employees or zero work hours).


                                                          90
                                                                      Figure A15: Effect on workforce characteristics, OLS




                                                                                                                      2
                     .01




                                                                                                                                    1.5
                     .005




                                                                                                      Average age (pct of baseline)
                                                                                                                            1
           0
Share women
   -.005




                                                                                                                   .5
                     -.01




                                                                                                           0
                     -.015




                                                                                                                      -.5
                     -.02




                                                                                                                      -1
                                               -4         -3     -2          -1          0   1   2                                        -4     -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                                      Time since birth                                                                        Time since birth


                                                      (a) Women's share of the workforce                                                       (b) Average age of the workforce
                                                                                                                      .4
                     1
Average years of schooling (pct of baseline)




                                                                                                      Average years of experience
                                 .5




                                                                                                                           .2
                    0




                                                                                                           0
       -.5




                                                                                                                      -.2
                     -1




                                               -4         -3     -2          -1          0   1   2                                        -4     -3      -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                                      Time since birth                                                                        Time since birth


                                                    (c) Workforce average years of schooling                                               (d) Workforce average years of experience

                  Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
                  years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
                  implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
                  standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                                 91
                    Table A9: Effects on workforce characteristics, 2SLS


                                                                   Absolute effect               Relative effect
                                                                   Effect of one           Effect of one additional
                                                                  additional birth         birth per 100 employees

                                                                at t = 0      at t = 1       at t = 0         at t = 1
                                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)

Share women at baseline firm                                   -0.0118        -0.00263     -0.00103         -0.000410
                                                               (0.00214)      (0.0796)     (0.000183)       (0.000211)
Average age (pct. rel. to baseline)                             0.731**        0.707**       0.0547**        0.0525*
                                                                (0.219)        (0.254)       (0.0204)        (0.0236)
Average years of education (pct. rel. to baseline)              -0.237          0.115        -0.0198         0.00714
                                                                (0.111)        (0.131)       (0.0104)        (0.0122)
Average years of experience                                      0.0875        0.157*         0.00362         0.00786
                                                                (0.0493)      (0.0615)       (0.00427)       (0.00521)
F -stat                                                           2,423         2,308          2,693           2,556
Observations                                                     28,274        26,241         28,274           26,241
Observations (weighted)                                          17,666        16,938         17,666           16,398
Clusters (firms)                                                 14,141        13,060         14,141           13,060
Notes: Each column-row represents the coefficient from a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) show 2SLS
estimates from regressions in which the number of births at the firm in the event year is instrumented by the
treatment dummy. Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from similar regressions but in which both the number
of births at the firm in the event year and the treatment dummy is divided by the number of baseline employees
(measured in hundreds), and where dummy variables for each possible number of baseline employees are included
as controls. In Columns (1) and (3) the outcome variable is measured in the event year (Time 0). In Columns (2)
and (4) the outcome variable is measured in the following year (Time 1). Regressions use firm-level data. The
number of observations changes across different columns because some firms may shut down between the event year
and the following year. Throughout, the analysis is conducted on the matched and reweighted samples. For each
panel and column, the F-stat from the first stage regression is listed. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
at the firm level. ** p <0.01 * p <0.05.




                                                          92
I   Effects on Coworkers in Same vs. Different Occupation

To examine whether the effects of parental leave are different for coworkers who are more likely com-

plements or substitutes for the worker on leave, we split our coworker sample by occupation. For each

treatment and control event, we determine the 1-digit occupation of the woman defining the event and

then restrict attention either to coworkers who are in this same occupation or to coworkers who are

not in this same occupation. The expectation is that same-occupation coworkers are likely substitutes

to the worker on leave, while other coworkers are likely to be complements to the worker on leave.

    Appendix Figures A16 and A17 show OLS estimates for the resulting two coworker samples. We

consistently see that the estimated effects for all coworkers found in the main text are driven almost

exclusively by same-occupation coworkers. In contrast, there is very limited evidence of effects for

coworkers not in the same occupation.




                                                 93
             Figure A16: Effects on outcomes of coworkers in same occupations as women on leave, OLS
               .06




                                                                                                                              .02   .015
                         .04
Coworker with baseline firm




                                                                                                              Coworker unemployment
                                                                                                                           .01
           .02




                                                                                                                 .005
0




                                                                                                                              0
               -.02




                                   -4       -3      -2          -1                     0        1         2                                        -4         -3         -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                         Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                   (a) Likelihood of coworker at baseline firm                                                                          (b) Coworker's share of year unemployed
               3




                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                              Coworker earnings, pct of baseline
                               2




                                                                                                                                              2
 Coworker hours, pct of baseline
                    1




                                                                                                                                  1
          0




                                                                                                                        0
-1




                                                                                                               -1
               -2




                                                                                                                              -2




                                   -4       -3      -2          -1                     0        1         2                                        -4         -3         -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                         Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                        (c) Coworkers' hours at baseline firm                                                                                      (d) Coworkers' earnings
                                                                      .04   .02
                                                              Sick days, any
                                                                      0
                                                                      -.02




                                                                                  -4       -3       -2          -1                                        0          1         2
                                                                                                         Time since birth


                                                                                  (e) Likelihood of coworker taking a sick day

             Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
             years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
             implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
             standard errors clustered at the firm level.
                                                                                                         94
Figure A17: Effects on outcomes of coworkers in different occupations than women on leave, OLS
                .06




                                                                                                                               .02   .015
                          .04
 Coworker with baseline firm




                                                                                                               Coworker unemployment
                                                                                                                           .01
            .02




                                                                                                                 .005
 0




                                                                                                                               0
                -.02




                                    -4       -3      -2          -1                     0        1         2                                        -4         -3         -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                    (a) Likelihood of coworker at baseline firm                                                                          (b) Coworker's share of year unemployed
                3




                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                               Coworker earnings, pct of baseline
                                2




                                                                                                                                               2
  Coworker hours, pct of baseline
                     1




                                                                                                                                   1
           0




                                                                                                                         0
 -1




                                                                                                                -1
                -2




                                                                                                                               -2




                                    -4       -3      -2          -1                     0        1         2                                        -4         -3         -2          -1          0   1   2
                                                          Time since birth                                                                                                     Time since birth


                                         (c) Coworkers' hours at baseline firm                                                                                      (d) Coworkers' earnings
                                                                       .04   .02
                                                               Sick days, any
                                                                       0
                                                                       -.02




                                                                                   -4       -3       -2          -1                                        0          1         2
                                                                                                          Time since birth


                                                                                   (e) Likelihood of coworker taking a sick day

              Notes: The dots and solid lines show the estimated difference between the treatment and control firms from four
              years prior to the event year until two years after. The baseline year is two years prior to the event year, which
              implies that the difference is identically zero here. The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval based on
              standard errors clustered at the firm level.
                                                                                                          95
