                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW DOES STATE-LEVEL CARBON PRICING IN THE UNITED STATES AFFECT
                    INDUSTRIAL COMPETITIVENESS?

                                       Brendan J. Casey
                                        Wayne B. Gray
                                          Joshua Linn
                                      Richard Morgenstern

                                      Working Paper 26629
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26629


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The opinions and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the
US Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This research was performed
at a Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number FSRDC1191. All
results using Census data have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. The authors thank the Resources for the Future Carbon Pricing Initiative for supporting
the research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Brendan J. Casey, Wayne B. Gray, Joshua Linn, and Richard Morgenstern. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does State-Level Carbon Pricing in the United States Affect Industrial Competitiveness?
Brendan J. Casey, Wayne B. Gray, Joshua Linn, and Richard Morgenstern
NBER Working Paper No. 26629
January 2020
JEL No. Q4,Q52,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

Pricing carbon emissions from a jurisdiction could harm the competitiveness of local firms,
causing the leakage of emissions and economic activity to other regions. Past research
concentrated on national carbon prices, but the impacts of subnational carbon prices could be
more severe due to the openness of regional economies. Focusing on subnational carbon pricing
in the United States, we specify a flexible model to capture competition between a plant in a state
with carbon pricing and plants in other states or countries. We estimate model parameters using
confidential plant-level data from 1982­2011 and simulate the effects of regional carbon prices
covering the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic (regions that currently cap carbon emissions from the
electric sector) on manufacturing output, employment, and profits. Importantly, we model
industry mix within a state or region, not simply energy price differences. A carbon price of $10
per metric ton reduces employment in the regulated region by 2.7 percent, and raises employment
in nearby states by 0.8 percent; the effects on output and profits are broadly similar. National
employment falls just 0.1 percent, suggesting that domestic plants in other states as opposed to
foreign facilities are the principal winners from state or regional carbon pricing.

Brendan J. Casey                                 Joshua Linn
ICF                                              Resources for the Future
9300 Lee Highway                                 1616 P St NW
Fairfax, VA 22031                                Washington, DC 20036
brendan.casey@icf.com                            linn@rff.org

Wayne B. Gray                                    Richard Morgenstern
Department of Economics                          Resources for the Future
Clark University                                 1616 P Street, NW
950 Main Street Worcester,                       Washington, DC 20036
MA 01610 and NBER                                morgenstern@rff.org
WGRAY@CLARKU.EDU
    1. Introduction
    Increasingly, carbon prices vary across jurisdictions that trade goods with one another. This
phenomenon exists in the United States and the European Union, where most countries
participate in the EU Emissions Trading System. Many individual nations also have policies that
effectively cause carbon prices to differ from prices elsewhere in Europe and international prices.
In the United States, several states are considering adopting a carbon price (either an emissions
tax or cap) or strengthening existing carbon prices. Since 2009, the Northeast has capped carbon
emissions from the electricity sector. And California has capped most state-wide carbon
emissions since 2012. Other states are considering introducing a carbon price for electricity
generation, transportation, and other sectors.2 The abrupt change in US climate policy between
the Obama and Trump administrations has likely contributed to states' growing interest in
pricing carbon as a substitute for federal policy.

    By design, pricing carbon emissions raises energy prices in accordance with the carbon
content of the energy. The economic cost of the resulting price increases has been a contentious
issue for states and regions considering carbon pricing because manufacturing plants located in
jurisdictions with such policies are potentially put at a competitive disadvantage, which could
reduce their output, employment, and profits. Moreover, reduced output in regions with carbon
pricing may be offset by increased output elsewhere, resulting in emissions leakage--a situation
in which net global emissions decline by less than emissions reduction in the carbon pricing
region. Adverse competitiveness effects of a carbon price thus can lead to broader negative
economic and environmental consequences.

    A large body of literature examines the potential for international leakage--in which case a
country (or set of countries) imposes a carbon price, causing emissions to flow to countries
without carbon pricing policies. A central insight of this literature is that the extent of leakage




2
 For example, as of late 2018, Oregon was considering pricing carbon and linking its program with California's,
and many states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast were also considering the expansion of the existing Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) that covers electricity sector emissions.

                                                        2
depends on the degree of competition between firms in countries that impose a carbon price and
those that do not.3

    Given the trend in state-level US climate policy, we examine industrial sector leakage from
states that adopt a carbon price. Applying the conclusions from the leakage literature to state-
level carbon pricing suggests that the geographical shifts in economic activity from state or
regional policies could be greater in magnitude than those from a national carbon price.
Electricity accounts for less than 2 percent of total US manufacturing costs. However, for
aluminum, chemicals, cement, and certain other industries the cost share is considerably
higher--suggesting proportionately larger negative effects of higher electricity prices. Plants also
combust fuels directly and consume electricity and fuels indirectly that are embodied in their
production materials.

    Moreover, states export a large share of their manufacturing output, making state-level
manufacturing output sensitive to competition from other states and countries. In 2012, about 65
percent of manufacturing output (by value) was shipped more than 100 miles and about 65
percent of output was shipped to another state or country. The domestic competitive pressures
faced by manufacturing plants in a particular state suggest that even a modest carbon price
applied to only that state could be costly and lead to a substantial decrease in output and
employment, as well as emissions leakage. In contrast, because a national carbon price would
affect energy prices by similar amounts for all US plants, the effects on competitiveness of US
plants would be relatively smaller as long as domestic competition is stronger than international
competition.

    State policymakers could take steps to reduce these adverse effects on competitiveness for
the manufacturing sector. In particular, states could use tax revenue (or in the case of a cap-and-
trade program, allocate emissions credits rather than auction them) to compensate firms and
reduce the likelihood of employment and output losses and the risk of emissions leakage. For
example, to reduce leakage from its cap-and-trade program, California allocates emissions
credits to certain industries based on their energy intensity and exposure to international


3
 For example, see Fowlie, Reguant, and Ryan (2016); Fischer and Morgenstern (2009); Fischer and Fox (2012);
and Boehringer, Fischer, and Rosendahl (2010).

                                                      3
competition. However, using the tax or auction revenue this way has an opportunity cost because
that revenue could be used for other public purposes, such as infrastructure investments. Clearly,
there are costs to over or undercompensating the manufacturing sector, and policymakers need to
know the magnitude of the adverse competitiveness effects of state or regional carbon prices.

   Despite the importance of these issues in US policy debates, the existing literature provides
little insight into the effects of a state's carbon price on economic activity in the state and
emissions leakage to other regions. The few existing studies focus on national carbon pricing.
Using national-level data, Aldy and Pizer (2015) estimate the effects of energy prices on
manufacturing employment. They use their results to infer the effects of a hypothetical national
carbon price, finding that a carbon tax of $15 per ton would increase net imports by up to 0.8
percent for the most energy intensive industries. Because they use national-level data, their
results reflect competition among US and international manufacturing plants. The effects of a
statewide carbon price depend not only on US and international competition, but also on
competition among states. Although Kahn and Mansur (2013) estimate the effect of electricity
prices on employment by comparing adjacent counties, their analysis does not directly translate
to a statewide carbon price, which would affect energy prices at the state and not the county
level. The general equilibrium literature (e.g., Boehringer, Fischer, and Rosendahl 2010; Fischer
and Fox 2012; and Adkins et al. 2012) lacks the geographic resolution necessary to address this
question.

   Building on our previous work (Gray, Linn, and Morgenstern 2016), we quantify the
competitiveness effects of state-level carbon pricing. Specifically, we estimate the effects of a
state or regional carbon price on manufacturing output, employment, and profits--both for those
plants that face carbon prices and for other domestic plants not subject to carbon pricing. To
accomplish this, we develop a general model linking a manufacturing plant's output,
employment, and profit with the energy prices it faces as well as the prices faced by its
competitors. We estimate the model parameters using confidential plant-level data from a 30-
year panel, and use the model to consider particular examples of carbon pricing in the Northeast




                                                   4
and Mid-Atlantic under the assumption that the carbon price is passed through into energy prices
faced by the plant.4

    More specifically, the model links plant-level outcomes to energy prices, where the outcomes
include employment, output, value added, and operating profits. We decompose the effect of a
regional carbon price on a plant's outcome into two channels: a) the change of the national
average outcome for the corresponding industry; and b) the deviation in the plant's outcome
from that national average outcome. We estimate the first channel using an approach similar to
Aldy and Pizer (2015).

    Estimating the second channel is the primary literature contribution of our empirical analysis.
This empirical component contains several features that make it particularly suitable for the
analysis of state-level carbon pricing. First, and most importantly, we control separately for the
energy prices a plant faces and the energy prices faced by competing plants in other states and
countries. This allows us to show transparently how carbon pricing in one state affects outcomes
in that state and others. Second, we allow the effects of energy prices on output and employment
to vary across industries and in a flexible manner. We partially relax assumptions that many
other studies (e.g., Linn 2008, 2009; and Aldy and Pizer 2015) have imposed on the relationships
between a plant's energy cost share and the elasticity of its output and employment to energy
prices. Third, because some states (e.g., California) price carbon emissions from electricity and
fuels whereas other states (e.g., New York) price carbon only for electricity, the model includes
separate measures of electricity and fuels prices. In contrast, some empirical studies, such as
Aldy and Pizer (2015), aggregate electricity and fuels. Finally, the model accounts for the energy
embedded in materials inputs and also for demand and labor cost shocks. This model extends the
work of Gray, Linn, and Morgenstern (2016) in several ways: including all industries rather than
selected energy-intensive, trade-exposed industries in the analysis; including all fuels rather than
just natural gas; and controlling for indirect energy use. These advances make it possible to
evaluate a wide range of actual or hypothetical state carbon prices.



4
 Ganapati, Shapiro, and Walker (2017) estimate the pass-through of energy prices to marginal costs and output
prices. Our assumption on pass-through regards the pass-through of the carbon price to energy prices, and not output
prices for the manufacturing plants. Fabra and Reguant (2014), among others, provide evidence on full pass-through
of a carbon price to energy prices.

                                                         5
    We use plant-level Census data from 1982­2011 to estimate a short-run (annual) reduced-
form model of energy prices and the economic outcomes of interest (employment, output, value
added, and operating profits). The parameter estimates largely conform to intuition. The effects
of a plant's own energy prices on its output, employment, and profits are generally negative--
reflecting the decrease in competitiveness for a plant that faces higher energy prices, all else
equal. The effects of competing plants' energy prices are typically positive for the same reason,
because an increase in a competitor's energy prices is advantageous to other plants. Energy-
intensive industries are typically more adversely affected by energy prices than other industries.

    The model is quite general and could be applied to consider any state or regional carbon price
in the United States. As an application, we use the model to simulate the effects of carbon prices
in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic. We focus on these regions for two main reasons. First, the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) has capped carbon emissions from the electricity
sector in the Northeast since 2009. New England and much of the Mid-Atlantic currently belong
to RGGI.5 Carbon prices have typically been low, at around $2 per ton of carbon dioxide (CO2),
but recent changes to the program may cause emissions prices to increase substantially in the
coming years.6 Second, several states have considered joining RGGI, and political opposition has
pointed to the potential adverse effects on manufacturing.

    We define two carbon price scenarios, relative to a no-policy baseline. The first scenario
includes a carbon price of $10 per ton of CO2 for the current RGGI states. The second scenario
assumes that Pennsylvania and New Jersey join the program, and we compare this scenario
against the first scenario. We chose these states because they border the RGGI region and have
previously belonged to RGGI or have considered joining; both states have substantial levels of
manufacturing employment. We also consider higher carbon prices and carbon prices that affect
electricity and fuels. The additional scenarios are motivated by the fact that some RGGI states
have considered expanding their carbon price to include fuels used by the manufacturing sector.




5
  More specifically, RGGI includes Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New
York, Rhode Island, and Vermont. New Jersey initially participated but dropped out in 2012.
6
  In 2017, RGGI states adopted an emissions containment reserve. If the emissions price falls below specific target
levels, participating states may withhold allowances from circulation, which would put upward pressure on the
allowance price.

                                                        6
   Given the estimation results, we expect several patterns to emerge in the simulations. First,
the RGGI carbon price on electricity should reduce manufacturing employment, output, and
profits in RGGI states, and increase these outcomes in neighboring states. Second, these effects
should be larger in magnitude for energy-intensive industries than for other industries. Third,
expanding RGGI should reduce employment, output, and profits in the states that join RGGI, and
increase those outcomes in states close to the expanded RGGI region in our analysis.

   Our results confirm these expectations. Specifically, a RGGI carbon price of $10 per ton of
CO2 reduces employment by 2.7 percent in RGGI states. The carbon price has similar effects on
output and profits. A RGGI carbon price increases employment, output, and profits in
neighboring states by 0.8 percent on average, suggesting a substantial shift of economic activity
outside of RGGI. National employment falls by just 0.1 percent, suggesting that most of the
adverse economic effects on the RGGI states occur due to domestic rather than international
competition. Expanding the carbon price to include additional states reduces the employment,
output, and profit losses for the original RGGI states. This suggests that adverse economic
effects and leakage within the United States are highly sensitive to the geographic extent of the
carbon price.


   2. Empirical Strategy
   2.1     Decomposing the Effects of a Regional Carbon Price
   The objective of the empirical model is to characterize the reduced-form relationship
between energy prices and various plant-level outcomes: value of shipments; value added
(defined as the difference between the value of shipments and the sum of energy and materials
costs); employment; and operating profits (defined as the difference between the value of
shipments and the sum of energy, materials, and labor costs).

   As noted in the introduction, Aldy and Pizer (2015) estimate the effects of national average
energy prices on national employment, and they use the results to make inferences on the effects
of a hypothetical national carbon price on national employment. One expects that a national
carbon price would affect employment in a given industry in the same direction across all
regions of the country, although the magnitude of the effect could vary across regions due to
regional differences in energy intensity or other factors. In our context, by contrast, a regional

                                                  7
carbon price would not have such uniform effects. A carbon price in the Northeast, for example,
could reduce employment in the Northeast but increase employment in other regions. The effects
of regional carbon prices are more likely to vary in direction across regions with a greater degree
of competition among plants across regions.

    This possibility suggests decomposing into two terms the effects of a regional carbon price
on the outcomes of plant i in industry j . The first term is the effect of the regional carbon price

on the national average of that outcome for the industry,  y j . This term captures competition

among domestic and foreign plants in the industry. If plants in the industry compete closely with
foreign plants, the national average effect should be negative--but if competition is purely
domestic, the national average effect could be zero.

   The second term in the decomposition is the plant's deviation from the corresponding
national average, yij . This term captures domestic competition. If the region imposes a carbon

price, the deviation should be negative, as the carbon price causes plants in the region to be less
competitive compared to other domestic plants. If the region does not impose a carbon price, the
deviation should be positive because the plants in the region are more competitive compared to
plants in the regulated region.

   Aldy and Pizer (2015) estimate the first term in this decomposition. Identifying the second
term is the main focus of our empirical analysis, as discussed below.

   2.2     Estimating Deviations from National Average Effects
   This subsection describes the short-run econometric model that links a manufacturing plant's
economic activity to the energy prices it faces and the energy prices of its competitors. The
effects of energy prices on an individual manufacturing plant depend on where the plant is
located. For example, suppose Massachusetts adopts a carbon price that raises energy prices, and
that no other states adopt a carbon price. In that case, the energy costs of plants located in
Massachusetts increase relative to competing plants elsewhere. In contrast, for a plant located
outside the Bay State, the energy prices it faces do not change, while the prices paid by its
competitors increase. The increase in energy prices in Massachusetts, therefore, can create a
competitive advantage for plants located outside the state.


                                                  8
       For either a plant in Massachusetts or a plant outside the state, we can express output,
employment, value added, or profits ( y ) as a function of the energy prices faced by either plant
and the energy prices of its competitors:

ln() = 1 s  ln() + 2   ln( )                                                                      (1)

where s is the cost share of energy, p is the energy price the plant faces, and  is the energy
price faced by plants in other states. The energy cost share is multiplied by the energy price
because a given energy price increase should have a greater effect on the outcomes for energy-
intensive industries than for other industries. We expect 1 to be negative because a plant facing
higher costs should produce less output and have lower profits, and these negative effects should
increase in magnitude with the cost share. In principle, if energy and labor are strong enough
substitutes, the coefficient could be positive for employment.

       In the case where output is on the left-hand side of Equation (1), this particular functional
form (in which we interact the cost shares with the energy prices) represents a generalization of a
Cobb-Douglas production function. If the plant has a Cobb-Douglas production function, the
output would be directly proportional to the interaction of the cost share with the price, and 1
would equal ­1.

       The parameter  2 should be positive because an increase in the energy prices of competing

plants makes the plant more competitive relative to those plants. For example, a Massachusetts
energy price increase would increase the competitiveness of plants outside the state that compete
with Massachusetts plants, causing their y to increase. Note that we could express the outcome
variable as a function of the price of energy faced by the Massachusetts plant relative to the price
of energy in other states (i.e., p / ), which would be equivalent to setting 1    2 in Equation

(1).

       To arrive at the estimating equation, we relax a number of assumptions embedded in
Equation (1). First, Equation (1) includes aggregate energy prices but the specific policies we
consider affect electricity and natural gas prices in different ways. Consequently, we distinguish



                                                     9
between the consumption of electricity and the consumption of fuels, which primarily include
natural gas and petroleum products for the manufacturing industries studied here.

   Second, Equation (1) includes the assumption that energy prices affect economic activity in
proportion to the cost share of energy. Aldy and Pizer (2015) and others in the literature make a
similar assumption, but given the available data we can partly relax this assumption. We define
eight industry groups based on their energy cost shares and we allow the coefficient on their cost
shares to vary across groups. For industries belonging to the same group, energy prices affect
economic activity in proportion to the energy cost shares, but we do not assume any
proportionality across groups. This approach allows the data to determine whether energy prices
have larger effects for high-consuming groups than for other groups, and allows for non-
loglinear relationships among energy prices and outcomes.

   Third, we account for indirect energy use. In the short run, with the capital stock fixed, plants
select inputs of energy, labor, and materials. Linn (2009) shows that energy prices can affect
economic activity directly, by raising the energy costs faced by a plant, as well as indirectly, by
affecting the prices of materials inputs. Ganapati, Shapiro, and Walker (2017) show that energy
prices affect marginal costs and output prices for certain industries, providing further evidence
that energy prices can affect a plant indirectly via intermediate materials prices. Consistent with
these studies, we assume that the indirect effect depends on the energy intensity of the inputs a
plant uses. For example, an increase in crude oil prices causes prices of petroleum products to
increase, which affects production costs more for plants that use petroleum products than for
those that do not. As described below, we use input-output relationships between industries to
compute the average electricity and fuels cost shares of the materials each plant consumes. We
interact the electricity and fuels cost share variables with their corresponding prices.

   Fourth, we control for the plant's labor costs. We allow the coefficient on labor costs to differ
across the energy cost share groups. Further, we recognize that energy prices may be correlated
with product demand. Energy price increases often accompany or precede macroeconomic
downturns, which would bias estimates of the effects of energy prices on economic activity. We
control flexibly for national industry-level demand shocks by including interactions of industry-
and year-fixed effects. We take two approaches to control for subnational demand shocks. Using


                                                 10
an approach that builds on Ellison and Glaeser (1999), we control for product demand of an
individual plant based on input-output relationships between industries as well as a plant's
proximity to demanding industries. In addition, we include interactions of fixed effects for
Census region and year to allow for regional demand shocks. These interactions control for
regional changes in input costs, regional product demand shocks, as well as international supply
and demand shocks that affect each industry proportionately. The next section describes the
construction of these variables in detail.

After making these modifications to Equation (1), we arrive at the estimating equation:

                                                                   
ln( ) = 0 + 1  ln(  ) + 2  ln(,  ) + 1  ln( ) + 2  ln(, ) + 1  ln(  )
                                                                  
           + 2  ln(, ) + 1  ln( ) + 2  ln(, ) +  1 ln( ) + 2 ln(, )
                            
           + 1 ln( ) + 2 ln(, ) +1  + 2  +  +   + 
                                                                                                    (2)

where the dependent variable is employment, output, value added, or gross operating profits by
plant i in industry j and year t. Equation (2) includes interactions of the log of the plant's
                   
electricity price ( ) with the industry's electricity cost share ( ), as well as the interaction of
                                                      
the log of the electricity price of competing plants (, ) with the cost share. The equation
includes corresponding terms for fuel prices, where the superscript F indicates a fuels price index
rather than electricity (E). The second line in the equation includes the interactions of the energy
                                                          
price variables with the indirect energy use shares ( and  ). The variables are average
electricity or fuels cost shares of the industry's materials. The equation includes the principal
effects of electricity and fuels prices, with these effects being absorbed by the corresponding
industry-year interactions ( ). The variables  and  indicate labor costs
and demand growth;  are region­year interactions; and  is an error term. The next
subsection describes the definitions of the competing energy prices, as well as the construction of
the measures for indirect energy use, labor costs, and demand growth.

   We estimate Equation (2) separately for each energy cost share group, omitting group
subscripts in the equation to simplify the notation. Because we perform a separate estimation for
each group, we allow for cross-group heterogeneity in the effects on economic activity of
electricity prices, fuels prices, indirect energy use, labor costs, and demand growth.

                                                  11
   The industry-year interactions play an important role in the identification and interpretation
of the coefficients on the variables that include energy prices. These interactions control for the
effects of energy prices on the average of the outcome for each industry and year. Consequently,
the coefficients are identified by deviations from industry-year means of energy prices interacted
with cost shares. For this reason, the coefficients capture precisely the second term in the
decomposition introduced in the previous subsection--that is, the deviations from the national
averages of the effects of energy prices on a plant's outcomes.

   Based on the intuition from Equation (1), within a cost share group, we expect that a plant's
electricity and fuels prices negatively affect the outcomes, and that the negative effects are larger
in magnitude for plants with higher cost shares--that is, the interaction terms for the plant's
energy prices are negative. Likewise, we expect positive coefficients for the interaction terms
involving energy prices of competing plants. We expect the signs on the indirect energy use
interactions to be the same as the signs of the corresponding direct energy use interactions.

   2.3     Estimating National Average Effects
Equation (2) identifies a plant's deviations from national industry average effects of energy
prices. To estimate the total effect of a carbon price, we therefore need to estimate the effects of
energy prices on national averages of the four outcomes. To accomplish this, we take an
approach similar to that of Aldy and Pizer (2015) and estimate an industry-level regression


                   )          )
ln( ) = 0 + 1  ln(   + 1  ln(   +1  + 2  +  +   +  (3)



where the dependent variable is employment, output, value added, or gross operating profits by
industry j and year t. The equation includes the interaction of the industry's electricity or fuels
cost share with the log of the average price of electricity or fuels in year t. Because there is less
price variation in the aggregate than in the plant-level data, we add the direct and indirect cost
shares in Equation (2) to create a combined cost share, c, in Equation (3). The variables for labor
costs and demand growth are defined similarly to Equation (2), except that they are aggregated
across plants. The equation includes year and industry fixed effects, and an error term.



                                                  12
    The coefficients on the cost share­energy price interactions are the key coefficients of
interest. They are identified by time series variation in energy prices interacting with cross-
industry variation in cost shares. For example, if the price of electricity increases between one
year and the next, the interaction coefficient is identified by cross-industry variation in the
response of the dependent variable to the price increase. One expects an electricity price increase
to have a larger negative effect for industries that consume more electricity than others (either
directly or indirectly via intermediate materials), in which case the interaction coefficient is
negative. Note that the equation omits the main effects of the cost shares and energy prices
because they are absorbed by the industry and year fixed effects. The year fixed effects control
for average energy prices in other countries and any other global demand or supply shocks that
affect all industries proportionately. Therefore, the energy price coefficient captures the effects
of domestic energy prices, holding international prices fixed. This is an important aspect of the
estimation because the simulations implicitly hold international prices fixed. The labor cost and
demand growth variables account for supply and demand shocks that vary across industries.

    Although Equation (3) is broadly similar to Aldy and Pizer (2015), there are a few important
differences. First, and most importantly, we estimate separate effects for electricity and fuels
prices. This is consistent with Equation (2), and enables us to simulate carbon prices that affect
electricity prices only, as well as carbon prices that affect both electricity and fuels prices.
Second, we include only industry and year fixed effects rather than interactions of year fixed
effects with aggregated industry fixed effects. Including only the year fixed effects rather than
additional controls is for consistency with the simulations discussed below. Third, we use
aggregate energy prices rather than industry-specific energy prices to reduce concerns about
endogeneity. Fourth, we account for both direct and indirect energy use, which is consistent with
the empirical analysis cited above as well as the plant-level estimation in Equation (2), and
allows for the possibility of indirect effects of energy prices acting through intermediate
materials prices. Finally, we omit controls for oil prices, physical capital, and human capital.
These choices are motivated primarily by parsimony to focus on the key coefficients of interest.
In practice, these differences do not appear to substantially affect the results; we obtain similar
estimates to those reported in Section 4 if we use a specification more similar to Aldy and Pizer
(2015).


                                                  13
      3. Data and Summary Statistics
      Our analysis is based on confidential plant-level data collected by the Census Bureau in the
Census of Manufactures (CMF) and the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM), which provide
data on output, revenue, employment, and expenditures. The CMF is conducted every five years
and includes data from all manufacturing plants; we use all years of the CMF from 1982­2007.
The ASM samples small plants and includes all large plants; we use the ASM data from 1983­
2011. The ASM and CMF records are linked together over time in the Longitudinal Business
Database, as described in Jarmin and Miranda (2002). Our final dataset includes about 2.5
million plant-year observations, covering all manufacturing industries except those that shifted in
or out of the manufacturing sector during the 1997 switch from the Standard Industry
Classification (SIC) to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) industry
definitions.

      Four measures of economic activity in the ASM/CMF data provide the dependent variables
for our analysis: employment, output, value added, and profits. Employment is measured as the
plant's total employment including both production and nonproduction workers. Output is
measured as the plant's total value of shipments. Value added is measured in the ASM/CMF by
taking the value of shipments and subtracting the combined costs of materials, supplies,
containers, fuels, purchased electricity, and contract work, adjusting for inventory changes.7
Profit is measured by gross operating profits, obtained by subtracting labor costs from value
added. Output, value added, and profits are all deflated by the industry's price deflator for
shipments from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database.8

      Our key explanatory variables are related to energy costs. The ASM/CMF data provide
annual plant-level expenditures separately for electricity and fuels and also provide the quantity
of electricity purchased. We calculate average (rather than marginal) plant-level electricity prices
as the ratio of electricity expenditure to the quantity of purchased electricity. Using the 1992
CMF, we calculate the average share of electricity or fuels in the value of shipments by industry.
Under the standard assumption that plants earn zero economic profits in the long run, these
shares equal the corresponding cost shares.


7
    https://www.census.gov/glossary/#term_Valueadded.
8
    https://www.nber.org/data/nberces.html.
                                                  14
       Because the ASM/CMF data do not include quantities of purchased fuels throughout the
sample, we use state-level industrial prices for five fuels (coal, natural gas, distillate fuel oil,
residual fuel oil, and liquefied natural gas) from the US Energy Information Administration. The
computed fuels price varies by industry, state, and year and equals the weighted average price
across the five fuels using expenditure shares as weights from the 1981 ASM.

       We use geocoded Census data from the Longitudinal Business Database to approximate
cross-state competition among plants. First, we randomly select 10,000 ASM/CMF plant
observations from each state. If at least 1,000 of the businesses in one state are located within
500 miles of 1,000 businesses in another state, those two states are deemed to be neighbors. We
calculate neighbor electricity and fuels prices for each plant in our sample as the average of the
electricity and fuels prices across all plants in the same industry in neighboring states. These
neighbor prices vary by industry, state, and year, and they account for geographic concentration
of plants within a state.

         The labor cost index is computed from the labor cost for plants in the same industry and
state, as well as plants in the same industry in neighboring states. The index is the total payroll
for all such plants divided by their total employment, using the 500-mile definition to define the
set of neighboring plants and excluding the plant's own payroll and employment.

        The demand growth index varies by plant and year and is based on downstream economic
activity and shipping patterns. First, input-output (IO) tables from the US Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) identify for every "making" industry how much of its output is purchased by
each "using" industry. We use both the 19929 (SIC-based) and 200710 (NAICS-based) IO tables,
and use concordances between the BEA industry codes and the SIC/NAICS industry codes to
link the IO tables to each of our plants in each year, identifying which other industries (both
manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries, including final demand) purchase that plant's
products. Second, the 2002 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) identifies the distances traveled by
shipments from plants in each industry, reported by three-digit NAICS industry of the shipped
products.11 For each three-digit NAICS industry, we compute the share of shipments traveling
less than 250 miles, the share of shipments traveling between 250 and 1,000 miles, and the share
of shipments traveling more than 1,000 miles. Third, annual state-level industry output data from

9
     http://www.bea.gov/industry/io_benchmark.htm.
10
      http://www.bea.gov/industry/io_annual.htm.
11
     http://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/publications/commodity_flow_survey/index.html.

                                                           15
BEA identifies the activity level of different "using" industries around the country, with final
demand proxied by personal income in the state.12

        For each plant in our dataset and for each industry that uses the products of that plant, we
calculate the amount of that industry's production that is located in states within 250 miles of the
plant (including the plant's own state), between 250 and 1,000 miles from the plant, or more than
1,000 miles from the plant. We then use the IO data to predict the demand for the plant's
products, aggregated over all these "using" industries, at each of the three distances. We
calculate the annual growth rate in product demand at each distance and weight those three
growth rates using the CFS weights for the share of the plant's shipments expected to travel
those distances, yielding a weighted projected demand growth. Finally, we transform these
growth rates into an index number by assigning them all a value of 150 in 1987.13

       We allow for differences among groups of industries in our estimation models, based on
the energy intensity as measured by the industry's total expenditure on electricity and fuels
divided by its total shipments. We split the industries into 8 separate groups, with greater detail
provided among industries with higher energy intensity. Group 1 includes half of the 6-digit
NAICS industries, with each of Groups 2­4 including 10 percent each and each of Groups 5­8
including 5 percent. Table 1 shows some key information for each group, such as the share of the
sample and the energy cost shares. Plants in more energy intensive (higher-numbered) groups
tend to have higher expenditures on both electricity and fuels but otherwise don't differ much in
their average employment, shipments, value-added, or operating profits.

        We define high-energy industries as those belonging to Groups 5­8, which collectively
include the top quintile of energy-intensive industries. Figure 1 shows the variation over our time
period in average energy prices and cost shares as well as output and employment for the entire
manufacturing sector and for high-energy manufacturing industries. The cost share of high-
energy industries declined by half over the period (from about 6 to 3 percent), and energy cost
shares declined by about one-third in the manufacturing sector as a whole (from about 3 to 2
percent). In contrast, energy prices followed similar trends for high-energy industries and all
industries. Output growth was noticeably slower for high-energy industries as compared to
others, while the decline in employment over the period was similar in both groups. Figure 2
shows geographic variation of electricity and fuels prices. Among RGGI or potential RGGI
states, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Massachusetts have the highest electricity prices;
Vermont and New Jersey have the highest fuels prices.

12
  http://www.bea.gov/regional/index.htm.
13
  The starting value of 150 in 1987 was chosen so that the demand index numbers would remain positive
throughout the sample for all industries.

                                                      16
       4. Estimation Results

       4.1      Deviations from National Average Effects
       Equation (2) includes multiple coefficients on energy prices and energy price interaction
terms. There are separate terms for electricity and fuels prices; interactions of those prices with
corresponding cost shares; prices for competing plants and interaction terms; as well as for direct
and indirect energy use; and a separate set of coefficients for each of the 8 groups, for a total of
96 energy-related coefficients. Because of this large number of coefficients, we focus on the
overall elasticities with respect to energy prices, which include both the direct effect of energy
purchased by the plant and the indirect effect via the energy-intensity of its purchased
materials.14

       Figure 3 plots the elasticities for employment and output by group for electricity prices, and
Figure 4 provides the analogous information for fuels prices. The figures illustrate separately the
elasticities with respect to the plant's own energy prices as well as the energy prices of
competing plants in neighboring states. The figures show the elasticities and confidence intervals
for each group. (The underlying regressions were estimated with clustering by industry-year.)

       The own electricity price elasticities in Figure 3 (panels A and B) are typically negative and
increase in magnitude, moving from the low cost-share groups to the high cost-share groups. The
increase is not perfectly monotonic, and there are deviations for Group 6 (employment) and
Group 7 (output). The mean employment elasticities range from -0.07 to -0.90 across the 8
groups, while the output elasticities range from -0.07 to -1.19, with all of them statistically
significant at the 5-percent level. The fact that there are a few positive elasticities is perhaps not
surprising, given the flexible functional form of Equation (2) and the large number of estimated
coefficients (that is, one would expect that by chance there would be a few positive and
statistically significant coefficients).

       The own fuels price elasticities in Figure 4 (panels A and B) are also typically negative (3 of
16 are positive but only one of those is significant, while 12 of the 13 negative elasticities are
significant), but they are smaller and less precisely estimated than the electricity elasticities. The


14
     The full set of coefficients are available from the authors.

                                                              17
relationships between the cost shares and the elasticities of the groups are weaker than for
electricity. The significant negative elasticities range from -0.08 to -0.29 for employment and
from -0.10 to -0.32 for output across the 8 groups.

   Overall, for most industry groups the own-electricity elasticities are negative and the
magnitudes increase with the cost share. The neighbor elasticities tend to be positive but there is
not a correlation between the magnitude of the elasticities and the cost share. Own-fuel
elasticities tend to be negative and neighbor-fuel elasticities tend to be positive, although there
are a few exceptions to these patterns.

   These elasticities are similar to those found in Gray, Linn, and Morgenstern (2016), in which
we applied a similar model to plant-level data for 49 energy-intensive, trade-exposed industries
and found average elasticities with respect to electricity prices of -0.6 for employment and -0.8
for output. Two other papers in the literature estimate own-price elasticities but not neighbor
elasticities. Aldy and Pizer (2015) find a somewhat lower elasticity of output with respect to
energy prices of -0.4, using national-level industry data from 1986­1994. Kahn and Mansur
(2013) use County Business Patterns data and report estimates similar to ours, finding an
elasticity of output with respect to electricity prices ranging from -0.2 for their average industry
to -2.2 for their most electricity-intensive industry (primary metals).

   The elasticities for competitors' energy prices, seen in panels C and D of Figures 3 and 4, are
typically positive for both electricity and fuels. As with the own-energy price elasticities, the
elasticities with respect to neighbors' electricity prices are larger in magnitude and more
precisely estimated than those for fuels. This difference between electricity and fuels elasticities
is similar to that reported in Gray, Linn, and Morgenstern (2016) for electricity and natural gas,
and likely reflects the lesser variation across states in prices for fuels. Across the 8 groups, the
majority of the elasticities with respect to neighbors' energy prices have the expected positive
sign and are statistically different from zero.

   4.2     National Average Effects
   Table 2 reports the estimates of Equation (3), for which we regress the variable indicated in
the column heading on electricity and fuels prices interacted with cost shares. Recall that the
energy price variables include both the direct and indirect effects. For each dependent variable,


                                                  18
the coefficient estimates are negative, which is as expected and consistent with the literature.
Unfortunately, we do not have sufficient variation to precisely estimate the electricity
coefficients. The fuel coefficients are estimated at the 5-percent confidence level or better.


     5. State Carbon Prices and Competitiveness
     5.1     Main Scenarios
     The objective of the simulations is to illustrate the effects of state carbon pricing on
competitiveness. In this subsection we define the two main scenarios that we analyze in
comparison to a no-policy baseline scenario.

     The baseline scenario uses the observed energy prices and other independent variables across
the entire estimation sample. We use Equation (3) to predict national average outcomes for each
industry and Equation (2) to predict deviations from the national averages. By construction, the
predicted values are equal to the observed sample means.

     To compare with the baseline, in the first policy scenario we add a carbon price of $10 per
ton of CO2 that raises electricity prices in the RGGI region, which includes Connecticut,
Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and
Vermont. For simplicity, we assume that the carbon price raises electricity prices in proportion to
the emissions rate of a natural gas­fired unit. Consequently, electricity prices increase by 0.6
cents per kilowatt hour in the RGGI states.15 We also assume that the carbon price does not
affect electricity prices in other states or fuels prices in any states. Consequently, for plants in
RGGI, their own electricity prices rise and the electricity prices of competing plants are
unchanged. For plants close to RGGI, their own electricity prices are unchanged and the
electricity prices of competing plants rise.16




15
   The effect of the carbon price on electricity prices is broadly consistent with estimates reported in Linn and
Muehlenbachs (2018), who estimate the effect of fuels prices on wholesale electricity prices using data from the
2000s.
16
   In principle, a carbon price in RGGI could affect electricity prices outside the region. The carbon price raises the
cost of producing electricity in RGGI, which could increase generation from outside the region, causing marginal
costs and electricity prices to increase. Shawhan et al. (2014) suggest that for a carbon price of $10 per ton of CO2,
this effect would be small compared to the increase in electricity prices in the RGGI region. For simplicity, the
simulations do not include this effect.

                                                           19
   Equation (2) and these counterfactual plant-level electricity prices are used to predict
deviations from national averages of employment, output, and profits. Then, we use Equation (3)
to predict national average changes for each industry. The price increases for RGGI and the share
of RGGI plants in national employment are used to compute the change in national average
electricity prices. Because RGGI plants account for about 10 percent of national employment on
average across all industries, national average electricity prices increase by about 2 percent for
the average industry. We combine the results of Equations (2) and (3) for each plant in the data-
set, and then compute percent changes in the outcomes for each plant, relative to the no-policy
baseline.

   Based on the estimation results reported in the previous section, we expect the RGGI carbon
price to reduce employment, output, and profits in RGGI states and increase those outcomes in
surrounding states. The total effect across the entire country should be negative, because national
average electricity prices increase. Because the plant-level elasticities (in Equation 2) tend to be
larger in magnitude than the industry-level elasticities (in Equation 3), we expect the carbon
price to induce shifts of employment, output, and profits to unregulated states.

   The second carbon price scenario expands the RGGI carbon price to New Jersey and
Pennsylvania. The plant-level outcomes are computed similarly to the first scenario. Relative to
the no-policy scenario, we expect lower employment, output, and profits in the expanded RGGI
region. Relative to the original RGGI scenario, we expect less of a reduction in employment,
output, and profits since the average electricity prices of competing plants increase by less in the
expanded RGGI scenario than in the original RGGI scenario.

   5.2      Main Results
   The main results are presented in a series of maps that illustrate the changes relative to the
baseline scenario, showing state-specific effects on employment and output for the eastern half
of the country, which includes all states that are neighbors of RGGI. In addition to the maps,
Table 3 shows the average effects of each scenario for various groups of states, including the
effects on profits as well as employment and output.

   The results of the simulations generally follow the expected pattern, with reductions in
employment, output, and profits in the RGGI states and increases in neighboring states. The


                                                 20
effects tend to be larger for RGGI states such as New York, Maryland, and Delaware that are
located closer to non-RGGI states. The output effects tend to be larger than the employment
effects, which is consistent with the elasticities seen in Figures 3 and 4. In Table 3 for the first
scenario, the RGGI carbon price reduces average manufacturing employment in those states by
2.7 percent, and raises average employment in New Jersey and Pennsylvania by 0.8 percent (the
increases are smaller in other eastern states). However, the maps show some variation in effects
that are uncorrelated with the distance from RGGI states. For example, Figure 5 shows larger
output changes for Kentucky and Tennessee than for some other states that are closer to RGGI.
These variations could arise because of the specific mix of industries operating in RGGI and
non-RGGI states, since relative energy prices only matter if there are competing plants in
neighboring states to take advantage of the energy price differential. Thus, in Figure 5C we see
larger output effects for Kentucky and Tennessee than for some other states that are closer to
more RGGI states.

   The effects of the carbon price on the high-energy industries are generally larger than for the
average industry, as expected. The average employment in those industries falls by 7.1 percent in
the RGGI states and output falls by 10.5 percent. The increases in employment and output in
neighboring non-RGGI states are also larger than for the average industry, although still only
about 0.5 percent. These larger effects make it easier to identify differences across particular
states, including the variation across states within the regions shown in Table 3, which again
shows Kentucky and Tennessee with larger output effects than those found for some other states
closer to RGGI.

   The results for the second scenario, where Pennsylvania and New Jersey join RGGI and
adopt carbon prices, are as expected. The results are shown in Table 3 and Figure 6. Because of
their location, those states now form a buffer between some of the original RGGI states and the
neighboring non-RGGI states, and the effects on their employment and output are somewhat
smaller on average than they were in the first scenario. The average across industries is a decline
of 2.2 percent in employment and 3.4 percent in output, with similar reductions for the high-
energy industries. The average declines in employment and output for Pennsylvania and New
Jersey are larger than those for the original states, with a 3.3 percent decline in average
employment and a 4.9 percent decline in average output across all industries. The estimated


                                                  21
effects on high-energy industries are also larger than those in the original RGGI states. The
increases in the non-RGGI states are also larger than they were in the first scenario, reflecting the
greater number of neighboring states with carbon prices. Table 3 also shows the predicted effect
on operating profits, which is slightly larger than the effects on output, ranging up to a decrease
of 11.2 percent for the high-energy industries in RGGI states.

   5.3     Other Results
   In this subsection we discuss the results of two variations in our scenarios. First, we redefine
the RGGI and expanded RGGI scenarios so that the carbon price affects both electricity and
fuels prices, rather than just electricity prices. This scenario corresponds to a situation in which
the RGGI states decide to expand their programs to include fuels directly combusted (a
California-style approach). The effects of this scenario are shown in Table 3 and Figure 7.
Compared to the electricity-only scenario, the differences are due largely to the mix of specific
industries operating in each state. Arguably, we might have expected to see larger effects, given
the wider range of energy sources affected by the carbon price--but the average reductions in
employment and output in the RGGI states are not much different from those in the first
scenario. This may reflect the presence of a few unexpected signs for the own and neighbors'
employment elasticities with respect to fuels prices. Figures 7A and 7B show employment
reductions that are more concentrated in New York and Maryland than in the first scenario
(Figure 4), and employment gains that are more concentrated in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

   Second, we set the carbon price to equal $25 per ton rather than $10 per ton in the RGGI
electricity scenario, representing a tightening of the RGGI emissions caps. Figures 7C and 7D
show the effect on employment for this scenario. The patterns across specific states are similar to
those seen in the second scenario, but it's important to note that the scale of the map's colors
needed to expand to reflect the larger effects seen here, with increases going up to 4 percent
rather than 2 percent and reductions going down to 25 percent rather than 15 percent.


   6. Conclusions
   A substantial literature has analyzed empirically and theoretically the potential for
international emissions leakage, in which a country or set of countries impose a carbon price that
raises emissions in other countries. Accompanying the emissions leakage would be


                                                  22
corresponding shifts of employment, output, and profits to firms located in unregulated
countries, representing the adverse competitiveness effects of the carbon price.

    In the United States, certain states have adopted or are considering adopting a carbon price.
The high degree of trade of manufactured goods across state lines raises the possibility of a
substantial amount of leakage of economic activity across states. In the state-level policy context,
leakage would be concerning not only because it would undermine the climate objectives of a
carbon pricing policy but also because it would imply losses of local jobs and production. As
policies evolve in this area, it is important to understand the magnitudes of potential leakage
under state-level carbon pricing policies.

    Clearly, it is not simply a matter of energy or carbon price differences across jurisdictions--
the industry mix in different areas is also a major factor. Carbon pricing by a jurisdiction that has
a monopoly or near monopoly on particular production capabilities would likely result in
minimal competitiveness effects in that jurisdiction. Thus, to estimate the employment, output, or
profit sensitivity of a particular jurisdiction requires consideration of multiple state- and region-
specific factors of the type included in our modeling.

     We decompose the effects of a carbon price on three plant-level outcomes (employment,
output, and profits) into two effects: the change in the national average level of that outcome for
all plants in the corresponding industry, and the individual plant's outcome deviation from the
national industry average. The first part is estimated via similar methods as Aldy and Pizer
(2015). We use a novel model and unique data to estimate the second part. Specifically, we link a
plant's outcome deviations to the energy prices it faces as well as the energy prices of competing
plants. This model thereby captures differing effects of the carbon price across plants in the same
industry. For plants in the regulated region, the carbon price raises energy prices, making them
less competitive, while plants outside the regulated region become more competitive. The model
is further distinguished by separating the effects of electricity and fuels, and by allowing for
indirect effects of energy prices to affect a plant via the prices of the energy-intensive materials
that it uses in its production process.

    The model parameters are estimated with confidential plant-level data from the Census
Bureau from 1982­2011. As expected, higher energy prices at a plant typically reduce its


                                                  23
employment, output, and profits, with the magnitude of the effects generally increasing with
energy intensity. Higher energy prices at competing plants tend to increase a plant's
employment, output, and profits.

   We then use the estimated parameters from the model to simulate the effects of regional
carbon prices. We focus on the RGGI program, which prices carbon emissions from the
electricity sector in the Northeast. A carbon price of $10 per ton reduces employment by 2.7
percent in the RGGI region, with comparable changes in output and profits. The same carbon
price raises those outcomes in the surrounding states, with a 0.8 percent increase in employment.
The national-level outcomes are relatively small, with employment declining by 0.1 percent,
confirming that a substantial amount of the shift of output, employment, and profits flowing out
of RGGI leaks into surrounding states rather than to other countries. We also show that
expanding RGGI to include New Jersey and Pennsylvania would reduce the adverse
competitiveness effects within the original RGGI region.

   These results imply that state policymakers can reduce the degree of leakage--and the
associated environmental and economic costs--by expanding their programs to include other
states. The benefits of linking programs across states can be substantial, due to the fact that
states' economies are so intertwined with such a high degree of cross-state trade of manufactured
goods.

   Finally, we note a few caveats regarding our analysis. First, as with most other studies in the
literature, we use industry responses to past changes in energy prices to derive estimates of the
effects of future carbon policy. That is, we assume that manufacturing plants would respond
similarly to energy price increases induced by a carbon price as they have responded to historical
price changes. The high degree of persistence of historical energy prices and carbon prices
supports this assumption. Second, our analysis covers the short run, in which capital stocks are
fixed and there is no entry and exit of plants. Modeling long-run effects that include capital
investment, entry, and exit would be a useful direction for future research.


   7. References



                                                 24
Adkins, Liwayway, Richard Garbaccio, Mun Ho, Eric Moore, and Richard Morgenstern. 2012.
      "Carbon Pricing with Output-Based Subsidies: Impact on US Industries over Multiple
      Time Frames." Discussion paper 12-27. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

Aldy, Joseph E., and William A. Pizer. 2015. "The Competitiveness Impacts of Climate Change
       Mitigation Policies." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
       Economists 2(4): 565­595.

Boehringer, Christoph, Carolyn Fischer, and Knut Einar Rosendahl. 2010. "The Global Effects
       of Subglobal Climate Policies." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10(2).

Ellison, G., and E.L. Glaeser. 1999. "The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural
        Advantage Explain Agglomeration?" American Economic Review Papers and
        Proceedings 89: 311­316. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.89.2.311.

Fabra, N. and M. Reguant. 2014. Pass-Through of Emissions Costs in Electricity Markets.
       American Economic Review 104: 2872­99.

Fischer, C., and R.D. Morgenstern. 2009. "Designing Provisions to Maintain Competitiveness
       and Mitigate Emissions Leakage." Policy brief 09-06. Washington, DC: Brookings
       Energy Security Initiative.

Fischer, C., and A.K. Fox. 2012. "Comparing Policies to Combat Emissions Leakage: Border
       Tax Adjustments versus Rebates." Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 64(2): 199­216 (September).

Fowlie, M., M. Reguant, and S.P. Ryan. 2016. "Market-Based Emissions Regulation and
       Industry Dynamics." Journal of Political Economy 124: 249­302.

Ganapati, S., J.S. Shapiro, and R. Walker. 2017. "The Incidence of Carbon Taxes in US
      Manufacturing: Lessons from Energy Cost Pass-Through." Discussion paper 2038R.
      New Haven, CT: Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University.

Gray, W., J. Linn, and R. Morgenstern. 2016. "Employment and Output Leakage under
       California's Cap-and-Trade Program." Discussion paper 16-17. Washington, DC:
       Resources for the Future.

Jarmin, R.S., and J. Miranda. 2002. "The Longitudinal Business Database." Working paper 02-
       17. Washington, DC: Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau.

Kahn, M.E., and E.T. Mansur. 2013. "Do Local Energy Prices and Regulation Affect the
      Geographic Concentration of Employment?" Journal of Public Economics 101: 105­114.

Linn, J. 2008. "Energy Prices and the Adoption of Energy-Saving Technology." The Economic
        Journal 118: 1986­2012.



                                              25
Linn, J. 2009. "Why Do Oil Shocks Matter? The Role of Inter-Industry Linkages." Economic
        Inquiry 47: 549­567.

Linn, J., and L. Muehlenbachs. 2018. "The Heterogeneous Impacts of Low Natural Gas Prices on
        Consumers and the Environment." Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 89: 1­28.

Shawhan, D.L., J.T. Taber, D. Shi, R.D. Zimmerman, J. Yan, C.M. Marguet, Y. Qi, B. Mao, R.E.
      Schuler, W.D. Schulze, and D. Tylavsky. 2014. "Does a Detailed Model of the Electricity
      Grid Matter? Estimating the Impacts of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative."
      Resource and Energy Economics 36: 191­207.




                                             26
                                       Table 1. Mean Values by Group


                                                                                                        Log of
                                      Electricity                                           Log of      gross
             # of obs.    Share of    cost          Fuel cost   Log of         Log of       value       operating
Group        (rounded)    sample      share         share       employment     shipments    added       profits
         1   1,289,000        0.51         0.007       0.004           3.716        8.494       7.818       6.781
         2     208,000        0.08         0.010       0.007           4.182        9.030       8.319       7.296
         3     306,000        0.12         0.012       0.008           3.524        8.453       7.670       6.769
         4     262,000        0.10         0.013       0.011           3.987        8.912       8.127       7.150
         5     191,000        0.08         0.019       0.017           3.980        9.164       8.283       7.356
         6      87,000        0.03         0.022       0.032           4.076        8.636       7.993       6.905
         7      87,000        0.03         0.029       0.054           3.600        8.802       7.943       7.108
         8      96,000        0.04         0.078       0.099           3.959        8.585       8.034       7.016
Full
sample       2,527,000                      0.015      0.015          3.797        8.646       7.927       6.928
(Std.
dev.)                                       0.022      0.026          1.443        1.866       1.816       2.567

Notes: Groups based on energy cost share (sum of electricity and fuel costs, divided by
shipments).


                         Table 2. Effects of Energy Prices on National Outcomes

                                         Dependent variable is:
                           Log real value of Log real value Log employment                         Log real profits
                              shipments           added
Log electricity price           -0.01              -0.17         -0.04                                   -0.14
X cost share                    (0.11)            (0.17)         (0.06)                                  (0.21)

Log fuels price                  -0.15                     -0.21                 -0.04                   -0.22
X cost share                     (0.07)                    (0.09)                (0.02)                  (0.11)

Number of                        13,749                   13,749                 13,749                 13,727
observations
R-squared                            0.92                   0.92                  0.92                    0.89

Notes: The table reports coefficient estimates from Equation (3), with standard errors in
parentheses clustered by three-digit NAICS industry and year. See text for details.




                                                          27
             Table 3. Simulation Results for $10 Carbon Price Applied to RGGI States
                        Including Variation with PA and NJ added to RGGI


                                                                                       Near     Far
Coverage       Carbon price     Industries    Outcome        RGGI states    PA+NJ      RGGI     RGGI
RGGI           electricity      all           employ               -2.71%     0.83%     0.29%    0.12%
RGGI           electricity      all           output               -3.81%     0.67%     0.20%    0.06%
RGGI           electricity      all           profits              -4.16%     0.31%    -0.03%   -0.17%
RGGI           electricity      high-energy   employ               -7.08%     1.76%    0.61%    0.37%
RGGI           electricity      high-energy   output              -10.51%     1.01%    0.56%    0.42%
RGGI           electricity      high-energy   profits             -11.24%     0.16%    0.23%    0.16%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electricity      all           employ               -2.22%     -3.32%   0.67%     0.28%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electricity      all           output               -3.37%     -4.91%   0.52%     0.18%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electricity      all           profits              -3.90%     -5.09%   0.01%    -0.27%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electricity      high-energy   employ               -5.73%     -7.82%   1.59%    0.85%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electricity      high-energy   output               -9.64%    -11.01%   1.42%    0.94%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electricity      high-energy   profits             -11.30%    -12.17%   0.36%    0.25%
RGGI           electric+fuels   all           employ               -2.04%     0.77%    0.26%    0.12%
RGGI           electric+fuels   all           output               -2.76%     0.75%    0.31%    0.20%
RGGI           electric+fuels   all           profits              -3.00%     0.61%    0.18%    0.08%
RGGI           electric+fuels   high-energy   employ               -6.62%     1.32%    0.61%    0.50%
RGGI           electric+fuels   high-energy   output               -9.59%     0.99%    0.74%    0.73%
RGGI           electric+fuels   high-energy   profits             -10.42%     0.75%    0.59%    0.65%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electric+fuels   all           employ               -1.59%     -2.57%   0.62%    0.27%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electric+fuels   all           output               -2.28%     -3.38%   0.72%    0.42%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electric+fuels   all           profits              -2.59%     -3.53%   0.42%    0.17%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electric+fuels   high-energy   employ               -5.62%     -7.04%   1.44%    1.01%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electric+fuels   high-energy   output               -8.67%     -8.77%   1.76%    1.46%
RGGI_PA_NJ     electric+fuels   high-energy   profits              -9.91%    -10.17%   1.23%    1.14%

Notes: Simulation results based on coefficients estimated in Equations (2) and (3). The table
shows change in average outcome variable for plants located in specified regions, comparing no-
policy ($0 carbon price) with a $10 carbon price applied to electricity prices (or both electricity
and fuels prices) faced by all plants located in the RGGI region (expanded in some simulations to
include Pennsylvania and New Jersey). Results shown separately for all manufacturing industries
and those designated as high-energy-cost industries (groups 5-8 in Table 1).

RGGI states: CT, DE, MA, MD, ME, NH, NY, RI, VT.
Near-RGGI states: IN, KY, MI, NC, OH, VA, WV.
Far-RGGI states: AL, FL, GA, IL, MS, SC, TN, WI.




                                                        28
       Figure 1. Comparison of All-Manufacturing and High-Energy-Cost-Industry Trends


                        Figure 1A. Energy Price and Energy Cost Share

 700

 600

 500

 400                                                                       energy price
                                                                           energy share
 300
                                                                           HE energy price
 200                                                                       HE energy share

 100

   0




                              Figure 1B. Employment and Output

 250


 200


 150                                                                       employment
                                                                           output
 100                                                                       HE employment
                                                                           HE output
  50


   0




Notes: These figures compare the average values for all manufacturing industries with the
average values for the high-energy-cost industries in Groups 5­8. Energy cost shares are scaled,
setting 100 = one percent cost share; all other variables are normalized to 100 in 1982. All
numbers based on industry-level data from NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database.
                                               29
                     Figure 2. Energy Price Variation Across States in 2011

                                Figure 2A. 2011 Electricity Prices




                                  Figure 2B. 2011 Fuels Prices




Notes: Both electricity and fuels prices come from the State Energy Data System (SEDS)
provided by the US Energy Information Administration (https://www.eia.gov/state/seds/) and are
expressed in dollars per million BTU. The electricity price is that paid by industrial consumers in
the state. The fuels price includes coal, natural gas, distillate fuel oil, residual fuel oil, and
hydrocarbon gas liquids, aggregating the total amount spent on those fuels by industrial
consumers in the state and dividing by their total BTU content.



                                                30
        Figure 3. Employment and Output Elasticities with Respect to Electricity Prices


            3A. Employment,                                      3B. Output,
             Own Electricity                                    Own Electricity
   0                                                   0
        1    2   3    4    5    6    7   8                  1    2   3    4    5    6    7    8
 -0.2                                                -0.2

 -0.4                                                -0.4

 -0.6                                                -0.6

 -0.8                                                -0.8

   -1                                                 -1

 -1.2                                                -1.2

 -1.4                                                -1.4



             3C. Employment,                                        3D. Output,
            Neighbors' Electricity                              Neighbors' Electricity
  0.4                                                0.4
  0.3                                                0.3
  0.2                                                0.2
  0.1                                                0.1
   0                                                   0
        1    2    3   4    5    6    7    8                 1    2    3    4    5   6    7    8
 -0.1                                                -0.1

 -0.2                                                -0.2

 -0.3                                                -0.3

 -0.4                                                -0.4

 -0.5                                                -0.5

 -0.6                                                -0.6


Notes: Estimated elasticity of outcome variables with respect to electricity prices (both own price
and neighbor price), based on coefficients from Equation 2, which is estimated separately for 8
industry groups shown in Table 1 (Group 1 is lowest energy cost share; Group 8 is highest).




                                                31
            Figure 4. Employment and Output Elasticities with Respect to Fuels Prices

            4A - Employment, Own Fuel                                   4B - Output, Own Fuel
  0.4                                                        0.4
  0.3                                                        0.3
  0.2                                                        0.2
  0.1                                                        0.1
   0                                                           0
        1    2    3    4   5    6       7       8                   1   2    3   4    5   6     7     8
 -0.1                                                        -0.1
 -0.2                                                        -0.2
 -0.3                                                        -0.3
 -0.4                                                        -0.4
 -0.5                                                        -0.5
 -0.6                                                        -0.6




        4C. Employment, Neighbors' Fuel                                 4D. Output, Neighbors' Fuel
                                                             0.6
0.6                                                          0.5
0.5                                                          0.4
0.4                                                          0.3
0.3                                                          0.2
0.2
                                                             0.1
0.1
                                                               0
  0                                                                 1   2    3    4   5    6    7         8
        1    2    3    4    5       6       7       8        -0.1
-0.1
                                                             -0.2
-0.2
                                                             -0.3
-0.3
                                                             -0.4
-0.4


Notes: Estimated elasticity of outcome variables with respect to fuels prices (both own price and
neighbor price), based on coefficients from Equation 2, which is estimated separately for 8
industry groups shown in Table 1 (Group 1 is lowest energy cost share; Group 8 is highest).




                                                        32
        Figure 5. Employment and Output Changes with $10 Carbon Price on Electricity

5A. Employment, All Industries                        5B. Employment, High-Energy Industries




5C. Output, All Industries                          5D. Output, High-Energy Industries




Notes: Simulation results based on coefficients estimated in Equations (2) and (3). The figures
show the change in average employment and output for plants located in each state, comparing
no-policy ($0 carbon price) with a $10 carbon price applied to electricity prices faced by all
plants located in the RGGI region. Results shown separately for all manufacturing industries and
those designated as high-energy industries (Groups 5-8 in Table 1).




                                               33
 Figure 6. Employment and Output Effects: Adding PA and NJ to RGGI with $10 Carbon Price
                                      on Electricity

6A. Employment, All Industries                       6B. Employment, High-Energy Industries




6C. Output, All Industries                         6D. Output, High-Energy Industries




Notes: Simulation results based on coefficients estimated in Equations (2) and (3). The figure
shows the change in average employment and output for plants located in each state, comparing
no-policy ($0 carbon price) with a $10 carbon price applied to electricity prices faced by all
plants located in the RGGI region as well as Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Results shown
separately for all manufacturing industries and those designated as high-energy industries
(Groups 5-8 in Table 1).




                                              34
                                 Figure 7. Alternative Scenarios

          Employment Changes with $10 Carbon Price on Both Electricity and Fuels

7A. Employment, All Industries                      7B. Employment, High-Energy Industries




Notes: Change in average employment comparing no-policy ($0 carbon price) with a $10 carbon
price applied to electricity and fuels prices faced by all plants located in the RGGI region.
Results shown separately for all manufacturing and high-energy industries (Groups 5-8 in Table
1).


    Employment Changes: Adding PA and NJ to RGGI with $25 Carbon Price on Electricity

7C. Employment, All Industries                      7D. Employment, High-Energy Industries




Notes: Change in average employment comparing no-policy ($0 carbon price) with a $25 carbon
price applied to electricity prices faced by all plants located in the RGGI region as well as
Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Results shown separately for all manufacturing and high-energy
industries (Groups 5-8 in Table 1).


                                               35
