                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CROSS-ASSET INFORMATION SYNERGY IN MUTUAL FUND FAMILIES

                                      Jun Kyung Auh
                                        Jennie Bai

                                     Working Paper 26626
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26626


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We thank Turan Bali, Tim Cohen, Amil Dasgupta, Darrell Duffie, Wayne Ferson, Wei Jiang, Hao
Jiang, Francis Longstaff, Massimo Massa, Veronika Pool, Lu Zheng for their insightful
comments, and William Birdthistle, John Morley, Mark Roe, Ann Lipton for legislative
consultation on mutual fund governance. We also appreciate feedback from seminar participants
at the Q-Group annual conference, the Rodney L. White Center annual conference on Financial
Decisions and Asset Markets at the Wharton School, WFA (2019), University of Maryland,
London School of Economics, American University, University of Cambridge Judge Business
School, University of Liverpool, Bloomberg, Georgetown University, Yonsei University, Utrecht
University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Office of Financial Research, and ESMT
Asset Management Conference. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jun Kyung Auh and Jennie Bai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Cross-Asset Information Synergy in Mutual Fund Families
Jun Kyung Auh and Jennie Bai
NBER Working Paper No. 26626
January 2020
JEL No. G11,G23,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

Despite common wisdom that equities and bonds are segmented, the organization structure of
fund families can offset frictions regarding cross-asset segmentation. We find that actively-
managed equity funds and corporate bond funds linked within a mutual fund family exhibit a
significant co-movement in holdings of commonly-held firms' equities and bonds. Such cross-
holdings facilitate information spillover, manifesting itself in the co-movement. Synthesizing
cross-asset information can predict future equity returns and create profits for fund families as
well as general investors. Our findings accentuate the importance of collaboration between equity
funds and bond funds within fund families.


Jun Kyung Auh
School of Business
Yonsei University
50 Yonsei-ro School of Business 504
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul
Korea
junkyung.auh@yonsei.ac.kr

Jennie Bai
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
3700 O Street, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
jennie.bai@georgetown.edu
   Corporate bonds and equities issued by the same firm are different contingent claims on the same

cash flows, hence theoretically their values should be correlated (Merton, 1974). Empirical studies

however suggest that bonds and equities are segmented due to institutional and informational frictions.

For example, equity returns and bond returns have low correlations at the firm level (e.g., Collin-

Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin, 2001; Kapadia and Pu, 2012), equity returns and bond returns are

driven by different risk factors (e.g., Choi and Kim, 2018; Chordia et al., 2017; Bai, Bali, and Quan,

2019), and equities and bonds have different investors (see the Flow of Funds report, 2018).1

   Would investors under a well-integrated setup overcome such segmentation? In this paper, we

investigate the relationship of equities and bonds in a unique environment: mutual fund families whose

equity funds and bond funds holding the same firm's assets, which we designate as a cross-holding by

sister funds. Mutual funds are ideal for this question since they are the primary overlapping investors,

holding 33% of equities and 25% of corporate bonds of U.S. corporations. Also, in the $17-trillion

mutual fund market as of December 2018, 96.7% of total assets are controlled by fund families managing

both equity funds and corporate bond funds. If equity and bond funds are housed in the same fund

family, are their investment decisions on commonly-held firms correlated? Would common holdings

facilitate equity or bond funds learning from the other side on commonly-held firms? If so, can the

fund family as a whole derive profit from synthesizing information of creditors and shareholders?

   The answer is not as certain as it seems to be. In academia, despite increasing studies of mutual

fund, the entire literature is dominated by studies on equity funds, only a few on bond funds, and

very little on the interaction of equity and bond funds. Second, equity and bond funds act for the

best value of shareholders and creditors respectively. Given that the objectives of shareholders and

creditors often diverge (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Myers, 1977), the holdings of equity and bond

funds on the same firm may not co-move. Furthermore, equity and bond investors are significantly

different regarding risk appetites and investment objectives, and such investor segmentation may also

hinder co-movement. For example, Goldstein, Jiang, and Ng (2017) show that the flows of corporate

bond mutual funds behave differently from those of equity mutual funds. In Wall Street, anecdotes
   1
    The Flow of Funds report released by the Federal Reserve Board shows the composition of investors for corporate
bonds (Table L.213) and equities (Table L.223) in the United States. Bonds are dominated by institutional investors,
in particular patient long-term investors such as insurance companies, whereas equities are mainly held by individual
investors (household sector). As of the end of our sample, 2018Q4, the primary holders of corporate bonds are insurance
companies (36%), mutual funds (25%), and pension funds (15%), whereas the primary holders of equities are households
(43%), mutual funds (33%), and pension funds (15%).




                                                          1
further suggest a large cultural gap and operational heterogenity across equity funds and bond funds.2

   In this paper, we provide the first systematic evidence that accentuates the importance of collab-

oration between equity funds and bond funds, which is largely understudied by academic researchers

and not explicitly aware of by market participants. Employing a unique dataset by matching the firms

held by actively-managed equity funds and bond funds in the survivor-bias-free mutual fund database,

we show that there is information spillover across the same management family's equity funds and

bond funds. In particular, we find that the holdings of equity and bond funds on commonly-held firms

exhibit a significant co-movement relationship only when both funds belong to the same fund family

(sister funds), but not when they belong to different families (stand-alone funds). The co-movement

is not driven by common reaction to public information, neither by non-information channels such as

large capital flows or common skills.

   More important, synthesizing information on cross-holdings of sister funds can help predict stock

returns and increase profit for fund families as well as general investors. This cross-asset information

synergy implies that combining the information of shareholders and creditors complements the whole

firm-level information, which is different from previously documented information channels such as

active cross-fund learning in the same asset class (equities), information sharing through side-by-

side management, or connections across fund managers. The organization structure of fund families

provides opportunities for cross-asset information spillover, even if the way of information sharing is

passive.3 Our findings provide the original evidence promoting the collaboration between equity funds

and bond funds in the fund families.

   It is worth clarifying that our research does not focus on the relationship between the holdings of

equity funds and bond funds in response to fundamental shocks of commonly-held firms; rather, we

study whether the relationship between equity and bond funds, measured by their investment decisions

in commonly-held firms, could be different conditional on belonging to the same fund family. Given

a particular fundamental shock, shareholders and bondholders may response differently because they
   2
     We interviewed fund managers from several largest investment companies, both equity side and bond side. Quoting
one of them, "At every firm I've worked with, there is a huge cultural gap between fixed income and equity and the two
often use completely different systems."
   3
     We use the term `sharing' in more general sense. It does not necessarily refer to active communication or collaboration.
According to some practitioners, it could be simply that managers of equity fund and bond fund attend internal meetings
and get inspired from the perspective of the other asset side. We provide further discussion in Section V.




                                                             2
can both benefit, both suffer, or one benefits but the other suffers.4 Notwithstanding different patterns

of responses, the pattern in the co-movement of equity holdings and bond holdings on average should

be the same, unless the organization structure plays a role.

   To test the hypothesis of market segmentation, we first examine investment decisions of equity and

bond funds in the same family. We find that the holding changes of equity funds are positively and

significantly related to those of bond funds on commonly-held firms when they belong to the same

family. In detail, the estimated co-movement coefficient is about 0.042 with the statistical significance

at the 1% level. That is, one standard deviation increase in bond holdings is related to 1.4 percent

increase in the same firm's equity holdings, which is economically large given the average equity holding

change is 12.16 percent. The co-movement is robust after controlling for firm characteristics, the fixed

effects of fund family, firm, time, and their interactions, indicating that the findings are not due to

the selection effect by fund families or holding firms.

   Rejecting the segmentation hypothesis, however, does not imply that there exists information flow

across sister funds since the co-movement can be due to common reaction to firm-specific public

information. To rule out this explanation, we switch our sample from equity and bond funds in the

same family to those in different families. Specifically, we identify equity funds and bond funds that

hold the same firm's assets but belong to different fund families, generating counterfactual sister funds.

Such fictitious relationships are established controlling for fund family characteristics to address the

concern that fund families attract managers with similar skills thus the co-movement in investment

decisions might be solely reflecting the correlation in managers' skills. We find that the holdings of

fictitious sister funds on average also tend to co-move in the same direction, however, the cross-holding

relationship is insignificant and economically negligible with an average co-movement coefficient of

0.001 in contrast to 0.042 in the case of sister funds.

   We also compare the case of sister funds to mixed-assets and balanced funds in which equities

and bonds are simultaneously managed, an extreme case that captures the most possible degree of

co-movement given the side-by-side information advantage. The estimated co-movement coefficient is

indeed larger around 0.10 in the baseline specification, but it loses significance after controlling for
   4
    For example, a downgrading (upgrading) event hurts (benefits) both shareholders and bond holders. Events like
spinoffs (Maxwell and Rao, 2003), Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) (Billett and Mauer, 2004), seasoned equity offerings
(Eberhart and Siddique, 2002) can incur bondholders' wealth losses as a result of the conflicts of interest.




                                                         3
the firm×time fixed effect. The impact of the firm×time fixed effect indicates that the co-movement

within mixed-asset funds is due to the manager's response to public information of holding firms. In

contrast, the co-movement across sister funds is driven by synthesizing asymmetric information of

shareholders and creditors (to be defined in Section II) thus cannot be absorbed by the firm×time

fixed effect.

   Our empirical findings robustly show that sister funds in the same family adjust their investment in

commonly-held firms in a different way from equity and bond funds belonging to different families. The

findings suggest that the organization structure plays an important role: sharing the same umbrella of a

fund family seems to facilitate information spillover across equity funds and bond funds. However, the

significant co-movement of sister funds can also result from reasons beyond information, for example,

the liquidity-driven co-movement. To rule out all non-information-based (operational or mechanical)

explanations, we investigate whether cross-holding contributes to investment profit. Should the co-

movement be associated with ex-post investment profit, any non-information-based explanations for

the co-movement would become invalid.

   This is a challenging task since conventional measures of fund performance, such as risk-adjusted

returns (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997, henceforth, DGTW), cannot be applied to

our case. The simple reason is that our cross-holding is defined at the firm and fund family level and

the return of fund family (even risk-adjusted) captures the overall performance, not specifically the

performance due to cross-holding. One fund family can be simultaneously identified as both cross-

holding and non-cross-holding, depending on the holding firm, thus the conventional methods cannot

decompose the fund family performance into the one contributed by sister funds cross-holding or the

one not.

   Accordingly, we design three novel tests to verify the benefits of sister funds cross-holding. We first

examine whether cross-holding helps sister funds to make more profitable investment decisions. When

equity and bond funds synthesize internal information, the managers have better chance that they can

adjust holdings in a preemptive way to enhance profit. We identify the profit-enhancing adjustment

when an equity fund increases (reduces) its holding one quarter before that equity experiences a

positive (negative) return. We show that sister equity funds have 7.312.4 percent higher chance to

make profitable decisions on cross-held assets relative to stand-alone equity funds whose fund families



                                                    4
do not hold the same firm's corporate bonds.

   In the second test, we explore the case of initial acquisition, which more likely represents deliberate

actions that can be due to new information generated through acquisition. We focus on a subsample

when a fund family's bond (equity) funds invest in a new firm for the first time while the family's equity

(bond) funds already hold the same firm's assets. We find that right after the initial acquisition, the

new cross-holding helps sister funds gain 19.626.6 percent higher chance to make profitable allocation,

which is more than double relative to the overall cross-holdings.

   Lastly, we show that the information synthesized from cross-holdings also helps predict future equity

returns. In detail, the holding changes of corporate bonds have significant predictive power on future

stock returns of the same firms, and this happens only when the firm's bonds and equities are cross-held

by the same fund family.5 Employing a long-short investment strategy, we further show that investors

can earn risk-adjusted return of 1.90%  2.50% in a month following quarterly holding changes under

various factor models, using cross-holding information. This finding confirms information synergy in

that the predictive power intensifies via aggregated holding changes of shareholders and creditors.

   Our paper contributes to three fields of the literature. First, we provide novel evidence of cross-asset

information synergy to the mutual fund literature. Studies in this field document cross-fund learning

but are limited to learning or spillover across homogeneous asset: equity (see Nanda, Wang, and Zheng,

2004; Brown and Wu, 2016; Sialm and Tham, 2016; and Choi, Kahraman, and Mukherjee, 2016). The

literature suggests that cross-fund learning may result from common skills or resources shared by

funds in the family, for example, funds share a common manager. In our case, cross-asset information

synergy is not from common skills or resources (indeed management teams of equity funds and bond

funds are segregated), rather it is from asymmetric information of equity funds (shareholders) and

bond funds (creditors). Combining the perspectives of both sides benefits cross-holding fund families

and general investors. The organization structure of fund families allows such information spillover

which is otherwise not available due to the well-documented segmentation of equities and bonds.

   Moreover, different from active learning across equity funds, cross-asset information spillover tends

to be passive. This is likely due to the cultural gap between bond and equity since managers of each
   5
     Employing bond holdings to predict equity returns has one crucial advantage: it allows us to clearly observe the
predictive power from the cross-holding channel, while alleviates the concern on equity funds' stock-picking skills or
timing ability.



                                                          5
asset class adopt different risk management methods and consider different risk factors. Equity funds

and bond funds also have independent board of trustees and use different trading platforms.

   It is worth noting that cross-asset information synergy has a different welfare distribution compared

to that in the cross-fund subsidization literature (e.g., Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006), Bhattacharya,

Lee, and Pool (2013), Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), and Kempf

and Ruenzi (2007). See Evans, Prado, and Galacho (2007) for a great summary). Both sister equity

and bond funds and their fund family can benefit; such win-win situation differentiates itself from the

win-lose status due to the fund family subsidization.6

   Second, we contribute to the extant literature on market segmentation and hedging across equity

and corporate bond (e.g., Greenwood, Hanson, and Liao, 2018; Kapadia and Pu, 2012; Choi and

Kim, 2018; and Kwan, 1996). Greenwood et al. (2018) suggests that if markets for different asset

classes are tightly integrated, then a shock that affects the pricing of a risk factor in one asset class

will have a similar effect on other asset classes exposed to the same risk; when markets are more

segmented, however, prices of risk in one market may be disconnected from those in other markets.

We confirm their market segmentation model for stand-alone funds, but not so for sister funds from

the same family. Our findings on cross-asset information synergy are consistent with Addoum and

Murfin (2018) in which they show investors in the equity market do not timely capture price-relevant

signals from bank loans. Different from their specific context, our paper provides systematic evidence

on information synergy across equity and bond.

   Finally, our work relates to discussions regarding dual ownership and shareholder-creditor interests.

For example, Jiang, Li, and Shao (2010) find that syndicated loans with dual holders (those holding

the same firm's equities and syndicated loans) have lower loan yield spreads, suggesting that incentive

alignment between shareholders and creditors helps reduce the cost of loans. Bodnaruk and Rossi

(2016) show that targeting firms in M&As who has a larger equity ownership by dual holders tend to

have lower M&A equity premia, also dual holders are more likely to vote in favor of a merger proposal.

Both papers study the impact of dual ownership on firms, whereas our paper focus on dual ownership

itself and its impact on investors in the context of information synergy.
   6
    For example, Gaspar et al. (2006) show that fund families strategically transfer performance across member funds
to favor those more likely to increase overall family profits, and Bhattacharya et al. (2013) show that affiliated funds
of mutual funds provide an insurance against liquidity shocks to other funds in the family but incur the cost for fund
investors.



                                                           6
   In the following, we introduce the data, outline hypotheses, presents the results of cross-holding

behaviors of sister funds, justify such behavior by showing its benefits, and discuss potential channels

of information spillover.



                                                   I.    Data

   Our main data is the survivor-bias-free mutual fund dataset from the Center for Research in Security

Prices (CRSP). The database contains both equity funds and fixed-income funds, and also provides a

map that matches each fund to its fund family over time. This feature is advantageous for our study

to identify fund families cross-holding the same firm's equities and corporate bonds.

   Based on the raw CRSP mutual fund data, we employ the following rules to construct our sample.

First, we eliminate passive, index-tracking, ETF, variable-annuity funds from our sample to focus on

the actively-managed funds. Second, we restrict our sample to the U.S. domestic equity and corporate

bond funds, and keep only fund families holding both active equity funds and active corporate bond

funds in which cross-holding can occur.7 To get a clean relationship of holdings between equities and

bonds, we also remove balanced funds and mixed-asset funds where a single fund holds both equities

and bonds under the same management. Third, we keep only public firms whose equity securities are

traded in stock exchanges and whose bond securities are traded in the over-the-counter market.

   Two steps are critical in identifying cross-holding fund families. The first step is to identify equity

funds and in particular corporate bond funds. Conventionally, the equity mutual fund studies rely

on CRSP style and objective codes (crsp obj cd), which use four alphabets to classify a fund's main

asset class (e.g., Wermers, 2000). For example, ED** refers to the U.S. domestic equity with the last

two characters defining a more granular level. The corporate bond fund studies use CRSP objective

codes (and its earlier versions: Lipper, Strategic Insight, and Wiesenberger) to identify corporate bond

funds (e.g., Jiang, Li, and Wang, 2017). However, we find that the classification (IC**) for domestic

corporate bonds has a poor quality: less than 5% of fixed-income funds having the label IC** while

the majority of qualified bond funds falls under a less granular label I***. Inspired by the equity

mutual fund studies (Evans, 2010, and Clifford, Jordan, and Riley, 2014), we extend the corporate
   7
    We exclude fund families consisting of pure equity funds or pure bond funds. This is relatively a small sample in
terms of asset under management. As further explained in Section II, fund families consisting of both equity and bond
funds control 96.7% of the $17-million mutual fund market.


                                                         7
bond fund classification by imposing two conditions: funds are classified as fixed income funds (I***)

and have more than 50% of their asset holdings as corporate bonds.8

     Following the literature, we initially use asset composition variables provided in CRSP Fund Sum-

mary data to decide whether a fund's assets are primarily invested in corporate bonds (per conv +

per corp > 50%), however we discover that these asset composition variables are not sufficiently accu-

rate. Accordingly, we exploit the CUSIP-level information to determine whether a security in a fund's

portfolio is an equity or a corporate bond by linking them to equity trading data (CRSP) and bond

issuance data (Mergent), then calculate the aggregate proportion by asset class to classify domestic

equity funds and corporate bond funds, where the holdings of genuine equities or bonds comprise of

more than 50% of total holdings.9 We have also tried more stringent cutoff, say 80%, under which the

main results (untabulated) become even stronger though the sample size is much smaller.

     The second critical step is to identify the cross-holding of equities and bonds. We use the mapping

information of security CUSIPs to issuing entities provided by Capital IQ to link bond and equity

at the issuer level. The conventional method relies on the 6-digit firm-level CUSIPs to link bonds

and equities, but this method generates noisy and incomplete results since many firms tend to issue

bonds via a special financing conduit with a completely different first 6-digit CUSIP. Capital IQ, on

the contrary, provides useful information about the ultimate issuer of each security (bond or equity)

and thus allows us to circumvent this problem. Furthermore, we supplement the identification by

manually checking issuer names and their merger and acquisition histories.



A.     Cross-Holdings of Factual and Counterfactual Sister Funds

     Our research question emerges: Would equity and bond funds exhibit atypical investment decision

on the same firm's securities when they are housed in the same fund family, relative to the case

otherwise. To test this, we aggregate across different individual funds and identify cross-holding at
   8
     The cutoff, 50%, is consistent with those used in equity mutual fund studies, say Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010).
   9
     We thank Veronika Pool for pointing out the problem of asset composition variables in the CRSP mutual fund
database. After identifying securities (equity or bond) at the CUSIP level and calculating the bottom-up asset proportion,
we find that some funds labelled as ED** have less than 10% holdings in equities and some funds with less than 10%
of assets invested in common and preferred equities (per com + per pref < 10%) indeed hold more than 50% of total
assets in equities. The problem is even more severe for corporate bond funds, where the percentage of corporate bonds
(per corp + per conv ) often fails to reflect the true proportion. Indeed, this identification issue is the main driver for the
different results in the current paper compared to an earlier version: the significance and the sign remain the same, but
the magnitude in the current version becomes more accurate.



                                                              8
the fund family level for specific firms at a given time.

                                     [Insert Figure 1 about here.]

     Panel (a) of Figure 1 illustrates the identification of sister funds cross-holding. In this hypothetical

figure, there are two fund families, Fidelity Investments and Invesco, both having equity funds and

corporate bond funds. At a given time, each fund (equity or bond) has asset holdings corresponding to

its asset-class mandate. For example, the equity funds of Invesco hold the stocks of Tesla and Apple,

while its bond funds hold the corporate bonds of Tesla, Facebook, and Exxon-Mobile. In this case,

Invesco is a fund family cross-holding Tesla's securities. For convenience, we also say equity and bond

funds in Invesco are sister funds cross-holding Tesla's equities and bonds. Similarly, Fidelity also has

sister funds that cross-hold Apple's equity and bonds, outlined in the red boxes.

     It is worth noting that sister funds cross-holding is identified at the firm and fund family level. A

fund family often has many equity (bond) funds, and the holdings of a firm's equity (bond) is aggre-

gated across all equity (bond) funds in the fund family. For example, the holding of Tesla's bonds in

Fidelity refers to aggregated holdings across high income fund, intermediate bond fund, short-term

bond fund, total bond fund, etc. The term "sister funds" is used for convenience, not necessarily mean-

ing to identify cross-holding by choosing specific funds. Throughout the paper, we interchangeably

use the terms of sister funds, sister funds cross-holding, and cross-holding fund families.

     Panel (b) illustrates the cross-holding of stand-alone funds or counterfactual sister funds. Take

Tesla as an example, the bond fund of Fidelity and the equity fund of Invesco hold Tesla's assets but

they belong to different fund families, thus they are stand-alone funds that cross-hold Tesla's bonds

and equities. Similarly, the bond fund of Invesco and the equity fund of Fidelity are stand-alone funds

cross-holding Exxon-Mobile's assets, indicated by the arrow lines.



B.     The Key Variable: Holding Change

     Our primary test variable is Hi,f,t , the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm

i's equities or bonds held by fund family f during the quarter t:


                                   Hi,f,t = (Hi,f,t - Hi,f,t-1 )/Hi,f,t-1 ,                              (1)



                                                      9
where Hi,f,t is aggregate quantity across all unique portfolios (crsp portno) held by actively-managed

equity or corporate bond funds.10 When the previous holding quantity is negative (short position),

we use absolute number to reflect the direction of change. By construction, the percentage change

has a lower bound of -100% but no upper bound. To avoid the possibility that extreme values drive

the results, we winsorize the percentage change at 5% level. Alternatively, winsorization at 1% level

yields qualitatively similar results. The CRSP mutual fund database also offers the holding data at

the monthly frequency in recent years, but the higher frequency data is mostly available for equity

funds while the majority holding data for bonds is released only at the quarterly frequency. Thus, we

construct the quarterly holding change for equities and corporate bonds to maintain consistency.

   Different from our measure, most studies in the literature adopt a conventional measure denoted

as fund flow (e.g., Chen et al., 2010):

                                                T N Ai,f,t - T N Ai,f,t-1 (1 + Ri,t )
                                 F lowi,f,t =                                         ,                            (2)
                                                            T N Ai,f,t-1

where T N A is the total net asset and R is the raw return. However, this flow measure reflects both

the change in market price and the change in holding quantity. Since our focus is solely on investment

decision across funds in a fund family, using the change in the number of shares summed over funds

would be more appropriate.

   We also consider a conditional measure of holding changes that filters out the effect of extreme

fund flows:

                              Hi,f,t = [Hi,f,t | P ( )t < F lowf,t < P (1 -  )t ] ,                                (3)

where P ( )t is the  -th percentile of flows across fund families at a given quarter t and F lowf,t is the

aggregated fund flow of a fund family. This measure is inspired by Khan, Kogan, and Serafeim (2012),

Coval and Stafford (2007a), and Ringgenberg, Huang, and Zhang (2018) given the concern that the

percentage change may not represent an information-driven investment decision if the fund manager

chooses to keep the exact same portfolio with large fund inflows or outflows.11 Khan et al. (2012)
  10
     In CRSP mutual fund data, multiple funds in a fund family may hold the same portfolio but have different fund
features such as management fee. For example, one portfolio (crsp portno=1009451) is held by six funds in Invesco,
that is, AIM Constellation Fund: Class A Shares, Class B Shares, Class C Shares, Class R Shares, Class Y Shares, and
Institutional Class. In this situation, we only count this portfolio once in calculating the holdings in Invesco.
  11
     The original measures in three papers are defined as the holding change in a firm's equity aggregated across funds
at a given time scaled by the equity's outstanding shares. Here we need a measure comparable for a firm's equity and
corporate bond. Thus we scale the holding change by the previous holding level under related assets (equity or bond).


                                                           10
choose the cutoff of the 10th percentile ( = 10). We also consider the cutoff values of 5th and 25th

percentile.



C.     Other Variables

     In our analyses, we also consider two sets of variables. The first set of variables is related to firm's

risk which potentially affects the mutual fund investment decisions. Firm size is the logarithm of total

assets. Leverage is the ratio of debt to equity in book value, in which the debt includes long-term

debt and debt in current liabilities. The book-to-market ratio is defined as the book value of equity

divided by its market value. Moreover, we use the firm-level credit ratings provided by Standard &

Poor's in the cross-sectional analysis.

     The second set of variables captures fund family characteristics. Fund family size is the total net

asset managed by a fund family f across all funds in the family. Fund family expense ratio is the

net-asset-value-weighted average of fund expense ratios in a fund family, where fund expense ratio is

the ratio of total investment that shareholders pay for the fund's operating expenses. Fund family

management fee is the average of fund management fee scaled by total net assets, and fund family

turnover ratio is the average of fund turnover ratios in a fund family, where fund turnover ratio is the

minimum of aggregated sales or aggregated purchases of securities divided by the average 12-month

total net assets of the fund. Fund family turnover also use net-asset-value weights in averaging across

funds.



D.     Summary Statistics

     Our final sample spans from 2008Q1 to 2018Q4 including 222 unique fund families and 1,485

unique issuing firms.12 Table 1 presents summary statistic for main variables in our sample. We first

calculate summary statistics of each variable at each quarter, and report the average values over the

whole sample period.
  12
    The CRSP mutual fund database starts earlier than 2008. Two concerns motivate us to start our sample from
2008Q1. First, Schwarz and Potter (2016) compare the quality of mutual funds between CRSP and SEC and suggest
"the use of CRSP portfolio data prior to the fourth quarters of 2007 should be avoided." A second and more important
concern is that CRSP has an issue of not including historical corporate bond holding information before 2008 (they do
have bond fund performance data). We detected this problem and communicated with CRSP. They confirmed this defect
and indicated that there is no further way to improve the data quality.



                                                         11
                                    [Insert Table 1 about here.]

   The average change in equity holding per quarter is 13.32% with a standard deviation of 64.90%.

The average change in bond holding per quarter is 6.29% with a standard deviation of 36.31%. Both

holding changes have small median values, however they exhibit large variation towards both sides of

changes. The average change in equity holdings per quarter is much larger than that in bond holdings,

possibly due to the fact that the corporate bond market is much more illiquid than the equity market.

Our sample funds' portfolios are well-diversified: a holding of each firm in equity and bond funds,

on average, takes less than 1% of fund families' total asset ( {Equity,Bond} ). Even the 90th percentile

holding weights are not large (1.14% for equity and 0.66% for bond), indicating that there is no heavy

concentration on a small set of firms. Firms in our sample on average have 67 billion dollars of total

asset, a leverage (debt-to-equity) ratio of 1.16, and a book-to-market ratio of 0.51.



                       II.    Hypotheses and Research Design

   Information is often gathered at the fund family level (e.g., Elton, Gruber, and Green, 2007) and

is potentially exploited by different funds in the same family. The literature has shown that different

equity funds under the same fund family have the tendency to share information of underlying equities

(see Choi et al., 2016; Brown and Wu, 2016). The literature, however, is silent about whether there

also exists information spillover across funds managing different asset classes, say equity and corporate

bond, under the same family, and whether such information exchange would compliment the firm-level

information as a whole.

   The lack of study on interactions between equity funds and bond funds in the mutual fund literature

is odd given the notable growth of fund families that contain both types of funds. According to the

CRSP survivor-bias-free mutual fund data, fund families that simultaneously contain equity funds and

bond funds account for less than one third of the total number of fund families, but their portion in

terms of AUM dominates. Figure 2 shows that fund families with both types control on average 93%

of the total assets in the mutual fund market, growing from 90.4% of 3.0 trillions AUM in 2008 to

96.7% of 17.3 trillions AUM in 2018.

                                   [Insert Figure 2 about here.]



                                                   12
   The main hindrance to the missing study is likely market segmentation across equities and bonds.

Greenwood, Hanson, and Liao (2018) build a model showing that capital moves quickly within an

asset class, but slowly between asset classes. Kapadia and Pu (2012) identify pricing discrepancies

across firms' equity and bonds, which supports a lack of integration across equities and bonds. The

segmentation could be due to multiple reasons. For example, the equity market and bond market

have different composition of investors which leads to varying information foci and motivations to

change their holdings. Alternatively, if investors that hold the same firm's equities and bonds are

linked under a well-integrated environment, say mutual fund families, would cross-asset segmentation

still hold? With these considerations, we present the segmentation hypothesis.

Hypothesis 1 (Segmentation): When equity and bond funds are affiliated under the same fund family,

their investment decisions on the cross-holding assets are affected by each other, resulting in atypical

holding co-movement relative to non-affiliated funds.


   To test the segmentation hypothesis, we specify Model I of dynamic holding change for sister funds

belonging to the same family and Model II for stand-alone funds that hold the same firm's equities

and bonds but belong to different families.


                                Equity
                     Model I : Hi,f ,t = F E +  · Hi,f
                                                   Bond
                                                       ,t +  · Zi,t + i,f,t                            (4)
                                Equity
                    Model II : Hi,f ,t = F E +  · Hi,f
                                                   Bond
                                                       ,t +  · Zi,t + i,f,t ,                          (5)


where Hi,f,t is the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's equities or bonds held

by fund family f during quarter t, as defined in Equation (1) of Section I. Model II shares specifications

in Model I except that the cross-holding relationship is estimated between counterfactual sister funds

which are in fact stand-alone funds from different fund families (f = f ). For the fixed effect F E ,

we consider the fixed effect of firm, fund family, industry, and time (calendar quarter). In some

specifications, we also consider the two-way fixed effect of the intersection of firm and time. The

vector of control variables, Z , includes the proxies of a firm's riskiness such as firm size, leverage, or

book-to-market ratio, which potentially affect the holding decision.

   The estimated coefficients  and  reveal the co-movement degree of holding changes in bonds and

equities of the same firm for sister funds and stand-alone funds, respectively. If all fund managers



                                                    13
independently react to a firm-specific news (public signal) through their holding decisions, we expect

 in Model II to be similar to  in Model I in terms of the magnitude and the sign, because the

reaction to the same public news should be indifferent to whether a bond or an equity fund are housed

in the same fund family or not.

   Note that we do not try to identify the causality between holding changes of cross-held assets, nor

did we impose a particular prior on the co-movement relationship. As discussed in the introduction,

the holdings of equity funds (shareholders) and bond funds (creditors) may have various relationships,

positive or negative, significant or insignificant. Under the null, whatever the holding relationship

between equities and bonds may be, the average relationship for a specific firm at a given time

should be similar among all equity and bond funds holding the firm's asset. However, if the cross-

holding relationship is significantly different between Model I and Model II, then it implies that the

organization structure of fund families plays a role.

   In the similar spirit, we combine Model I and II into a nested model to test the marginal contribution

of sister funds relative to stand-alone funds in the cross-holding relationship:


                     Equity
                    Hi,f,t  = F E +  · Hi,f,t
                                        Bond        Bond
                                              +  · Hi,f ,t +  · Zi,t + i,f,t .                       (6)


This specification helps decompose the holding co-movement result into the channel related to the

sister fund link and other irrelevant channels by comparing  and  . We will present the test results

in Section III.

   Our main focus is to test whether sister funds behave differently from stand-alone funds in their

investment decisions on the commonly-held firms, and whether the difference is related to information

spillover between sister funds. If both  and  are insignificant, the results provide supporting evidence

to the segmentation of equity and bond. If  in Model II is significantly different relative to  in Model

I, we nevertheless cannot conclude that there exists information spillover across sister equity and bond

funds in the same family. We then posit the second hypothesis.

Hypothesis 2 (Information): The co-movement between the holdings of equity funds and bond funds

on commonly-held firms' assets is significantly different for sister funds in the same family relative to

stand-alone funds from different families, since sister funds can synthesize internal information that



                                                   14
is not available to stand-alone funds.


   Not all trades are driven by information, neither are investment decisions captured by the holding

change. Our hypothesis is tested against more generic alternatives such as non-information drivers

that could be operational, mechanical, or random.

   One alternative explanation to the co-movement in sister funds is related to the fund flow. Prior

research has shown that managers mechanically scale their existing positions depending on fund flows

(Coval and Stafford, 2007b, and Lou, 2012). Since fund flows tend to be more correlated amongst

funds within the same fund family, the co-movement in holdings can be due to the correlation in

flows. For example, a fund management company decides to withdraw from a specific market, then

both its equity funds and bond funds liquidate their holdings of commonly-held firms. The flow-based

explanation is less of a concern in our case because the holding change is calculated at the fund family

level and for both equities and bonds--the non-information-driven holding change might happen for a

single or a few funds, but rarely happens for all equity funds and bond funds holding the same firm's

assets at the same time, which requires tremendous coordination among fund managers both within

the same asset class and across different asset classes. With that said, we also conduct a robustness

check by using the flow-adjusted measure as in Equation (3) which excludes the case in which fund

families experience large capital flows, a test motivated by Khan et al. (2012), Coval and Stafford

(2007a), and Ringgenberg et al. (2018).

   Another alternative explanation is related to the managers' skill. Managers with similar skills

are likely to identify similar sets of companies to (dis)invest and their trades tend to be correlated

(e.g., Cohen, Coval, and P´
                          astor, 2005). This concern generally holds within the same asset class, say

equity funds, but is less likely to hold for different asset classes. According to the corporate bond fund

literature and the industry convention, bond managers have different information focus and skills from

their equity counterparts. For example, bond fund managers adopt completely different benchmark

models and care more about bond characteristics such as credit rating or duration (see Cici and

Gibson, 2012). Bond fund managers also have different investment styles (e.g., AQR, 2016).

   There are also other random reasons leading to the co-movement. For example, a fund's manager

is replaced with a new manager who has different preferences from the predecessor, or a fund has to

liquidate a part of its holdings for a random reason. It requires a great degree of coincidence: such an


                                                   15
event has to happen on both equity and bond funds for a given firm at the same time. Thus it cannot

systematically drive the co-movement of sister funds holdings.

   It is impossible to explicitly rule out all non-information channels. To answer this challenge,

we test information synergy in Section IV. `Synergy' is defined as the interaction of two or more

forces producing a combined effect greater than the sum of their individual effects. In our context, it

implies that being exposed to information on the other side (creditor vs. shareholder) compliments the

information set of commonly-held firms. Our mechanism does not necessarily require that managers

of sister funds actively communicate or collaborate, neither that managers of sister funds have private

information. Very likely, they both observe similar information (e.g., public news), but equity funds

(shareholders) and bond funds (creditors) have different interpretations even to the same public signal

since they have different information foci and risk perspectives. Operating under the same fund

family offers better access to each other's information (e.g., management family has research papers

on both equity earnings and corporate credit of the same firm. Section V offers more discussions

on information spillover channels), therefore helps compliment the overall information and boost the

performance. Evidence for investment benefits would rule out all possible non-information channels

since such channels cannot systematically result in a larger profit.



                         III.    Cross-holding of Sister Funds

   In this section, we examine investment decisions on commonly-held firms by equity and bond funds

that are housed in the same family (sister funds) and those in different families (stand-alone funds).

We first take a preliminary look on the cross-holding situations for sister equity and bond funds in

the same family. We then study the dynamic holding relationship on commonly-held firms' equities

and bonds separately for sister funds and stand-alone funds, and test whether such relationship is

different due to the organization structure of fund family. Lastly, we present several benchmarks for

the holding relationship of the same firm's equities and bonds based on the aggregate holdings by all

mutual funds and those by mixed-assets and balanced funds.




                                                  16
A.     Preliminary Look of Cross-Holding of Sister Funds

     Before studying the cross-holding relationship of sister funds, we first check how likely equity funds

and bond funds in the same family hold the same firm's securities. We introduce two cross-holding

measures, both are defined at the fund family level. We measure the degrees of sister fund cross-holding

from the perspective of equity funds and also from bond funds. From the perspective of equity funds,

for example, the variables are constructed as follows. For all equity funds in fund family f at time

t, we count the unique number of firms in their holdings and calculate the proportion of firms whose

corporate bonds are also held by sister bond funds in the same family, IW Cohold f t (issuer-weighted).

The second measure is similar except that we use the market value of holdings instead of the number

of firms. Specifically, we calculate the ratio of the total market value of common holdings over the

total market value for all firms held by equity funds in fund family f at time t, VW Cohold f,t (value-

weighted). In order to clearly observe fund families' discretionary cross-holding pattern, we require

firms in the sample to have public equities and tradeable corporate bonds.

                                     [Insert Figure 3 about here.]

     Figure 3 depicts the mean value of issuer-weighted co-holding (in solid line) and the mean value

of value-weighted co-holding (in dotted line), as well as the band of the 25th and 75th percentiles of

issuer-weighted co-holding (in shade) across all fund families containing sister funds during the time

period 2008Q1 - 2018Q4. Panel (a) defines the measures from the perspective of equity funds. The

average issuer-weighted co-holding is 13%, indicating that for every 100 firms held by equity funds in

a fund family, there are on average 13 firms whose bonds are held by bond funds in the same family.

The co-holding ratio ranges from the 25th percentile value of 4% to the 75th percentile value of 25%,

and the average value-weighted co-holding is 19%. When we measure the degree of co-holding from

the perspective of bond funds, the ratios tend to be larger as shown in Panel (b), on average 37%

and 38% for issuer-weighted and value-weighted respectively. The lower co-holding degree in Panel

(a) reflects the fact that equity funds hold more firms and have larger assets under management.

     Overall, the cross-holding ratio across assets is low especially from the equity funds' perspective,

in spite of the growing pattern. This preliminary finding suggests that equity funds and bond funds,

even in the same family, generally tend to have different considerations in portfolio allocation. In the

next subsection, we focus on the commonly-held firms and examine the relationship of their holdings


                                                     17
by sister funds.



B.     Cross-Holding of Sister Funds

     To understand the cross-holding relationship among sister equity and bond funds, we examine the

change of holdings as specified in Model I. The dynamic allocation decisions capture sister funds'

decision-making processes on their cross-holdings.

                                      [Insert Table 2 about here.]

     Table 2 presents the results. For specifications, we sequentially consider the fund family fixed effect

in Column (1), the combined fixed effect of fund family and time (year-quarter) in Column (2), the

combined fixed effect of fund family, time, and industry in Column (3), the combined fixed effect of

fund family, time, and firm in Column (4), the two-way fixed effect of firm×time in Column (5), and

the combined fixed effect of fund family and firm × time in Column (6). The specification in Column

(6) sets the most rigorous control for any factor affecting the fund holdings due to fund family specific

features or time-varying firm characteristics. We calculate the robust standard errors clustered at the

fund family level and report the corresponding t-statistics in parentheses.

     The results across specifications consistently suggest a positive and significant co-movement rela-

tionship between equity holdings and bond holdings of the same firm by sister funds in the same fund

family. In detail, Panel (a) shows that the estimated co-movement coefficient  ranges between 0.034

to 0.046 with a statistical significance at less than 1% level. Take Specification (5) as an example,

one standard deviation increase in bond holdings is related to 1.4 percent increase in the same firm's

equity holdings. Given the average change of equity holdings over the whole sample is 12.16 percent,

the impact from bond funds is economically large.



B.1.     Robustness Test


     We conduct two robust tests for the dynamic holding relationship of sister funds. First, we re-

examine the relationship conditional on the scenario when a firm's equity return and bond return

move in the same direction. One can argue that the positive holding co-movement is entirely driven

by return chasing behavior. Fund managers may increase the holding of assets whose prices appreciate,


                                                     18
or vice versa. If this is the case, a subsample of equity and bond whose returns move in the same

direction would be associated with dominating magnitude of the co-movement.13 Panel (b) in Table 2

show that adding such a constraint has little influence on the dynamic holding relationship of sister

funds.

     Second, we re-examine the relationship using the flow-adjusted measure defined in Equation (3) to

relieve the concern that the significant co-movement is due to flow-incurred trade instead of unforced

investment decision (Khan et al., 2012, Ringgenberg et al., 2018). Table 3 shows three sets of results

by removing fund families that experience a large capital flow beyond 5th, 10th, and 25th percentile

on both sides. Each set of results uses both the baseline specification (Column 1) and the most

stringent specification (Column 6) in Table 2. After removing the flow-incurred trade using the

two-side threshold of 25th percentile, the holding relationship becomes even stronger. If removing the

flow-incurred trade using the threshold of 5th or 10th percentile, the results are similar to our findings.

                                         [Insert Table 3 about here.]

     Overall, though equity and bond funds in the same family tend to hold different firms in portfolios

as shown in the previous subsection, the above tests suggest that their holding decisions on the

commonly-held firms seem to be significantly related. These findings imply that decisions by investors

in two asset markets are not made completely independently. To understand further whether the

co-movement is driven by firm fundamental news, internal information spillover, or non-information

factors, we further investigate the cross-holding relationship of counterfactual sister funds in the next

subsection.



C.     Cross-Holding of Counterfactual Sister Funds

     Firms' equity prices and bond prices can respond to public firm-specific news in the same direction.

Upon such news, rational fund managers of equity and bond funds would accordingly make independent

investment decisions. In this case, we are likely to observe co-movement in holding decisions as in

Table 2. This common reaction mechanism is different from the channel related to internal information
  13
    We construct the quarterly returns as the compounded monthly returns within each quarter. The monthly equity
return is downloaded directly from CRSP. For bonds, we calculate the firm-level return as the value-weighted average of
bond-level returns, using the methodology in Bai et al. (2019). The illiquidity in the bond market remarkably affect the
sample size given many firms do not have valid bond returns.




                                                          19
spillover. To distinguish these two channels, we exploit Model II proposed in Section II. The public

news should be available across all funds whether they belong to the same family or not. Therefore,

this setup provides an experiment in which we eliminate the effect of being linked within the same

fund family while keeping all other firm-specific effects intact.

                                         [Insert Figure 4 about here.]

   To this end, we construct a counterfactual sister fund relationship. Corresponding to each equity

holding in fund family f for a given firm i at quarter t, we randomly match bond holdings of firm i in

another fund family f . This process allows us to eliminate any effects due to sister-fund relationship.

With these fictitious cross-holdings, we repeat estimating specification (5) with firm × time fixed

effect in Table 2. As we are matching two different fund families, including additional fund family

fixed effect as in specification (6) is redundant. To visualize the difference, we bootstrap this matching

experiment for 100 times and report the histogram of the estimated coefficients  (left) and t-statistic

values (right) in Panel (a) of Figure 4. The average estimate of  is 0.001 with a standard deviation

of 0.002, and the average absolute t-stat value is 0.89. The cross-holding relationship of counterfactual

sister funds is remarkably smaller compared to that of sister funds where  = 0.042 (t-stat= 4.04).

Moreover, most estimates are statistically insignificant at 10% level as presented by blue markers.

   Fund families arguably attract managers with similar quality. For example, it is possible that large

fund families are able to attract the best talent while small fund families recruit managers with rather

moderate skills. The strong co-movement in investment decisions of sister funds within fund families

might be solely reflecting the correlation in investment decisions of managers with similar skill levels.

To address this concern, we construct the counterfactual sister funds, simultaneously matching four

fund family characteristics: asset size, turnover ratio, expense ratio, and management fee.14 Panel (b)

of Figure 4 presents the estimates of  under these conditional matching. The results are similar to

the unconditional matching but even cleaner, with the average estimate of  as small as 0.001 and

being significant at the 10% level only in 3 out of 100 regressions.

   The stark contrast of the cross-holding relationship between sister funds and counterfactual sister

funds rules out the possibility that the co-movement is due to independent and parallel reactions to
  14
    At a given time, we sort fund families into five portfolios independently by fund family's size, turnover ratio, expense
ratio, and management fee, which are value-weighted average across funds in each fund family. Two fund families are
identified as a matching pair if they both belong to the same quintile portfolio in all four dimensions.



                                                            20
the public news about the underlying firm. The rigorous specification in fixed effects also rules out

other possibilities that the co-movement is due to industry shocks or fund family characteristics. Thus,

it supports Hypothesis 1 that the co-movement between the holdings of equity funds and bond funds

on commonly-held firms' assets is significant different for sister funds and counterfactual sister funds.

For equity funds and bond funds, sharing the same management company makes their investment

decisions different, i.e., the organization structure of fund family matters.

                                         [Insert Table 4 about here.]

     To test the marginal contribution of sister funds versus counterfactual sister funds in the cross-

holding relationship, we further estimate the nested model in Equation (6). Table 4 highlights the

contrast between  and  . Since we join all possible matching combinations in Panel (a), the number

of observations is substantially larger than the factual case in Table 2. Controlling for fund family

fixed effect and firm×time fixed effect, the findings from both the unconditional matching in Panel

(a) and the conditional matching in Panel (b) confirm the economic and statistical significance of the

co-movement for sister funds in the same family, while the co-movement for stand-alone funds from

different families are economically much smaller, and even insignificant under conditional matching.15

     One notable pattern in this result is the economically insignificant (often statistically as well)

coefficients among counterfactual cross-holdings. This finding posits an additional layer of asset market

segmentation: not only is the return correlation between the same firm's assets insignificant (e.g.,

Greenwood et al., 2018) but also investors' decision on them is insignificantly correlated. To gauge our

magnitude of holding co-movement in the context of a broader setup, we provide several benchmarks

in the following subsection.



D.     Benchmark Co-Movement Relationship

     What should we expect for the unconditional relationship of a firm's equity holdings and bond

holdings? To answer this question, we design two types of benchmarks. The first type of benchmark

offers the lower boundary of the co-movement based on aggregate holdings across all mutual fund

investors in the CRSP database. We estimate Model I again except that the holding change variable
  15
     The differences become wider as  is less significant under conditional matching. However, we refrain making further
interpretation because the sample of conditional matching loses statistical power likely due to a much-reduced sample
size.


                                                          21
is constructed at the firm-time level instead of fund family-firm-time level:


                                 Equity
                                Hi,t    = F E +  · Hi,t
                                                    Bond
                                                         +  · Zi,t + i,t ,                                           (7)


where Hi,t is the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's equities or bonds

across all mutual fund investors during quarter t. Note that our sample focuses on active funds with

primary investment in equities or corporate bonds (see Section I for the sample filtering criteria). On

the contrary, for the purpose of the benchmark construction, we use holdings of all mutual funds that

also consist of passive funds and active funds with marginal allocation in equities or bonds. Therefore,

the estimated coefficient in Equation (7) provides a lower boundary for the holding co-movement of

sister funds in our sample, since the aggregation largely ignores sister-fund-related mechanisms that

would affect cross-holding co-movement.

                                         [Insert Table 5 about here.]

   Panel (a) of Table 5 shows that the co-movement is positive but insignificant if considering the

holdings by all mutual fund investors (Columns 1-3). The magnitude is very small with the estimated

coefficient  = 0.00004 and t-statistic value around 1. Theoretically, the holding co-movement should

follow the price co-movement. The insignificant holding co-movement relationship may be due to the

noisy and mixed price co-movement between equities and bonds. Thus, we also examine the case in

which a firm's equity return and bond return move in the same direction, either both positive or both

negative.16 Columns (4)-(6) show that adding the constraint of equity and bond prices moving in

the same direction has little influence and simply confirms the findings of the unconstrained case in

Columns (1)-(3).17

   The second benchmark suggests the upper boundary of the co-movement by examining the co-

movement relationship within mixed-asset funds and balanced funds in which equities and bonds are

simultaneously managed. Nohel, Wang, and Zheng (2010) study mutual funds and hedge funds man-
  16
      We construct the quarterly returns as the compounded monthly returns within each quarter. The monthly equity
return is downloaded directly from CRSP. For bonds, we calculate the firm-level return as the value-weighted average of
bond-level returns, using the methodology in Bai et al. (2019). The illiquidity in the bond market remarkably affect the
sample size given many firms do not have valid equity returns and bond returns simultaneously.
   17
      This is probably not surprising. Foremost, the change of holdings during a quarter may not accurately capture the
price change. Stock prices always move and move fast, thus a positive quarterly return that only reflects the information
at several time points unnecessarily refer to the positive welfare of shareholders during that quarter. Moreover, the
illiquidity in the bond market hinders bond prices to timely capture creditor's welfare, and also notably reduce the
sample size with less than half of the observations in Columns (4)-(6).



                                                           22
aged by the same manager and show that there is information advantage for side-by-side management.

In our benchmark, the side-by-side management across equities and bonds within a fund captures the

most possible co-movement relationship. To make a fair comparison with Table 2, we employ Model

I to test the holding relationship of equities and bonds if they are managed by mixed-assets and bal-

anced funds in a fund family. Panel (b) of Table 5 presents the results. The co-movement coefficient

 is around 0.10 with a t-stat of 2.45 under the fixed effect of fund family, time, and firm or industry,

as shown in Columns (1) and (2). However, after controlling for the two-way firm × time fixed effect,

the estimate becomes smaller ( = 0.0656), and mostly important, it loses the statistical significance

(t-stat= 1.35). In the same direction scenario, the estimates become larger (0.17  0.20), but again

the firm × time fixed effect eliminates the significance.

   The benchmark findings provide two important messages. First, though equities and bonds should

both reflect a firm's fundamentals, their holdings are weakly linked if considering the holdings by all

mutual funds. This finding offers additional evidence supporting the market segmentation literature

which traditionally studies the prices of equity and bond instead of the holdings. Second, even in

the side-by-side management scenario, the holding co-movement is relatively small and even loses

significance after controlling for the firm×time fixed effect. The impact of the firm×time fixed effect

indicates that the significant co-movement within mixed-asset funds is primarily due to the manager's

response to the public information of the holding firms. If there is information spillover between

sister equity and bond funds contributing to the co-movement as in Hypothesis 2, the co-movement

relationship should not be absorbed by the firm×time fixed effect.

   In sum, results presented in this section indicate that funds affiliation and fund family's organi-

zation structure are important for cross-asset funds' investment decisions. However, the significant

co-movement of sister does not necessarily imply that they exchange price-relevant information. In fact,

such a co-movement can be caused by various non-information channels such as the flow-dependent

scaling discussed in Section II. To test Hypothesis 2 that the cross-holding co-movement is caused by

information spillover across sister equity and bond funds that is not available to stand-alone funds,

we will examine the benefits of cross-holding in Section IV.




                                                   23
                IV.     Benefits from Sister Funds Cross-holding

   We have shown that sister funds in the same fund family adjust their holdings on commonly-held

firms' assets in a different way from stand-alone funds in different fund families. The findings suggest

that the organization structure plays an important role: sharing the same umbrella of a fund family

seems to encourage internal information spillover across equity funds and bond funds. In this section,

we quantify the benefit of sister funds cross-holding. To this end, whether sister funds and their fund

families can enhance the performance from cross-holding would provide an important implication. If

they can derive a better profit, this would be strong evidence that information content in each asset

market is not redundant, hence it implies a possibility of information synergy. At the same time, it

rules out non-information-based channels for the co-movement since those should not explain notable

profits.

   The literature conventionally utilizes the fund performance, raw or risk-adjusted return, to evaluate

the profit based on specific strategies, fund manager skills, or fund characteristics. To cite a few

among many others, Jiang and Zheng (2018) propose a new measure, active fundamental performance

(AFP), to identify skilled fund managers and show that equity mutual funds with higher AFP has

better performance proxied by fund returns. Sialm, Sun, and Zheng (2019) show that fund investors'

geographical preference affects hedge fund performance measured by risk-adjusted fund returns. Cici

and Gibson (2012) study the performance of corporate bond mutual funds through buy-and-hold

returns of corporate bond portfolios managed by fund managers.

   These conventional methods however can be hardly applied to our case due to multiple reasons.

First, our cross-holding is defined at the firm and fund family level. While the return of fund family

captures the overall performance, it does not reflect the specific performance due to cross-holding.

Second, one fund family can be identified as both cross-holding and non-cross-holding simultaneously,

depending on the holding firm, thus the conventional methods cannot decompose the fund family

performance into the one contributed by sister funds cross-holding and the others.

   Another strand of performance measure decomposes the fund's assets into two portfolios comprising

firms with and without specific features, then compare the two portfolios' performance. For example,

Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) focus on connections between mutual fund managers and corporate



                                                  24
board members and justify the performance by comparing the returns of connected firms' stocks and

unconnected ones. This method does not apply to our case either. Our hypothesis does not claim that

firms under sister fund cross-holding perform better than other firms in a fund family. Instead, we

want to compare the performance of sister funds and stand-alone funds holding the same firms where

fund family affiliation is the only way to differentiate them.

     In this section, we design three novel tests to quantitatively verify the benefits of cross-holding. The

first test examines whether cross-holding helps sister funds to make more profit-enhancing allocations.

The second test explores the case of initial acquisition when a firm's assets is cross-held by a fund

family for the first time. Lastly, we directly investigate whether cross-holding helps predict equity

returns.



A.     Profit-Enhancing Allocation

     In this subsection, we provide direct evidence that cross-asset holdings facilitate information synergy

and improves the performance of fund families. We propose a new measure of the cross-holding

benefit on investment decisions. When equity funds and bond funds synthesize their price-relevant

information, chances are high that they adjust holdings in a timely manner to enhance profit. We

introduce a dummy variable P ROF IT to identify the profit-enhancing allocation. In particular,

P ROF ITi,f,t is equal to 1 if equity funds of fund family f enhances profits at the end of quarter t

based on the position adjustment in firm i's equity holdings during quarter t - 1 prior to the return

realization in quarter t, otherwise it is equal to 0. Profit-enhancing adjustment is made if an equity

fund reduces (increases) its holding of firm i before the equity experiences a negative (positive) return,

as shown below:                            
                                            1
                                           
                                                     if    s(Hi,f,t-1 ) × s(ri,t ) > 0
                         P ROF ITi,f,t =
                                            0       if     s(Hi,f,t-1 ) × s(ri,t )  0,
                                           


where ri,t is the equity return of firm i in quarter t and s(·) denotes the sign function that assigns 1

to a positive number and -1 to a negative number. For example, if Hi,f,t-1 > 0 and followed by a

positive return of firm i's equity, then s(Hi,f,t-1 ) = 1 and s(ri,t ) = 1, resulting in P ROF IT = 1.

The definition of Hi,f,t-1 is identical to the one in Equation (1).

     The timeline below shows the construction of P ROF IT for a given firm i and fund family f . In


                                                      25
order for P ROF IT to be 1, the asset i's return in quarter t (rt ) must have the same direction as the

holding change in the previous quarter (Ht-1 ) by fund family f .

           Cross-holding                  Cross-holding                          Profit

                     Position change (Ht-1 )          Return realization (rt )

               t-2                             t-1                                 t      time



   This methodology is not specific to asset types as long as we observe assets returns. However,

as shown in Panel (b) of Table 2, we are subject to a great degree of missing bond returns. Due to

the difference in comprehensiveness of observable returns between equity and bond market, we focus

on profit-enhancing allocations on equity holdings. Accordingly, we test whether the cross-holding of

sister funds leads to more profit-generating allocations on equity in the following specification:


                            P ROF ITi,f,t = F E +  · Coholdi,f,t-1 + i,f,t ,                          (8)


where Coholdi,f,t-1 is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if firm i's bonds are held by sister bond funds

in fund family f during quarter t-1, otherwise 0. Table 6 presents the results. Via F E , we control

for various heterogeneity across fund families, firms, and calendar time, and sequentially consider the

fixed effect of fund family in Column (1), the combined fixed effects of fund family and time in Column

(2), the combined the fixed effects of fund family, time, and firm in Column (3), and the two-way fixed

effect of firm×time in Column (4).

                                     [Insert Table 6 about here.]

   Using these linear models has a merit in particular when the dependent variable is binary, that is, we

do not need to rely on the numerical convergence of the estimation which tends to be problematic with

multi-dimensional fixed effects (Beck, 2018). However, for robustness, we also estimate the conditional

logit model with the firm×time fixed effect in Column (5). The comparison of the logit model and

linear models would allow us to check whether there exists a serious bias in estimating the coefficients

via linear models.

   Across all specifications in Table 6, we consistently find a significant estimate of  . The estimation

using the conditional logit model in Column (5) is also consistent with the linear model estimations,


                                                     26
enhancing the confidence in using linear models. The results suggest that sister funds cross-holding

the same firm's assets have about 7.312.4 percent higher chance to make profit-enhancing allocations

than stand-alone funds.

     The findings provide an important implication for the cause of the co-movement: managers of

sister funds are exposed to each other's price-relevant information of commonly-held firms, affecting

each other's investment decision. Further, through this mechanism, a cross-holding generates infor-

mation advantage compared to a case without it. Any non-information-based explanation for the

co-movement cannot explain the systematic profit-enhancing allocation. For example, large capital

flow simultaneously across sister funds due to liquidity reasons may generate significant co-movement

in their cross-holdings, but it should not be associated with a better profit.



B.     The Case of Initial Acquisitions

     The second experiment explores the case of initial acquisitions of assets. When an asset is newly

acquired by a fund, there will be a substantial degree of information generated. The new information

would therefore make a contribution to the profit at the margin. To test this, we focus on a subsample

in which a fund family's bond (equity) funds invest in a new firm for the first time and cross-holding

relationship becomes established by those acquisitions. We repeat estimating Equation (8) with this

subsample, and report the results in Table 7.

                                 [Insert Table 7 and Figure 5 about here.]

     As shown in Table 7, we find that right after the initial acquisition, the new cross-holding helps

sister funds gain 18.626.6 percent higher chance to make profitable allocation, which more than

doubles the chance for general cross-holding in Table 6.18

     Figure 5 further provides a dynamic pattern of information synergy. We impose the maximum

timing lag from the initial acquisition and estimate the propensity gains of the profit-enhancing allo-

cations. Particularly, we use the specification corresponding to Column (4) of Table 7 with maximum

time lag from 0 to 4. Using the sample of initially acquisition, we provide the magnitude of the

coefficient  in Equation (8) and its 90% confidence interval in the figure.
  18
     The number of observations are different across columns because there are singleton observations within each fixed-
effect group, as the sample size is substantially reduced. In particular, the conditional logit model in Column (6) requires
the outcome variable to have within variation, which are not always satisfied.


                                                            27
     The Lag = 0 result is identical to the one in Table 7 that only exploits the fresh acquisitions (the

earliest acquisitions that we can observe to evaluate the propensity). Lag  1 result is obtained after we

allow 1-quarter lag from the timing of the initial acquisition, i.e., initial acquisition occurred at t - 2 or

t - 3. Hence, the coefficient  corresponding Lag  1 case quantifies the information advantage of fresh

and one-quarter-old cross-holding relationships. The rest of coefficients are estimated in the similar

way. The pattern of  indicates that information synergy is the highest after the fresh acquisition

and it decays over time. This finding is consistent with our premise that the amount of information

generation peaks at the time of asset acquisition.



C.     Predicting Future Returns from Cross-Holding

     We next investigate whether the aggregated bond holding changes are informative for predicting

corresponding firms' equity return, contrasting cross-holding cases against non-cross-holding cases. In

the mutual fund literature, Chen, Jegadeesh, and Wermers (2000) show that stocks purchased by funds

have significantly higher returns than stocks they sell, i.e., the increase of aggregate equity holdings

have a predictive power on equity return. In the similar spirit, but in the context of cross-asset holding,

we design a test to examine whether the bond holding changes by sister funds have any predictive

power compared to those by stand-alone funds. To test this, we consider the following specification:


                                       ¯ Bond
                   ri,t+1 = F E + XH · H                ¯ Bond
                                        i,f XH,t + SA · Hi,f SA,t +  · Zi,t + i,t ,                       (9)


where ri,t+1 is firm i's one-month-ahead equity return. For F E , we use time fixed-effect and firm fixed-

effect as well as time-varying firm characteristics (Zi,t ) that may have an impact on equity returns.

Our key predictors are constructed in the following way. For a given firm i during quarter t, we

calculate the holding change of its bonds in each fund family that cross-holds its equities (f  XH ),
                                                             ¯ Bond . We also calculate the holding
then take the average value across fund families, denoted as Hi,f XH,t

change of its bonds in each fund family that does not cross-hold its equities (f  SA), and denote the




                                                     28
                 ¯ Bond . Specifically,
average value as Hi,f SA,t



                                ¯ i,f
                                  Bond             1        Bond
                                H     XH,t =         ·     Hi,f,t
                                                  nXH f XH

                                ¯ i,f
                                  Bond             1                Bond
                                H     SA,t =            ·          Hi,f,t ,                                     (10)
                                                  nSA       f SA


       Bond is defined in Equation (1), and n
where Hi,f,t                                  XH and nSA are the number of fund families in

                                    ¯ Bond captures the average bond investment decision for a given
corresponding sets. In other words, H

firm at a given time by each type of fund family (XH or SA). We implement two filters to reduce the

noise of prediction. First, we consider only economically significant holding changes by requiring the
                                                                              |Hi,f,t -Hi,f,t-1 |×Pi,t-1
amount of change to be more than 0.1% of the fund family's AUM (i.e.,                 AU Mf,t-1            >10 bps).

Second, we impose a restriction that nXH,SA > 5 to reduce the statistical noise in the aggregation.

For example, imagine a situation in which a holding change corresponds to a very small portion of

portfolio, or another situation in which a firm is cross-held by only one fund family. One should not

expect the holding change in either case is informative. The comparison of the coefficients XH and

SA is of our interest.

   It is worth noting that the above test is stronger than a test to predict equity returns using equity

holding changes of fund families. The relationship between the holding changes in equity and future

equity returns has a direct implication on mutual fund managers' stock-picking skills or timing ability,

which is not necessarily related to the cross-holding benefit. In addition, the corporate bond mutual

fund study shows that there is no evidence confirming the bond/firm-selection skills of bond fund

managers (Cici and Gibson, 2012). Thus, if the holding changes of sister bond funds can predict

the return of the same firm's stock, this cannot be due to bond fund managers' stock-picking skills.

Moreover, if the holding change of sister bond funds only predicts the stock return, not the holding of

stand-alone bond funds, it would provide strong evidence that the predictability is attributed to the

information synergy via cross-holding.

                                   [Insert Table 8 about here.]

   Column (1) of Table 8 shows that the holding changes of bond funds on firm i has a significant

predictability on one-month-ahead equity return of firm i in the presence of cross-holding (XH = 0.035

with t-stat= 2.43), while the bond holding changes on the same firm by stand-alone funds do not


                                                  29
(SA = 0.019 with t-stat= 1.28). Column (2) confirms the findings of Chen, Jegadeesh, and Wermers

(2000) that funds' aggregated equity holding changes predict the stock return. However, our result

suggests that the predictability is dominated by cross-holding fund families. Most importantly, the

predictability of bond holding change remains significant even after equity holding changes are included

in the regression, as shown in Column (3). Note that the predictability within each pair of predictors

is contrasted by only one dimension: cross-holding versus non-cross-holding. Our result provides

surprising evidence that exploiting bond market information further contributes to the stock return

prediction beyond what is implied in the equity market.

                                   [Insert Table 9 about here.]

   To test the information synergy in a conventional framework and measure it in a more practical

term, we estimate the profitability of portfolios sorted by the aggregated holding changes of equity
                                               ¯ Bond
and bond in cross-holding fund families, i.e., H             ¯ Equity
                                                i,f XH,t and Hi,f XH,t as defined in Equation (10).

We construct the value-weighted portfolios at the end of each quarter by first sorting individual stocks

into three terciles based on their average holding changes of equity in cross-holding fund families
 ¯ Equity ). Then within each H
(H                            ¯ Equity -sorted portfolio, stocks are further sorted into three sub-

                                                                    ¯ Bond ). Low-H
terciles based on their average holding changes of corporate bonds (H             ¯ Bond represents

           ¯ Bond -ranked stock terciles within each of the three H
the lowest H                                                      ¯ Equity -ranked terciles. Table 9

shows the one-month-ahead risk-adjusted return (alpha) for each tercile portfolio under three risk

models: the Capital Asset Pricing model (CAPM), the Fama-French three-factor model (FF3), four-

factor models (FF4) including MKT, SMB, HML, and MOM.

   Table 9 presents an interesting pattern that the portfolio profitability (alpha) increases almost
                        ¯ Bond and H
monotonically as either H          ¯ Equity goes from low to high. Across all risk models, the HH

                      ¯ Equity ) portfolio's risk-adjusted return is consistently highly significant
      ¯ Bond and High-H
(High-H
                                                                     ¯ Bond and Low-H
both in statistical and in economic terms (1.93  2.37%). The LL (Low-H              ¯ Equity )

portfolio's risk-adjusted returns are negative (FF3, FF4) or close to zero (CAPM) but none of them

are statistically significant. Overall, the signal based on equity holding changes in cross-holding fund

families generates a slightly better performance relative to the signal based on bond holding changes.

Portfolios with the middle and high equity holding changes conditional on also having the high bond

holding changes have significant returns.



                                                  30
     Further, we design the investment strategy in which an investor goes long the value-weighted HH

portfolio and short the value-weighted LL portfolio, i.e., forming the HH-LL portfolio. The long-short

strategy performance is consistently significant, yielding the alpha spread of 1.90  2.50% in the

following month. We also implement the joint test of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) for alphas

and show that the GRS statistics are significant under the 5% level. In other words, sorting portfolios

jointly by the holding changes of equity and bond in cross-holding fund families generates anomalous

return that cannot be explained by the long-established risk factor models.

     To sum, these results echo the main findings in Table 8: with two-side information (bond and

equity), investors can gather better information on firms beyond one-side information, exhibiting

information synergy. Put differently, our findings suggest that each asset market has non-redundant

information on a firm.



                          V.       Channels of Information Spillover

     In this section, we consider potential channels through which information spillover across sister

funds may occur. Before any discussion, we first and foremost need to answer one question: is it legal

for equity funds and bond funds to share information, actively or not, if they act best for the benefits

of shareholders and creditors of the same underlying firm?19



A.     Is There a Chinese Wall?

     Individual mutual funds are organized as independent corporate entities overseen by boards and the

directors (i.e., advisers) of mutual fund board (Morley, 2014; Investment Company Institute, 2017).

Generally speaking, fund managers and their advisers have fiduciary duties to each fund's investors,

so in an abstract sense they should not be permitted to sacrifice the interests of one fund in order

to benefit another. There is no statute or regulation prohibiting an adviser or a fund manager from

sharing information across various funds. That said, information sharing can sometimes raise conflict
   19
      We encountered this question from a premier investor in a series of interviews with market participants in the mutual
fund industry. Without related knowledge, we consulted legal scholars on mutual fund governance. Statement presented
in the next two paragraphs are collective insights from dialogues with John Morley from Yale Law School, Mark Roe
from Harvard Law School, Ann Lipton from Tulane Law School, and William Birdthistle from Chicago Kent-College of
Law.



                                                            31
of interest issues for which common law doctrines of fiduciary duty could hold an adviser/manager

liable. As a practical matter, most advisers believe that the risk of an actual lawsuit is low, and they

manage the risk mainly through internal procedures that ensure that conflicts of interest never become

especially stark or publicly salient. Indeed, many advisers are comfortable using a single research outfit

to serve all of their different funds.

     Although legal commentators have pointed out and complained about these conflicts, they have

never prevailed in forcing advisers to be put in different boards for each fund or different fund managers.

Morley (2014) explains why fund investors are so willing to permit the conflicts an adviser faces when

it simultaneously manages different funds. Mehran and Stulz (2007) also examine the economics of

conflicts of interest in financial institutions and show that investors can benefit from the existence

of such conflicts. In the case of mutual fund, the organization structure of mutual fund families

makes board oversight of multiple funds within a fund complex an efficient and effective approach to

governance.

     In short, there is no Chinese wall between equity funds and bond funds within a mutual fund

family. Advisers and managers of both types of funds should conduct fiduciary duty to their own

fund investors, which is shareholders and creditors of commonly-held firms in the case of sister funds

cross-holding. But such a fiduciary duty does not mean that sister funds cannot exchange information.



B.       Potential Information Sharing Channels

     The mutual fund literature suggests that information sharing cross equity funds may result from

common skills or resources shared by funds within the same family. The most supporting evidence

is that equity funds in a family may share a common manager, and managers in a family may share

information, opinions, and expertise with each other even if they manage different equity funds.

We thus first examine this micro channel. If sister equity and corporate bond funds share common

managers, then it is reasonable to observe the co-movement of holding changes of sister funds.

     Contrary to such an expectation, we find only separated management teams for equity funds and

bond funds in the same family. We collect the management team information for each fund under the

fund families in our sample and manually check if any fund manger are shared among sister funds.20
  20
       Note that our primary analysis is conducted at the level of firm and fund family. Here to identify management team,


                                                             32
On average, there are 4890 domestic equity funds per quarter in our sample and only 59 funds share

no more than two managers with sister bond funds, a ratio of 1.20%.

   Overall, we find that it is common for fund managers to supervise homogeneous assets, either

equities or corporate bonds in a fund family, but uncommon for them to supervise heterogeneous

assets. Those funds sharing the same managers tend to belong to boutique fund families, which have

a smaller number of funds and a smaller scale of management team. It is also worth noting that mega

fund families such as BlackRock, Goldman Sachs, Fidelity, and JP Morgan, have completely separate

management teams for equity funds and bond funds; there is not a single case that two types of funds

share even one manager. These findings confirm what we have heard from Wall Street that there

exists a large cultural gap between equity and bond funds.

   Even without sharing common managers, it is still likely that sister funds' managers access to

the same pool of financial analysts, legal counselors, and outside experts. But these channels should

provide homogeneous information of the same underlying firm to managers of both equity funds and

bond funds. Why do we still observe information synergy?

   After collecting anecdotes in Wall Street, we find the most likely interpretation is that managers

of equity funds and bond funds, that is, shareholders and creditors, may have different interpretation

or sensitivity to the same information, and such a difference leads to information synergy. One chief

investment officer of a large fund family told us, "In our company, managers of equity funds and bond

funds attend some internal meetings. And by listening to questions raised from the other side, say

creditors' opinions, equity fund managers can be inspired thus benefit." A senior veteran of Wall Street

mentioned that when he used to work in TIAA, "both credit side and equity side met once a month

and collecting perspectives from both sides was tremendously helpful."21

   The statement that creditors and shareholders have different risk appetites and information foci has

been studied in the literature. For example, creditors care most about downside risk (Bai et al., 2019)

and creditors have more inventive to produce information when bonds become information sensitive

(Benmelech and Bergman, 2018). Results in the next subsection indeed provide supporting evidence.
we need to do it at the fund level.
   21
      TIAA refers to the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America-College Retirement Equities Fund, a
financial corporation managing more than one trillion dollars assets.




                                                       33
C.     Factors Influencing Information Flow

     We examine which type of firms are more subject to the cross-holding co-movement by exploring

the interaction of bond holding changes with firm characteristics using the following specification:


                        Equity
                       Hi,f,t  = F E +  · Hi,f,t
                                           Bond        Bond
                                                 +  · Hi,f,t · Hi,t + i,f,t ,                       (11)


where H is an indication variable that equals to 1 if each firm's characteristic is above the median of

the cross-sectional distribution, otherwise 0. We also consider the impact of credit rating on the co-

movement by using a finer classification to reflect the possibility of non-monotonic effect, as specified

below:
                               Equity
                              Hi,f,t  = F E +  · Hi,f,t
                                                  Bond
                                                        · Ri,t + i,f,t ,                            (12)

where R is a vector of indication variables that equals to 1 for each of the five rating categories:

AAA/AA, A, BBB, BB, and B or below. With F E , we control for the unobserved heterogeneity of

firms and fund families.

                                    [Insert Table 10 about here.]

     As shown in Column (3) of Table 10, the co-movement relationship is stronger for firms with larger

size. Intuitively, larger firms tend to take larger portions in funds' portfolio. When there is a larger

stake, investors are more incentivized to complement their information, exhibiting a higher degree of

co-movement. Moreover, large firms tend to have more complex information on both equity side and

credit side which makes sharing meaningful.

     Column (4) is specifically for the rating heterogeneity. Interestingly, the co-movement intensity is

not monotonic across ratings. First of all, the sign of co-movement flips to negative for high yield

issuers (BB or below). This pattern is consistent with the risk-shifting-based explanation that a firm's

bond and equity value move in the opposite direction when it is near default. In this case, information

exchange across sister funds leads to the co-movement in the opposite direction. This non-monotonic

pattern contributes to the insignificant leverage result in Column (2). A higher leverage corresponds to

a worse rating. Therefore, highly-levered firms are likely to be associated with negative co-movements,

resulting in an unclear co-movement pattern with respect to leverage ratio.



                                                    34
   Further, the co-movement is related to the incentive to produce information. When firms are

very safe, (A or above) there is little incentive for creditors to generate information as their bonds

are de facto information-insensitive securities, hence we observe weak and insignificant co-movement.

However, once a firm gets close to the boundary of high yield grade (BBB), information production

becomes valuable (Benmelech and Bergman, 2018). As the risk-shifting is not imminent for the BBB-

rated firms, we observe positive and most significant co-movement. The information sensitivity of

a high-yield bond incentivizes its investors to produce information. Additionally, these firms are

subject to risk-shifting problem. As a result, we observe negative and significant co-movement for

below-BB-rated firms. For firms in the middle (BB-rated), the signs of co-movements are mixed,

neutralizing the magnitude to near zero. Our overall co-movements in Table 2 are positive because

the distribution of our sample is dominated by investment grade firms ( 74%). This non-monotonic

co-movement pattern by ratings confirms that co-movement is actually driven by the exchange of

produced information.



                                         VI.      Conclusion

   In this paper, we investigate whether there exists information spillover across equity funds and bond

funds in mutual fund families. We show that the holdings of equity and bond funds on commonly-held

firms have a significant co-movement relationship when they belong to the same fund family, but such a

relationship does not exist when equity and bond funds belong to different families. The co-movement

is not driven by common reaction to public information, neither by non-information channels such

as equity and bond funds experience simultaneous capital outflows/inflows or their managers share

common skills. We justify the information channel by showing that the cross-holding of equity and

bond funds help create notable profits.

   Cross-asset information spillover is understudied. Market participants also do not seem to actively

exploit its benefit, likely due to the cultural gap well-established in the real world. In spite of the recent

growth, the cross-holding behavior is still less common. For every 100 firms held by equity funds, only

13 firms on average are held by bond funds in the same family. The low cross-holding ratio suggests

that there is a large space for development. Our findings suggest that combining the information of

shareholders and creditors can be beneficial for funds, fund families, and investors. Thus this paper


                                                     35
provides an empirical foundation to highlight the importance of cross-asset collaboration.




                                                 36
                                           REFERENCES
Addoum, Jawad M., and Justin R. Murfin, 2018, Equity price discovery with informed private debt, Working
  Paper. Yale University.

AQR, 2016, Style investing in fixed income, Alternative Thinking 3.

Bai, Jennie, Turan Bali, and Wen Quan, 2019, Common risk factors in the cross-section of corporate bond
  returns, Journal of Financial Economics .

Beck, Nathaniel, 2018, Estimating grouped data models with a binary dependent variable and fixed effects:
  What are the issues?, Working Paper. New York University.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai Bergman, 2018, Debt, information, and illiquidity, NBER Working Paper No.
  25054.

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Jung H. Lee, and Veronika K. Pool, 2013, Conflicting family values in mutual fund families,
  Journal of Finance 68(1), 173­200.

Billett, King T.-H. D., M. T., and D. C. Mauer, 2004, Bondholder wealth effects in mergers and acquisitions:
  New evidence from the 1980s and 1990s, Journal of Finance 59(1), 107­135.

Bodnaruk, Andriy, and Marco Rossi, 2016, Dual ownership, returns, and voting in mergers, Journal of Financial
  Economics 120(1), 58­80.

Brown, David P., and Youchang Wu, 2016, Mutual fund flows and cross-fund learning within families, Journal
  of Finance 71(1), 383­424.

Brown, Keith C., W.V. Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, 1996, Of tournaments and temptations: An analysis of
  managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 51(1), 85­110.

Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, The value of active mutual fund manage-
  ment: An examination of the stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal of Financial and Quanti-
  tative Analysis 35(3), 343­368.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2010, Payoff complementarities and financial fragility: Evidence from
  mutual fund outflows, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 239­263.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives, Journal of
  Political Economy 105(6), 1167­1200.

Choi, Darwin, Bige Kahraman, and Abhiroop Mukherjee, 2016, Learning about mutual fund managers, Journal
  of Finance 71(6), 2809­2860.

Choi, Jaewon, and Yongjun Kim, 2018, Anomalies and market (dis)integration, Journal of Monetary Economics
  100, 16­34.

Chordia, Tarun, Amit Goyal, Yoshio Nozawa, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Qing Tong, 2017, Are capital
  market anomalies common to equity and corporate bond markets?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis 52(4), 1301­1342.

Cici, Gjergji, and Scott Gibson, 2012, The performance of corporate bond mutual funds: Evidence based on
  security-level holdings, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47(1), 159­178.

Clifford, Christopher, Bradford Jordan, and Timothy Riley, 2014, Average funds versus average dollars: Impli-
  cations for mutual fund researc, Journal of Empirical Finance 28, 249­260.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The small world of investing: Board connections
  and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116(5), 951­979.



                                                      37
Cohen, Randolph B., Joshua D. Coval, and Lubos P´
                                                astor, 2005, Judging fund managers by the company they
  keep, Journal of Finance 60(3), 1057­1096.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, The determinants of credit spread
  changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177­2207.

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007a, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets, Journal of Financial
  Economics 86, 479­512.

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007b, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets, Journal of Financial
  Economics 86, 479­512.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund performance
  with characteristic based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52(3), 1035­1058.

Eberhart, A. C., and A. Siddique, 2002, The long-term performance of corporate bonds (and stocks) following
  seasoned equity offerings, Review of Financial Studies 15(5), 1385­1406.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and T. Clifton Green, 2007, The impact of mutual fund family membership
  on investor risk, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42(2), 257­277.

Evans, Richard, Melissa Porras Prado, and Rafael Zambrana Galacho, 2007, Competition and cooperation in
  mutual fund families, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479­512.

Evans, Richard B., 2010, Mutual fund incubation, Journal of Finance 65(4), 1581­1611.

Gaspar, Jose Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos, 2006, Favoritism in mutual fund families? evidence on
  strategic cross-fund subsidization, Journal of Finance 61(1), 73­104.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio,
  Econometrica 57(5), 1121­1152.

Goldstein, Itay, Hao Jiang, and David Ng, 2017, Investor flows and fragility in corporate bond funds, Journal
  of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Gordon Y. Liao, 2018, Asset price dynamics in partially segmented
  markets, Review of Financial Studies 31(9), 3307­3343.

Investment Company Institute, 2017, Investment company fact book, Investment Company Institute, Washing-
  ton DC.

Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
  ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3(4), 305­360.

Jiang, Hao, Dan Li, and Ashley Wang, 2017, Dynamic liquidity management by corporate bond mutual funds
   Working Paper. Michigan State University.

Jiang, Hao, and Lu Zheng, 2018, Active fundamental performance, Review of Financial Studies 31(12),
   4688â4719.

Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Pei Shao, 2010, When shareholders are creditors: Effects of the simultaneous holding
   of equity and debt by non-commercial banking institutions, Review of Financial Studies 23(10), 3595­3637.

Kapadia, Nikunj, and Xiaoling Pu, 2012, Limited arbitrage between equity and credit markets, Journal of
  Financial Economics 105(3), 542­564.

Kempf, Alexander, and Stefan Ruenzi, 2007, Family matters: Rankings within fund families and fund inflows,
  Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 35, 177­199.

Khan, Mozaffar, Leonid Kogan, and George Serafeim, 2012, Mutual fund trading pressure: Firm-level stock
  price impact and timing of SEOs, Journal of Finance 67, 1371­1395.

                                                       38
Kwan, Simon, 1996, Firm-specific information and the correlation between individual stocks and bonds, Journal
 of Financial Economics 40(1), 63­80.

Lou, Dong, 2012, A flow-based explanation for return predictability, Review of Financial Studies 25, 3457­3489.

Maxwell, W. F., and R. P. Rao, 2003, Do spin-offs expropriate wealth from bondholders?, Journal of Finance
 58(5), 2087­2108.

                      e M. Stulz, 2007, The economics of conflicts of interest in financial institutions, Journal
Mehran, Hamid, and Ren´
 of Financial Economics 85, 267­296.

Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates, Journal of
 Finance 29, 449­470.

Morley, John, 2014, The separation of funds and managers: A theory of investment fund structure and regula-
 tion, The Yale Law Journal 123, 1228­1287.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147­175.

Nanda, Vikram, Z. Jay Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2004, Family values and the star phenomenon: Strategies of
  mutual fund families, Review of Financial Studies 17(3), 667­698.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and auto-
  correlation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55(3), 703­708.

Nohel, Tom, Z. Jay Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2010, Side-by-side management of hedge funds and mutual funds,
  Review of Financial Studies 23(6), 2342­2373.

Ringgenberg, Matthew C., Sheng Huang, and Zhe Zhang, 2018, The information in asset fire sales, Working
  Paper. University of Utah.

Schwarz, Christopher G., and Mark E. Potter, 2016, Revisiting mutual fund portfolio disclosure, Review of
  Financial Studies 29(12), 3519­3544.

Sialm, Clemens, Zheng Sun, and Lu Zheng, 2019, Home bias and local contagion: Evidence from funds of hedge
   funds, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Sialm, Clemens, and T. Mandy Tham, 2016, Spillover effects in mutual fund companies, Management Science
   62(5), 1472­1486.

Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockâpicking talent,
 style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55(4), 1655­1695.




                                                       39
                              Figure 1. Identify Cross-holding of Sister Funds
This plot illustrate the definition of cross-holdings by factual and counterfactual sister funds. If equity funds and bond
funds in a fund family hold the same firm's equities and bonds, then we denote it as sister funds cross-holding. For
example, Invesco is a fund family cross-holding Tesla's equities and bonds, thus its equity and bond funds are called
sister funds, as shown in Panel (a) and marked in red boxes. If equity and bond funds hold the same firm's equities and
bonds but they belong to different fund families, then we denote it as counterfactual sister funds cross-holding or stand-
alone funds cross-holding. For example, the bond fund of Fidelity and the equity fund of Invesco are stand-alone funds
holding Tesla's assets, as marked by arrows in Panel (b). Cross-holding is identified at the firm and fund family level at
a given time. The holdings of a firm's equity (bond) is aggregated across all unique portfolios held by actively-managed
equity (bond) funds in a fund family.

                                                (a) Sister Funds Cross-Holding

                               Invesco                                                Fidelity




               Equity Funds               Bond Funds                   Equity Funds              Bond Funds


                        Tesla stock               Tesla bond                                            Tesla bond

                        Apple stock                                             Apple stock             Apple bond


                                                  Facebook bond


                                                  Exxon-Mobile bond             Exxon-Mobile stock




                                         (b) Counterfactual Sister Funds Cross-Holding

                               Invesco                                                Fidelity




                Equity Fund                Bond Fund                    Equity Fund               Bond Fund


                        Tesla stock               Tesla bond                                             Tesla bond

                        Apple stock                                             Apple stock              Apple bond


                                                  Facebook bond


                                                  Exxon-Mobile bond             Exxon-Mobile stock




                                                                  40
                 Figure 2. Mutual Fund Family Structure by Asset Allocation
The figures show the number of fund families (panel a) and the value of assets under management (AUM) of fund families
(panel b) according to fund family structure. The sample contains the U.S. mutual fund families in the CRSP Mutual
Fund database. We classify fund families into four categories: those with both equity funds and corporate bond funds,
those with only equity funds (Pure equity ), those with only corporate bond funds (Pure bond ), and others. The sample
period is from 2008Q1 to 2018Q4.

                                           (a) The number of fund families




                                            (b) Assets under management




                                                         41
                                                 Figure 3. Cross-Holding over Time
The figures show the time-series of two cross-holding measures: issuer-weighted (IW) and value-weighted (VW). The
sample contains mutual fund families that contemporaneously have domestic equity funds and corporate bond funds
holding assets issued by public firms. Panel (a) defines the measures from the perspective of equity funds. For all equity
funds in a fund family at a specific quarter, we count the unique number of firms in their holdings and calculate the
proportion of firms whose corporate bonds are also held by sister bond funds in the same family. We call this issuer-
weighted cross-holding measure, IW Cohold. We report the mean (the solid line) and the 25th to 75th percentile (the
shade) across all fund families in each quarter. The value-weighted cross-holding measure, VW Cohold, is defined in the
similar way except using the market value of holding firms instead of the number of firms. We report the mean value
(the dashed line using the right y -axis) across all fund families over the sample period 2008Q1 to 2018Q4. Panel (b)
displays the time-series of the same measures from the perspective of corporate bond funds.

                                              (a) Cross-holding from the perspective of equity funds




                                                                                                           25
                                25




                                                                                                           20
                                20




                                                                                                           Proportion VW (%)
                        Proportion IW (%)




                                                                                                                       15
                                    15




                                                                                                              10
                           10




                                                                                                           5
                                5
                                0




                                                                                                           0
                                     2008q1       2010q1      2012q1      2014q1     2016q1      2018q1
                                                                    Time (Qtr)

                                                  p25-p75 (IW)           IW Cohold            VW Cohold



                                              (b) Cross-holding from the perspective of bond funds
                              75




                                                                                                          75
                              60




                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                          Proportion VW (%)
                      Proportion IW (%)
                                  45




                                                                                                                      45
                         30




                                                                                                             30
                              15




                                                                                                          15
                              0




                                                                                                          0




                                     2008q1       2010q1      2012q1     2014q1      2016q1      2018q1
                                                                   Time (Qtr)

                                                  p25-p75 (IW)           IW Cohold            VW Cohold




                                                                       42
Figure 4. Dynamic Holding Relationship of Counterfactual Sister Funds: Bootstrapping
The figures compare the cross-holding relationship of sister funds and that of counterfactual sister funds. The cross-
holding relationship counterfactual sister funds is examined in Equation (5). We use the specification in Column (5)
of Table 2 and bootstrap the regression estimation for 100 times. Both panels present the distribution of estimated
coefficients  and their t-statistics. In panel (a), we randomly match fund families of counterfactual sister funds without
imposing any matching condition. In panel (b), we match fund families by four characteristics: size, turn-over, expense
ratio, and fee, which are aggregated at the fund family level via value-weighting across funds. The "" (red) markers in
the right panel indicate estimated coefficients with at least 10% significance and the "×" (blue) markers indicate those
with weaker than 10% significance. For reference, we also present the estimate of  (vertical line) and its t-statistic (solid
black dot "·") in the factual case.

                                                         (a) Unconditional Matching
                                                                                                                                                                                                              4.04
                                                       Matched (.042)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .042
        40




                                                                                   -.01-.005 0 .005 .01 .015 .02 .025 .03 .035 .04
                                                                                                                                                                                          factual matching
        30




                                                                                                      Coefficient
   Frequency
      2010
        0




                  -.01   0   .01       .02       .03       .04          .05                                                          -3.04   -2.04     -1.04         -.04         .96   1.96    2.96          3.96
                                   Coefficient                                                                                                                          t-Statistics




                                                           (b) Conditional Matching
                                                                                                                                                                                                              4.04
                                                       Matched (.042)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .042
                                                                                   .005 .01 .015 .02 .025 .03 .035 .04




                                                                                                                                                                                          factual matching
        40   30




                                                                                              Coefficient
   Frequency
    20  10




                                                                                                          0
        0




                  -.01   0   .01       .02       .03       .04          .05                                                          -1.39      -.39           .61             1.61      2.61          3.61
                                   Coefficient                                                                                                                         t-Statistics




                                                                              43
             Figure 5. Profit from Cross-Holding: The Case of Initial Acquisition
The figure presents the propensity of profit-enhancing allocations on equity as in Equation (8) over time since cross-
holding relationship has been initially established. The regression coefficient of the last specification in Table 7 (Column
4) is reported with 5 different subsamples: using fresh cross-holdings by initial acquisitions, cross-holdings within 1  4
quarters since initial acquisitions. Panel (a) illustrates the variable construction in the case of fresh cross-holding. At
t - 2, a firm's bond (equity) is acquired for the first time by a sister bond (equity) fund in a fund family which has
already holds the same firm's equity (bond), thus the cross-holding relationship is established in the fund family. This is
the case of Lag = 0. During quarter t - 1, fund managers adjust their holdings on a specific stock whose cross-holding
relationship is just established in the fund family at the beginning of the quarter. Based on the stock's return realized in
quarter t, we can evaluate P rof itt at the end of quarter t if we observe that fund managers increase (reduce) holdings
before return becomes positive (negative). The case of Lag  1 is identical except that we allow initial acquisition to
occur at t - 2 or one quarter prior to t - 2. The cases of Lag  2, .., 4 are constructed in the same way. Panel (b) plots
the regression coefficients using the 5 subsamples by the maximum lag timing from the initial acquisition.


                     Cross-holding                           Cross-holding                             Profit

                                        Position change (Ht-1 )          Return realization (rt )

                          t-2                                     t-1                                     t             time


                        Initial
                      Acquisition
                                                  (a) Timeline of Variable Construction




                                        .26
                                                                                                     90% CI
                                                                                                     Est. Coefficient

                                        .24

                                          .2353
                          Coefficient




                                        .22




                                         .2            .2039
                                                                           .1963              .1945
                                                                                                                  .1897
                                        .18



                                              0          1                  2                    3                      4
                                                             Lag Number from Initial Acquisition

                                                         (b) Regression Results




                                                                         44
                                           Table 1. Summary Statistics
This table presents the distribution of variables related to investment decision. The sample consists of fund families (FF)
contemporaneously having equity funds and corporate bond funds in the CRSP Mutual Fund database from 2008Q1 to
2018Q4. The distribution statistics of each variable is calculated at a given quarter, and the average statistics across the
                                            Equity
whole sample period is reported. First, i,f,t      is the market value of firm i's equities held by fund family f scaled by
                                                                       Bond
the total assets under management of the fund family at quarter t, i,f,t      is the market value of firm i's corporate bonds
held by fund family f scaled by the total assets under management (AUM) of the fund family at quarter t. Second,
    Equity
Hi,f,t     is the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's equities held by fund family f during the
                Bond
quarter t, Hi,f,t    is the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's corporate bonds held by fund
family f during the quarter t. Also the panel includes the market value of holdings (equity+bond) per firm in each
fund family, as well as the distribution of firm characteristics such as size (total assets in billion dollars), leverage (total
debt/ book equity), book-to-market ratio (book equity / market equity). Firm leverage and book-to-market ratio are
winsorized at 1% level.

                                       Mean             SD           p10          p25          p50          p75          p90
      Equity
  H         (%)                        13.32         64.90         -45.96       -14.21       -0.26        16.03        90.66
  H Bond (%)                            6.29         36.31         -28.12        -1.45         0.0         3.48        50.22
   Equity (%)                           0.43          0.89            0.0         0.03        0.12         0.45         1.14
   Bond (%)                             0.29          0.88           0.01         0.02        0.06         0.21         0.66
  AUM per firm in FF (mn.$)            42.82        237.11           0.15         0.71        3.73        18.49        73.71
  Firm asset size (bn.$)               66.69        234.56            1.9         4.19       11.48        36.59       116.91
  Firm leverage                         1.16          2.22           0.22         0.42        0.76          1.4         2.77
  Firm book-to-market ratio             0.51           0.5           0.13         0.25        0.43          0.7         1.01




                                                              45
                       Table 2. Dynamic Holding Relationship of Sister Funds
This table presents the dynamic holding relationship for sister funds cross-holdings. Panel (a) shows the estimation
results in Equation (4):
                                     Equity
                                 Hi,f,t     = F E +  · Hi,f,tBond
                                                                  +  · Zi,t + i,f,t
            Equity
where Hi,f,t       is the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's equities held by fund family f during
                     Bond
the quarter t, Hi,f,t     is the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's corporate bonds held by fund
family f during the quarter t, F E is a fixed effect specification, and Zi,t is a vector of firm-level control variables including
firm size (the logarithm of total assets), leverage (the ratio of total debt to book value of equity), and book-to-market
ratio. The industry fixed effect is defined by the first 2-digit of SIC code. Panel (a) contains all observations. Panel (b)
                                                                                                   Equity        Bond
uses a subsample in which returns of equity and bond of firm i are in the same direction (s(ri,t          ) × s(ri,t  ) > 0, where
s(·) is the sign function). Standard errors are clustered at the fund family level and t-statistics are shown in parentheses
with the significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.


                                                       (a) All observations
                               (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)          (6)
       Bond
   H                        0.046***         0.036***          0.036***        0.035***         0.042***       0.037***
                               (4.79)           (4.08)            (4.01)          (3.86)           (4.04)         (3.72)
   Log(Asset)              -0.007***        -0.007***         -0.007***       -0.027***
                              (-5.35)          (-5.11)           (-3.63)         (-3.16)
   Leverage                    -0.000           -0.000            -0.000          -0.001
                              (-0.85)          (-0.50)           (-0.00)         (-0.77)
   Book/Mkt                 0.021***         0.020***          0.020***        0.033***
                               (6.64)           (6.41)            (5.86)          (4.22)
   Fund Family FE                 Y                 Y                 Y               Y                   N           Y
   Time FE                        N                 Y                 Y               Y                   N           N
   Industry FE                    N                 N                 Y               N                   N           N
   Firm FE                        N                 N                 N               Y                   N           N
   Firm x Time FE                 N                 N                 N               N                   Y           Y
   N.Obs                     120,037          120,037           120,037         120,037             120,037     120,037
   R-squared                   0.008            0.018             0.018           0.020               0.051       0.057



                                                                                           Equity          Bond
              (b) When equity and bond returns are in the same direction: s(ri,t                    ) × s(ri,t  )>0
                               (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)         (6)
       Bond
   H                         0.039***          0.030**          0.030**        0.029**          0.039***        0.033**
                                (3.16)           (2.56)           (2.51)         (2.40)            (2.67)         (2.39)
   Log(Asset)               -0.006***        -0.005***         -0.005**       -0.031**
                               (-3.82)          (-3.34)          (-2.30)        (-2.28)
   Leverage                     -0.000           -0.000            0.000         -0.001
                               (-0.18)          (-0.01)           (0.30)        (-0.69)
   Book/Mkt                  0.021***         0.022***         0.024***       0.027***
                                (5.77)           (5.78)           (5.09)         (2.92)
   Fund Family FE                   Y                Y                 Y              Y                   N           Y
   Time FE                         N                 Y                 Y              Y                   N           N
   Industry FE                      N                N                 Y              N                   N           N
   Firm FE                         N                 N                 N              Y                   N           N
   Firm x Time FE                  N                 N                 N              N                   Y           Y
   N.Obs                       62,290           62,290            62,290         62,290              62,290      62,290
   R-squared                    0.008            0.016             0.016          0.020               0.053       0.058




                                                                46
 Table 3. Dynamic Holding Relationship of Sister Funds: the Flow-Adjusted Measure
This table presents the dynamic holding relationship for sister funds using the flow-adjusted holding measure defined in
Equation (3):
                                 Hi,f,t = [Hi,f,t | P ( )t < F lowf,t < P (1 -  )t ] ,
where P ( )t is the  -th percentile of flows across fund families at a given quarter t and F lowf,t is the aggregated fund
flow of a fund family. This measure filters out the effect of extreme capital flows. Flow of fund family f is calculated as:

                                                     k
                                                         T N Ak,f,t - T N Ak,f,t-1 · (1 + Rk,f,t )
                                     F lowf,t =                                                    ,
                                                                     T N Af,t-1
where T N Ak,f,t is total net asset under management for fund k in family f and T N Af,t is total net asset for fund family
f aggregated across all subsidiary funds. Rk,f,t is the return of fund k that belongs to family f during quarter t. All
variables are defined in Table 2. We report results using the baseline specification and the most stringent specification:
Columns (1) and (6) in Table 2. We report three sets of results by removing fund families that experience a large flow
beyond 5th (Flow 5-95 pct.,  = 5), 10th (Flow 10-90 pct.,  = 10), and 25th (Flow 25-75 pct.,  = 25) percentile
on both sides. Standard errors are clustered at the fund family level and t-statistics are shown in parentheses with the
significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.

                                Flow 5-95 pct.                           Flow 10-90 pct.                   Flow 25-75 pct.
                               (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)           (6)
        Bond
    H                       0.041***          0.031***             0.039***         0.030***            0.052***     0.040***
                               (4.07)            (3.12)               (3.73)           (2.87)              (3.80)       (2.66)
    Log(Asset)             -0.007***                              -0.008***                            -0.009***
                              (-5.71)                                (-5.70)                              (-5.39)
    Leverage                   -0.001                                 -0.001                               -0.001
                              (-1.60)                                (-1.56)                              (-0.93)
    Book/Mkt                0.021***                               0.023***                             0.024***
                               (6.80)                                 (6.61)                               (5.69)
    Fund Family FE                 Y                    Y                  Y               Y                   Y             Y
    Time FE                       N                     N                  N               N                   N             N
    Industry FE                    N                    N                  N               N                   N             N
    Firm FE                        N                    N                  N               N                   N             N
    Firm x Time FE                N                     Y                  N               Y                   N             Y
    N.Obs                    112,708              112,708            104,109         104,109              66,975        66,975
    R-squared                  0.006                0.058              0.006           0.058               0.006         0.063




                                                                    47
   Table 4. Dynamic Holding Relationship of Factual and Counterfactual Sister Funds
This table presents the dynamic holding relationship of factual and counter-factual sister funds in Equation (6):
                              Equity
                             Hi,f ,t = F E +  · Hi,f
                                                 Bond         Bond
                                                     ,t +  · Hi,f ,t +  · Zi,t + i,f,t ,

           Equity          Bond
where Hi,f,t      and Hi,f,t     are the percentage change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's equities and bonds
                                                   Bond
held by fund family f during the quarter t, Hi,f       ,t is the percentage change in quantity of firm i's corporate bonds
                                                 FE
held by fund family f (f ) during quarter t,         is a fixed effect specification, and Zi,t is a vector of firm-level control
variables including firm size (the logarithm of total assets), leverage (the ratio of total debt to book value of equity), and
book-to-market ratio. The industry fixed effect is defined by the first 2-digit of SIC code. Panel (a) reports the results
under unconditional matching where fund families f is randomly matched to fund family f which contains all possible
matching. Panel (b) reports the results by matching fund families f and f based on their characteristics including size,
expense ratio, turnover, and management fee, aggregated or averaged across funds in a fund family. Robust standard
errors are used and t-statistics are shown in parentheses with the significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*)
levels.

                                              (a) Unconditional Matching
                              (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
   H Bond
     f                      0.051***        0.046***        0.045***         0.045***        0.050***        0.047***
                               (4.71)          (4.24)          (4.21)           (4.16)          (4.42)          (4.19)
   H Bond
     f                      0.006***            0.000          -0.000           -0.000        0.000**         0.000**
                               (3.05)          (0.20)         (-0.06)          (-0.35)          (2.02)          (2.01)
   Log(Asset)              -0.009***       -0.009***       -0.008***        -0.025***
                              (-8.89)         (-8.72)         (-4.99)          (-2.79)
   Leverage                    -0.000          -0.000          -0.000           -0.000
                              (-0.96)         (-0.35)         (-0.46)          (-0.45)
   Book/Mkt                 0.024***        0.023***        0.021***         0.023***
                               (6.81)          (6.72)          (5.93)           (3.54)
   Fund Family FE                  Y               Y                Y               Y               N               Y
   Time FE                        N                Y                Y               Y               N               N
   Industry FE                     N               N                Y               N               N               N
   Firm FE                         N               N                N               Y               N               N
   Firm x Time FE                 N                N                N               N               Y               Y
   N.Obs                   3,271,652       3,271,652        3,254,095       3,271,652       3,271,652       3,271,652
   R-squared                   0.013           0.021            0.021           0.026           0.119           0.128


                             (b) Conditional Matching by Fund Family Characteristics
                              (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
   H Bond
     f                      0.060***        0.055***         0.055***        0.055***        0.060***        0.058***
                               (3.64)          (3.48)           (3.47)          (3.42)          (3.64)          (3.52)
   H Bond
     f                          0.005          -0.001           -0.001          -0.001          -0.000          -0.000
                               (1.34)         (-0.27)          (-0.42)         (-0.52)         (-0.14)         (-0.04)
   Log(Asset)              -0.010***       -0.009***        -0.008***       -0.041***
                              (-7.05)         (-7.29)          (-4.14)         (-3.52)
   Leverage                    -0.000          -0.000           -0.000          -0.000
                              (-0.81)         (-0.48)          (-0.54)         (-0.57)
   Book/Mkt                 0.028***        0.027***         0.025***        0.032***
                               (5.63)          (6.17)           (5.51)          (4.05)
   Fund Family FE                 Y                 Y               Y                Y              N               Y
   Time FE                        N                 Y               Y                Y              N               N
   Industry FE                    N                 N               Y                N              N               N
   Firm FE                        N                 N               N                Y              N               N
   Firm x Time FE                 N                 N               N                N              Y               Y
   N.Obs                     687,652          687,652         685,325          687,652        687,652         687,652
   R-squared                   0.010            0.017           0.018            0.025          0.140           0.147



                                                              48
      Table 5. Benchmark for Dynamic Holding Relationship of Equities and Bonds
This table provides benchmarks for dynamic holding relationship between bond and equity of the same firm. Panel (a)
explores the relationship at the aggregated level without identifying factual cross-holdings:
                                         Equity
                                        Hi,t    = F E +  · Hi,t
                                                            Bond
                                                                 +  · Zi,t + i,t ,

where Hi,t is the percentage change of firm i's equity shares or corporate bond shares held by all mutual fund families
during quarter t, F E is a fixed effect specification, and Zi,t is a vector of firm-level control variables including firm size
(the logarithm of total assets), leverage (the ratio of total debt to book value of equities), and book-to-market ratio.
Panel (b) explores the relationship for cross-holdings of balanced funds and mixed-assets funds using Equation (4). In
addition to the whole sample, in both panels we also consider a subsample in which the same firm's equity return and
                                                             Equity     Bond
bond return move in the same direction during quarter t: ri,t        × ri,t   > 0. The industry fixed effect is defined by the
first 2-digit of SIC code. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level in panel (a) and at the fund family level in panel
(b). We use robust standard errors, and t-statistics are shown in parentheses with the significance at the 1% (***), 5%
(**), and 10% (*) levels.

                                         (a) Holdings by Mutual Fund Investors
                                            All                                              Same Direction
                          (1)               (2)              (3)                   (4)            (5)             (6)
       Bond
   H                     0.00004           0.00005          0.00004              0.01613         0.01502         0.0167
                           (0.82)             (1.01)           (1.20)              (0.94)          (0.88)         (0.91)
   Log(Asset)             0.1002            -0.1182          -0.8972              0.7122          0.1299         0.9306
                           (0.35)            (-0.57)          (-0.91)              (1.40)          (1.01)         (0.63)
   Leverage               0.0004             0.0008         0.0017*               0.0010          0.0014         0.0002
                           (0.75)             (1.21)           (1.83)              (0.56)          (0.79)         (0.29)
   Book/Mkt            -1.462***         -1.463***        -1.464***              -0.021*        -0.022**       -0.022**
                          (-3.46)            (-3.46)          (-3.38)             (-1.72)         (-2.09)        (-2.06)
   Time FE                     Y                Y                Y                     Y              Y                Y
   Industry FE                 N                 Y                N                    N              Y                N
   Firm FE                     N                 N                Y                    N              N                Y
   N.Obs                   40148             40148            40097                18343          18343           18272
   R-squared               0.024             0.024            0.018                0.005          0.007           -0.021


                                (b) Holdings by Mixed-Assets and Balanced Investors
                                               All                                           Same Direction
                                (1)               (2)          (3)                 (4)              (5)            (6)
       Bond
   H                       0.0963**          0.1066**        0.0656                0.1796          0.1670        0.2000
                               (2.45)            (2.45)      (1.35)                 (1.65)          (1.40)       (1.35)
   Log(Asset)                -0.1080            1.3797                            -0.0881          0.5312
                              (-1.00)            (1.26)                            (-1.52)          (1.45)
   Leverage                  -0.0005           -0.0044                           -0.0103*       -0.0144**
                              (-0.20)           (-1.22)                            (-1.87)         (-2.21)
   Book/Mkt                 0.0013*             0.0027                            0.0010*          0.0006
                               (1.87)            (1.03)                             (1.86)          (0.44)
   Fund Family FE                   Y                 Y           Y                    Y                Y             Y
   Time FE                         Y                 Y            N                    Y                Y             N
   Industry FE                      Y                 N           N                    Y                N             N
   Firm FE                          N                Y            N                    N                Y             N
   Firm×Time FE                    N                  N           Y                    N                N             Y
   N.Obs                        34374             34335       34138                18475            18436         18546
   R-squared                    0.008             0.013       0.042                0.013            0.025         0.114




                                                               49
                                      Table 6. Profit From Cross-Holding
This table presents the estimation results of Equation (8):

                                       P ROF ITi,f,t = F E +  · Coholdi,f,t-1 + i,f,t ,

where P ROF ITi,f,t is an indication variable that is equal to 1 if equity funds of fund family f make profits at the end
of quarter t based on the position adjustment of equity holdings on firm i during quarter t - 1 which is before the return
realization in quarter t, otherwise 0. Expressed in formula, P ROF ITi,f,t = 1 if s(Hi,f,t-1 ) · s(ri,t ) = 1, where ri,t is
the equity return of firm i in quarter t and s(·) denotes the sign function that assigns 1 to a positive number and -1 to
a negative number. If Hi,f,t-1 > 0, then s(Hi,f,t-1 ) = 1, otherwise -1. The profit-enhancing position adjustment
implies that an equity fund reduces (increases) its holdings before the equity experiences a negative (positive) return.
Coholdi,f,t-1 is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if firm i's bonds are held by sister bond funds in fund family f during
quarter t - 1, otherwise 0. Panel (a) shows the timeline of the variable construction. Panel (b) presents the regression
results. Columns (1)-(4) use the OLS model with different sets of fixed effects (F E ), while Column (5) shows the
conditional marginal effect from the Logit model with the firm×time fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the
fund family level. t-statistics (z -statistic) are shown in parentheses for the OLS (Logit) model with significance at the
1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.


                                          (a) Timeline of Variable Construction
                      Cross-holding                 Cross-holding                       Profit

                              Position change (Ht-1 )            Return realization (rt )

                          t-2                              t-1                               t          time




                                                  (b) Regression Results
                                 (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)             (5)
    Coholdt-1 =1              0.073***            0.075***             0.073***             0.114***           0.124***
                                (12.93)             (13.46)              (12.61)              (16.43)            (79.05)
    Fund Family FE                    Y                  Y                    Y                    N                  N
    Time FE                          N                   Y                    Y                    N                  N
    Firm FE                          N                   N                    Y                    N                  N
    Firm x Time FE                   N                   N                    N                    Y                  Y
    Model                          OLS                OLS                  OLS                  OLS               Logit
    N.Obs                       953,737            953,737              953,737              953,737            953,737
    R-squared                     0.039              0.041                0.057                0.033




                                                              50
         Table 7. Profit From Cross-Holding Immediately After Initial Acquisition
This table presents the estimation results of Equation (8):

                                        P ROF ITi,f,t = F E +  · Coholdi,f,t-1 + i,f,t ,

where Coholdi,f,t-1 is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if firm i's bonds are held by sister bond funds in fund family
f during quarter t - 1, otherwise 0. In this special case, Coholdi,f,t-1 coincides with the timing of initial acquisition in
which a firm's equity (bond) is acquired for the first time by equity (bond) funds in a fund family that has already held
the same firm's bonds (equities) at the beginning of quarter t - 1. P ROF ITi,f,t is an indication variable that is equal to
1 if equity funds of fund family f make profits at the end of quarter t based on the position adjustment of equity holdings
on firm i during quarter t - 1 which is before the return realization in quarter t, otherwise 0. Expressed in formula,
P ROF ITi,f,t = 1 if s(Hi,f,t-1 ) · s(ri,t ) = 1, where ri,t is the equity return of firm i in quarter t and s(·) denotes the
sign function that assigns 1 to a positive number and -1 to a negative number. If Hi,f,t-1 > 0, then s(Hi,f,t-1 ) = 1,
otherwise -1. The profit-enhancing position adjustment implies that an equity fund reduces (increases) its holdings
before the equity experiences a negative (positive) return. Panel (a) shows the timeline of the variable construction.
Panel (b) presents the regression results. Columns (1)-(4) use the OLS model with different sets of fixed effects (F E ),
while Column (5) shows the conditional marginal effect from the Logit model with the firm×time fixed effect. Standard
errors are clustered at the fund family level. t-statistics (z -statistic) are shown in parentheses for the OLS (Logit) model
with significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.


                                           (a) Timeline of Variable Construction
                     Cross-holding                   Cross-holding                       Profit

                              Position change (Ht-1 )             Return realization (rt )

                          t-2                               t-1                              t            time


                         Initial
                       Acquisition



                                                   (b) Regression Results
                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)               (5)
    Coholdt-1 =1               0.225***            0.223***             0.186***             0.235***            0.266***
                                 (20.56)             (20.58)              (17.22)              (18.59)             (35.63)
    Fund Family FE                    Y                   Y                     Y                     N                 N
    Time FE                          N                   Y                     Y                      N                 N
    Firm FE                          N                    N                     Y                     N                 N
    Firm x Time FE                   N                   N                     N                      Y                 Y
    Model                          OLS                 OLS                   OLS                   OLS              Logit
    N.Obs                        24,036              24,036                23,908                18,994            13,807
    R-squared                     0.100               0.104                 0.123                 0.103




                                                                  51
                          Table 8. Stock Return Prediction from Cross-Holding
This table examines whether the changes of bond holdings by sister funds and/or stand-alone funds help predict a firm's
future equity returns in Equation (9):

                           ri,t+1 = F E + XH · H Bond
                                               ¯ i,f             ¯ Bond
                                                     XH,t + SA · Hi,f SA,t +  · Zi,t + i,t ,

where ri,t+1 is the firm i's one-month-ahead equity return at the end of quarter t. H    ¯ i,f
                                                                                           Bond
                                                                                               XH,t is the average percentage
change in quantity (number of shares) of firm i's bonds held by fund families which contain sister equity funds cross-
holding firm i's securities. We denote such fund families as cross-holding fund families with sister funds (f  XH ).
H ¯ i,f
    Bond
        SA,t is the average percentage change of firm i's bond shares held by fund families which contain stand-alone
equity funds also holding firm i's equities. We denote these fund families as fund families with stand-alone funds (f  SA).
Specifically,
                           Bond
                         ¯ i,f           1            Bond              Bond
                                                                     ¯ i,f           1            Bond
                       H       XH,t =             Hi,f,t      and H        SA,t =              Hi,f,t   ,
                                       nXH                                         nSA
                                           f XH                                        f SA

where nXH or nSA is the number of fund families in the corresponding sets. We impose two criteria, (i) (|Hi,f,t -
Hi,f,t-1 | × Pi,t-1 )/AU Mf,t-1 > 10 bps and (ii) nXH,SA > 5, to get informative signals for the aggregated holding
changes. For F E , we consider the one-way fixed effect of firm and time, respectively. Zi,t is a vector of firm-level
control variables including firm size (the logarithm of total assets), leverage (the ratio of total debt to book value of
equities), and book-to-market ratio. Instead of bond holding change, Column (2) uses average equity holding changes
(H ¯ Equity , H   ¯ Equity ), which are calculated in the similar way as bond holdings. Column (3) include the holding
     i,f XH,t       i,f SA,t
changes of bond and equity in the same model. Standard errors are clustered at the fund family level and t-statistics are
shown in parentheses with the significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.

                                           (1)                       (2)                    (3)
             ¯ Bond
             H f XH                      0.035**                                           0.034**
                                           (2.43)                                            (2.31)
                 Bond
             ¯ f SA
             H                              0.019                                             0.021
                                           (1.28)                                            (1.40)
                 Equity
             ¯ f XH
             H                                                     0.030***               0.032***
                                                                      (2.75)                 (2.84)
                 Equity
             ¯ f SA
             H                                                         0.012                  0.010
                                                                      (0.75)                 (0.63)
             Log(Asset)                -0.021***                  -0.019***              -0.020***
                                          (-3.36)                    (-3.05)                (-3.20)
             Leverage                      -0.000                     -0.000                 -0.000
                                          (-0.11)                    (-0.19)                (-0.05)
             Book/Mkt                       0.006                      0.004                  0.005
                                           (0.98)                     (0.68)                 (0.81)
             Firm FE                            Y                         Y                       Y
             Time FE                           Y                         Y                        Y
             N.Obs                          6,149                     6,281                   6,142
             R-squared                      0.241                     0.239                   0.242




                                                             52
                                         Table 9. Investment Strategy

This table shows the risk-adjusted return (alpha) of portfolio sorted by the average holding changes of equity (H ¯ Equity )
                                                                                                                    i,f XH,t
                                                ¯ Bond
and the average holding changes of bond (Hi,f XH,t ) of cross-holdings respectively. The average holding changes are
calculated in the identical way as in Table 8. We use tercile sorting (H,M,L) and value-weighted portfolio return. Upon
the portfolio construction, the strategy performance is measured by following 1-month-ahead risk-adjusted returns (alpha)
according to CAPM, Fama-French 3 factor (FF3), and 4 factor (FF4) model. The alphas are displayed in percentages
and t-statistics are shown in parentheses with the significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels, using Newey
and West (1987) standard errors. We further implement a long-short investment strategy in which an investor goes
long HH (High H     ¯ Equity and High H  ¯ Bond ) portfolio and short LL (Low H   ¯ Equity and Low H  ¯ Bond ) portfolio, and
reported its profitability (HH-LL alpha). The table also shows the p-value of Gibbons et al. (1989) statistic (GRS) for
the joint test of alpha.


                               CAPM Alpha (%)                     FF3 Alpha (%)                     FF4 Alpha (%)
               ¯ Bond
               H             L        M         H              L         M         H             L         M         H
                            0.03     0.14      0.01          -0.13      0.05      0.16         -0.13      0.41      0.49
                   L
                           (0.07)   (0.21)    (0.80)        (-0.27)    (0.07)    (0.21)       (-0.27)    (0.57)    (0.67)
 ¯ Equity                   0.48     0.77     1.52**          0.16      0.78     1.68**         0.76      1.02     1.61**
 H                M
                           (0.59)   (1.14)    (2.49)        (0.19)     (1.08)    (2.56)       (1.08)     (1.43)    (2.39)
                            0.86     0.89     1.93**          0.66      1.21     1.95**         0.99      1.08     2.37**
                  H
                           (1.36)   (1.01)    (2.17)        (0.99)     (1.37)    (2.02)       (1.59)      (1.2)    (2.55)
 HH - LL Alpha (%)                            1.90**                             2.08**                           2.50***
                                              (2.51)                             (2.55)                            (3.30)

 GRS p-value                                  0.028**                           0.029**                           0.037**




                                                             53
                      Table 10. Cross-Sectional Analysis by Firms and Rating
This table examines how the dynamic holding relationship for sister funds' cross-holdings varies across the holding firms'
characteristics such as size, leverage, book-to-market ratio and coarse credit rating. For Columns (1)-(3), we interact
the bond holding change (H Bond ) with indication variables related to each firm characteristics, and estimate Equation
(11):
                                    Equity
                                Hi,f,t     = F E +  · Hi,f,t
                                                          Bond          Bond
                                                               +  · Hi,f,t   · Hi,t + i,f,t ,
where Hi,f,t is the percentage change of firm i's equity shares or corporate bond shares held by fund family f during
the quarter t, H is the indication variable that take value of 1 if the corresponding firm characteristic is higher than the
median value otherwise 0, In Column (4), we estimate Equation (12):
                                       Equity
                                      Hi,f,t  = F E +  · Hi,f,t
                                                          Bond
                                                                · Ri,t + i,f,t ,

where all other variable definitions are identical to the above, except that R is a vector of indication variables that take
1 only at the firm's coarse issuer rating. Coarse ratings are constructed in the following way: 1 = AAA /AA, 2 = A, 3
= BBB, 4 = BB, and 5 = all below BB. For F E , we consider fund family, time, and firm fixed effect. Standard errors
are clustered at the fund family level and t-statistics are shown in parentheses with the significance at the 1% (***), 5%
(**), and 10% (*) levels.

                                        (1) Book/Mkt           (2) Leverage         (3) Size        (4) Rating
       H Bond                                 0.037***             0.028***          0.018*
                                                 (3.41)               (2.76)         (1.79)
       H Bond × H.Book/Mkt                       -0.003
                                                (-0.34)
       H Bond × H.Leverage                                             0.014
                                                                      (1.46)
       H Bond × H.Size                                                              0.032**
                                                                                      (2.56)
       H Bond × Rating=1                                                                                  0.030
                                                                                                         (0.90)
       H Bond × Rating=2                                                                                  0.024
                                                                                                         (1.53)
       H Bond × Rating=3                                                                             0.058***
                                                                                                         (2.75)
       H Bond × Rating=4                                                                                  0.000
                                                                                                         (0.01)
       H Bond × Rating=5                                                                               -0.039*
                                                                                                        (-1.66)
       Fund Family FE                                Y                    Y               Y                  Y
       Time FE                                      Y                    Y                Y                  Y
       Firm FE                                      Y                     Y               Y                  Y
       N.Obs                                   120,037              120,037         120,037             31,001
       R-squared                                 0.019                0.019           0.019              0.026




                                                            54
