                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TECHNOLOGICAL TRANSITIONS WITH SKILL HETEROGENEITY ACROSS
                            GENERATIONS

                                         Rodrigo Adão
                                          Martin Beraja
                                      Nitya Pandalai-Nayar

                                       Working Paper 26625
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26625


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020

First version: May 2018 under title "Skill-Biased Technological Transitions." We are grateful to
Masao Fukui, Agustin Gutierrez and Michelle Lam for excellent research assistance. We thank
Christopher Tonetti for his superb discussion as well as all other participants at the NBER's
EF&G Fall meeting. For their valuable suggestions, we thank Daron Acemoglu, David Autor,
Fernando Alvarez, Ariel Burstein, Juliette Caminade, V.V. Chari, Arnaud Costinot, Steve Davis,
Dave Donaldson, Oded Galor, Erik Hurst, Greg Kaplan, Pablo Kurlat, Frank Levy, Simon
Mongey, Fabrizio Perri, Aysegul Sahin, Dejanir Silva, Venky Venkateswaran, Gianluca Violante,
and Fabrizio Zilibotti. We also thank seminar participants at Dartmouth, Duke, MIT,
Northwestern, NYU, Notre-Dame, Philly Fed, Stockholm (IIES), UCLA, UCSD, U of Munich,
USC Marshall, UT Austin, Yale, WashU/St. Louis Fed, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, and
the NBER SI Income Distribution and Macroeconomics, and Micro Data for Macro Models
groups for helpful comments. Data access was provided by the Research Data Centre (FDZ) of
the German Federal Employment Agency (BA) at the Institute for Employment Research (IAB).
We thank Peter Brown and Clare Dingwell of the Harvard Economics Department, for facilitating
access to IAB data. All results based on IAB microdata have been cleared for disclosure. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rodrigo Adão, Martin Beraja, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technological Transitions with Skill Heterogeneity Across Generations
Rodrigo Adão, Martin Beraja, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
NBER Working Paper No. 26625
January 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. C0,E0,F0,J0,O0

                                          ABSTRACT

We study how inequality, skills, and economic activity adjust over time to technological
innovations. We develop a theory of technological transitions where economies adjust through
two margins: (i) within-generation reallocation of workers with heterogeneous skills, and (ii)
cross-generation changes in the skill distribution driven by entering generations investing in
skills. We then characterize the equilibrium dynamics, showing that they resemble those of a q-
theory of skill investment where q is lifetime inequality. Technological transitions are slower and
more unequal whenever innovations are biased towards economic activities intensive in skills
which differ more from those used in the rest of the economy--i.e., technology-skill specificity is
higher. This is because the first margin is weaker and the second stronger. Lastly, we document
that recent cognitive-biased innovations caused responses in occupational composition and
training which were strong for younger generations but weak for older ones. This evidence is
consistent with high technology-skill specificity, implying that cognitive-biased transitions are
particularly slow and unequal because they are mainly driven by changes in the skill distribution
across generations.

Rodrigo Adão                                     Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
Booth School of Business                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                            University of Texas at Austin
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                       3.142 BRB, 2225 Speedway
Chicago, IL 60637                                Austin, TX 78713
and NBER                                         and NBER
rodrigo.adao@chicagobooth.edu                    npnayar@utexas.edu

Martin Beraja
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
martinberaja@gmail.com




A online appendix is available at https://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26625/
1     Introduction
In recent decades, developed economies have experienced rising inequality and large
changes in relative employment across occupations and sectors (Acemoglu and Autor,
2011; Buera and Kaboski, 2012). These trends have resulted, in part, from technologi-
cal innovations that were biased towards economic activities intensive in specific skills
(Autor et al., 2003). However, these aggregate changes in relative employment can mask
underlying differences across generations. For instance, Figure 1 documents that while
the employment share of occupations intensive in cognitive skills increased in most de-
veloped economies, such changes were larger for younger than for older generations.1
    In this paper, we study how economies adjust over time to technological innovations
that are biased towards economic activities intensive in specific skills. We argue that the
type of patterns in Figure 1 point to at least two margins through which this adjustment
can occur: (i) existing workers reallocate towards these activities, provided their skills are
more valuable in them, and (ii) new generations of workers invest more in the relevant
skills, thus entering these activities in greater proportions. Because the first margin
dominates the adjustment at shorter horizons and the second at longer ones, they shape
the dynamics of the economy following technological innovations, in particular how
slow and unequal these dynamics are. This implies that, if the strength of the two
margins varies with the type of innovation, then technological transitions will vary in
how slow and unequal they are as well. Motivated by this discussion, our goal is to
provide answers to three questions: How do inequality, skills, and economic activity
jointly adjust over time to technological innovations? What features of innovations and
skills determine whether the adjustment is fast or whether it slowly plays out over many
generations? Which types of evidence, even when only available over short horizons,
point to an unequal and slow adjustment?
    We begin by developing a theory of technological transitions where economies adjust
through two margins: (i) within-generation reallocation of workers with heterogeneous
skills (Roy, 1951), and (ii) cross-generation changes in the skill distribution driven by
entering generations investing in different skills than previous ones (Chari and Hopen-
hayn, 1991). Using an approach that shares some parallels with Perla and Tonetti (2014)
and Lucas and Moll (2014), we then show that the equilibrium dynamics resemble those
of a q-theory of skill investment, where lifetime inequality q overshoots its long-run level
and the skill distribution slowly adjusts over time.
    We use this characterization to establish our main insight: the type of technological
innovation determines the relative strength of the two adjustment margins and, con-
   1 Murphy and Topel (1987) and Kim and Topel (1995) find similar patterns across broad sectors in the U.S. and

Korea. Hobijn et al. (2019) and Porzio and Santangelo (2019) document them for many developed and developing
countries. Autor and Dorn (2009) shows average age increases in middle-wage occupations in the U.S. in 1980-2005.


                                                       1
   Figure 1: Recent trends in cognitive-intensive employment growth in developed countries




    Note. Annualized log-change in cognitive-intensive occupation share in 1997-2017 for European countries, in 2000-
    2010 for U.S., and in 2001-2011 for Canada. Sample of males in two age groups: "Young" aged 15-39yrs and "Old"
    aged 40-64yrs. Cognitive-intensive occupations are the top 3 groups in cognitive intensity among the nine 2-digit ISCO
    occupation groups (Managers, Professionals, Technicians). Data comes from Eurostat for European countries and IPUMS
    International for U.S. and Canada. Cognitive intensity is the average across an ISCO group's occupations of time spent
    on analytical non-routine and interactive tasks as reported in the German BERUFNET dataset.


sequently, the joint equilibrium dynamics of inequality, the skill distribution, and eco-
nomic activity. More precisely, we show that a technological transition is slower and
more unequal whenever an innovation is biased towards economic activities intensive in
skills which differ more from those used in other activities--i.e., whenever technology-
skill specificity is higher. This is because, in this case, it is harder for existing workers to
reallocate across activities (the first margin is weaker), which leads to a larger increase
in inequality q following the innovation. In turn, this causes new generations of workers
to invest more in the skills that became more valuable, which leads to larger changes in
the skill distribution along the transition (the second margin is stronger).
    Lastly, in the context of Germany, we show that recent cognitive-biased innova-
tions caused responses in occupational composition and training which were strong
for younger generations but weak for older ones. These type of responses, even when
observed over short horizons, indicate an economy featuring high technology-skill speci-
ficity. Through a counterfactual exercise, we then show that this implies that cognitive-
biased transitions are particularly unequal and slow because they are mainly driven
by changes in the skill distribution. As a result, naive extrapolations from observed
responses at short horizons lead to overly pessimistic views about the welfare and dis-
tributional implications of cognitive-biased innovations. The reason is that they miss the
increase in average living standards and the decline in inequality at longer horizons,
which are yet unobserved and take many generations to fully materialize.
    We next describe the theory in more detail and present the three main results which
address, in turn, each of the three questions posed above. To formalize the within-
generation reallocation margin theoretically, we consider an economy with two technolo-

                                                              2
gies that are combined to produce a final consumption good, as in Katz and Murphy
(1992), Ngai and Pissarides (2007), and Buera et al. (2011). Workers are heterogeneous
over a continuum of skill types that determine their technology-specific productivities,
as in Roy (1951). Given the relative technology-specific wage at a point in time, there
is an assignment threshold determining the allocation of workers with different skills
to technologies. To formalize the cross-generation skill distribution changes margin, we
introduce overlapping generations of workers with stochastic lifetimes, as in Yaari (1965)
and Blanchard (1985). Workers make a costly forward-looking investment upon entry
that determines their skill type for their lifetime, similar to Chari and Hopenhayn (1991),
Caselli (1999) and Galor and Moav (2002).2 When faced with different paths of rela-
tive wages, the investment decisions of entering worker generations yield endogenous
differences in skill distributions across generations.
    Our first result characterizes the joint equilibrium dynamics of inequality, the skill
distribution, and worker allocations following a skill-biased innovation that permanently
increases the productivity of one of the technologies. This is the solution to a high-
dimensional, complex fixed-point problem in which the skill distribution is a state vari-
able and can, in principle, only be tackled numerically (which we do in our numerical
counterfactual exercises). Yet, we analytically characterize the approximate transitional
dynamics by reducing the dimensionality of the problem. In particular, we establish that
they can be approximated by a system of differential equations that resembles that of
a q-theory of skill investment, where q is the present value of the relative technology-
specific wage. This analytical characterization allows us to tell the story of the economy's
adjustment through the two margins in the theory, as well as derive the theoretical and
measurement insights that answer the questions posed in the beginning.
    The economy's adjustment plays out as follows. On impact, the innovation raises
the relative wage in the improved technology. Within existing generations, marginal
skill types that were around the initial assignment threshold now reallocate into that
technology. This rationalizes the observed changes in relative employment within older
generations. For entering generations, the change in current and future relative wages
(summarized in q) causes them to tilt their investment decisions towards skills more com-
plementary to the improved technology. This rationalizes the stronger changes in occu-
pation composition observed for younger generations. Along the transition, as younger
generations replace older ones, the economy's overall skill distribution and worker allo-
cations also tilt towards the improved skills and technology. This leads to a slow process
of relative wage decline and relative output increase across technologies.
    Our second result establishes our main insight about the determinants of technolog-
ical transitions. We consider two separate thought experiments that speak to differences
  2 In   an extension of our baseline model, we also let older generations invest in skills after a technological innovation.



                                                              3
across episodes of adjustment in which the type of technological innovations might be
different. The first compares two economies: one in which an innovation improves a
technology intensive in skills which are markedly different from those used by the rest
of the economy (a high technology-skill specificity economy) and another one in which
they are more similar (a low technology-skill specificity economy). The second com-
pares two other economies: one in which an innovation improves a technology intensive
in skills which are harder to accumulate (a high cost of skill investment economy) and
another one in which they are easier (a low cost of skill investment economy).
    Higher technology-skill specificity leads to a slower, more back-loaded adjustment
in inequality and economic activity following a skill-biased innovation.3 On impact,
higher specificity weakens the within-generation reallocation of older generations with
predetermined skills. This results in a stronger increase in inequality (q), which then
strengthens the incentives of younger generations to invest in those skills that are more
complementary to the improved technology. Ultimately, a larger fraction of the over-
all adjustment happens along the transition because larger changes in the economy's
skill distribution take place as younger generations replace older ones. In addition, a
lower cost of skill investment for young generations strengthens the cross-generation
margin by amplifying changes in the skill distribution for any given change in lifetime
inequality. This makes the adjustment slower as well, both directly and by amplifying
the importance of technology-skill specificity. Together, these results show that tran-
sitions are slower and more unequal whenever the adjustment is driven more by skill
distribution changes than by the reallocation of older worker generations at impact.
    Our third result connects the determinants of the two adjustment margins in our
theory to the impact of technological innovations on labor market outcomes that are
observed over short horizons. In particular, we link the degree of technology-skill
specificity and the cost of skill investment to the type of responses for different gen-
erations shown in Figure 1. This result builds directly on the comparative statics de-
scribed above. In the short-run, economies with higher technology-skill specificity ex-
hibit weaker within-generation relative employment responses for older workers but
larger cross-generation differences in relative employment responses of younger versus
older workers. In contrast, a lower cost of skill investment for entering generations cre-
ates larger cross-generation differences in relative employment responses, but has no
impact on the responses of older workers.
    In the last part of the paper, we use our theory to analyze Germany's adjustment
to cognitive-biased innovations. This has two advantages. First, we are able to provide
    3 Formally, we use the "discounted cumulative impulse response" (DCIR) to measure how slow the adjustment

is. It captures how much of the overall (long-run) adjustment older generations born before the innovation expect to
experience during their lifetime. In our model, we show that the DCIR of q is an important determinant of the average
and distributional welfare consequences of new technologies.



                                                         4
causal evidence that confirms and extends the stylized patterns in Figure 1. Second,
by exploiting our third theoretical result, we are able to use this evidence to discipline
key structural parameters in our model and ask the following counterfactual question:
if technological innovations had not been cognitive-biased and had instead been biased
towards occupations or sectors intensive in skills which were more similar to those used
in the rest of the economy, how different would the economy's adjustment have been?
    We first investigate the evolution of labor market outcomes across narrowly defined
occupations that differ in terms of cognitive intensity. We show that employment and
payroll grew more in more cognitive-intensive occupations over recent decades. This
effect is strong for younger generations but weak for older generations. These responses
are similar when we control for a number of confounding factors, like exposure to im-
migration and international trade. We also explore the large-scale German vocational
training program to document stronger growth in the number of trainees in more cog-
nitive intensive occupations. This provides direct evidence for the theory's source of
dynamics: entering generations tilt their investment decisions towards cognitive skills.
    We then investigate the dynamic adjustment of labor market outcomes to a particular
cognitive-biased innovation: the introduction of broadband internet in the early 2000s.
Following Falck et al. (2014), we use pre-determined conditions of the German telephone
network to obtain quasi-experimental variation across regions in the timing of adoption.
By comparing late to early adopting regions, we estimate impulse response functions
that show an increase in the relative employment and payroll of more cognitive-intensive
occupations starting in 2005. We find that the impact on relative employment is small
and non-significant for older generations over the entire period. In contrast, it is positive
and statistically significant for younger generations. Thus, the expansion of cognitive-
intensive occupations was entirely driven by the entry of younger generations.
    Through the lens of our third theoretical result, the evidence indicates that cognitive-
biased innovations are associated with an economy featuring high technology-skill speci-
ficity and that the supply of cognitive skills is elastic at longer horizons. Our counterfac-
tual exercise shows that had recent technologies instead been biased towards economic
activities intensive in skills which were more similar to those used in the rest of the
economy (i.e., if technology-skill specificity had been lower), then the adjustment would
have been less unequal and faster. In other words, cognitive-biased transitions are partic-
ularly unequal and slow to play out because they are mainly driven by skill distribution
changes across generations. Moreover, we show that naively extrapolating from changes
at short horizons leads to views regarding welfare and inequality that are too pessimistic.
We conclude with suggestive evidence that technology-skill specificity was lower in the
U.S. and German economies in the mid-twentieth century than in recent decades.4
  4 We   document similar changes in occupational composition for young and old generations before 1990 in Germany



                                                         5
2     Related literature
Our paper is related to the extensive literature analyzing the economic consequences
of changes in relative demand for skills, sectors, or occupations. Recent papers have
used static Roy-like assignment models with technology-skill interactions to study the
impact of new technologies on relative wages and employment reallocation across occu-
pations and sectors, e.g., Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Costinot and Vogel (2010), Hsieh
et al. (2013), Burstein et al. (2016). A separate literature has studied how new technolo-
gies affect the economy through the entry of new generations with potentially different
skills ­ e.g., Chari and Hopenhayn (1991) and Galor and Moav (2002). Finally, the lit-
erature on structural transformation has analyzed the reallocation of economic activity
across sectors, focusing for the most part on sources of dynamics and notions of tech-
nology that abstract from interactions with skills altogether, e.g., Ngai and Pissarides
(2007), Rogerson (2008), and, for a review, Herrendorf et al. (2014).5 Our theory builds
on these literatures by endogenizing the dynamics of the skill distribution in assign-
ment models through the forward-looking investment decisions of new generations on
technology-specific skills. This allows us to study how the types of technologies and
skills determine the reallocation of workers within a generation and changes in the skill
distribution across generations and, consequently, the speed of reallocation of economic
activity and the dynamics of inequality during technological transitions. Furthermore,
we link our theoretical margins to causal short-run responses of labor market outcomes
to technological innovations, which we then use to discipline counterfactual exercises on
the impact of cognitive-biased innovations in Germany.
    The only source of dynamics in our theory is the endogenous change in the dis-
tribution of skills across generations. This mechanism not only rationalizes the cross-
generation differences in occupation composition changes that we document, but it is
also consistent with recent evidence on the impact of labor demand shocks on young in-
dividuals' decisions of educational attainment (Atkin, 2016 and Charles et al., 2018) and
field of study (Abramitzky et al., 2019, Ghose, 2019). We add to this literature by doc-
umenting that cognitive-biased innovations cause higher training in cognitive-intensive
occupations in Germany. Our paper is thus also related to the literature using quan-
titative frameworks with endogenous skill accumulation to study the impact of shocks
to relative demand across skills, sectors and occupations ­ e.g., Lee and Wolpin (2006).
This literature has by and large studied dynamics in environments with exogenous skill-
prices or without technology-specific skills, or focused on comparisons across long-run
and the U.S., which stands in sharp contrast with the strong differences across generations after 1990 (Figure 1).
   5 Exceptions considering workers with heterogenous skills are Buera and Kaboski (2012) and Lagakos and Waugh

(2013).




                                                        6
equilibria instead of transitional dynamics.6 By simplifying our theory along some di-
mensions, we are able to sharply characterize the economy's transitional dynamics in an
environment with technology-specific skills and, thus, study how the type of innovations
shape the endogenous dynamics of the skill distribution and skill-prices.
    Several papers have proposed alternative sources of dynamics to study technologi-
cal transitions, including technology diffusion across firms (Atkeson and Kehoe, 2007),
firm-level investment in R&D (Atkeson et al., 2018), endogenous creation of new tasks for
labor in production (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018), sluggish labor mobility across sec-
tors (Matsuyama, 1992; Dvorkin and Monge-Naranjo, 2019), and rising wealth inequality
via permanent changes in the returns to wealth following increases in automation (Moll
et al., 2019). We focus on dynamics arising from endogenous changes in the skill distri-
bution across generations, which we show to be relevant in the context of Germany.
    Finally, our paper is related to the extensive literature that has estimated the distri-
butional consequences of shocks to the demand and supply of skills ­ for a review, see
Acemoglu and Autor (2011). Our empirical analysis follows the literature studying the
impact of new technologies on the demand of skills across occupations with different
task intensity ­ e.g., Autor et al. (2003) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017). We extend
the estimation strategy in this literature to establish that recent cognitive-intensive inno-
vations caused relative employment responses that were strong for young workers but
weak for older workers.7 Through the lens of our theory, this evidence suggests a slow
transition process that takes several generations to materialize. Our results thus indicate
that one should be cautions when extracting conclusions about the full impact of new
technologies from evidence spanning less than a generation.8


3     A Model of Skilled-biased Technological Transitions
3.1     Environment
We consider a closed economy in continuous time. There is a single final good whose
production uses the input of two intermediate goods. We denote the two inputs as
    6 One exception is Heckman et al. (1998), which numerically studies transitional dynamics in a model with

technology-skill interactions, skill accumulation and endogenous inequality. Relative to this paper, we provide ana-
lytical characterizations of the transitional dynamics and use them to study what determines how unequal and slow
technological transitions are.
    7 As Akerman et al. (2015), we estimate the labor market consequences of broadband internet adoption. While they

focus on the impact of broadband internet adoption on educational composition of employment in Norwegian firms,
we estimate the responses occupation-level outcomes across German local labor markets.
    8 A full account of inequality trends would require analyzing not only the impact of shocks to skill demand but

also how the economy adjusts to shocks to the supply of skills, as in Katz and Murphy (1992) and Goldin and
Katz (2009). For instance, Card and Lemieux (2001) show that generation-specific skill supply shocks are important
determinants of inequality trends. Similarly, we incorporate skill differences across generations. However, while it
would be possible to study the consequences of skill supply shocks in our theory, we focus on the consequences of
shocks to skill demand when skill supply responds across generations.


                                                         7
high-tech (k = H ) and low-tech (k = L). Their production uses only labor. There is
a continuum of worker skill types i  [0, 1]. The skill type determines the worker's
productivity in the H and L production technologies. There are overlapping generations
of workers. Workers consume the final good, self-select into a technology, and make a
costly skill investment decision when they are born which determines their skill type for
the remaining of their lifetime.

Final good. Production of the final good is a CES aggregator of the two inputs:
                                                                                     
                                                      -1                   -1        -1
                            Yt = ( At X Ht )                 + ( X Lt )                   (1)

where  > 0 is the demand elasticity of substitution between the low-tech and the high-
tech intermediate inputs, and At is a shifter of the relative productivity of the high-tech
input (as in Katz and Murphy, 1992).
   Conditional on input prices, the cost minimization problem of firms producing the
final good implies that the relative spending on the high-tech input is

                                                                      1- 
                                      X Ht                      t
                                yt  t      =                                    ,         (2)
                                      X Lt                      At
where t   Ht / Lt is the relative price of the high-tech good. We normalize the price
of the low-tech good to one,  Lt  1.
    In a competitive environment with zero profits, the final good price is
                                                                  1
                                     Pt = (1 + yt ) 1- .                                  (3)

Assignment of skills to technologies. We assume that a worker's skill type determines
her productivity with the two technologies in the economy. Specifically, the production
functions of L and H are respectively
                                                     1
                                  X Lt =                 (i )s Lt (i )di,                 (4)
                                                 0

                                             1
                                X Ht =           (i ) (i )s Ht (i )di,                    (5)
                                         0
where skt (i ) is the density of workers employed with technology k at time t. For a
worker of type i  [0, 1], (i ) is the overall productivity and (i ) is her differential
productivity in high-tech production. Therefore, (i ) governs vertical differences in the
productivity across skill-types (i.e, absolute advantage) whereas (i ) governs horizontal
differences across technologies for a given type (i.e., comparative advantage). Without loss
of generality, we assume that (i ) is increasing in i: we order types such that higher i


                                                         8
types have higher relative productivity in high-tech production. This implies that the
skills of those workers indexed by higher i types are more complementary to the H
technology than to the L technology. The slope of  (i ) governs the strength of this
complementarity.
    Online Appendix 1.1 provides one economic interpretation for a skill type. We show
that (4)­(5) arise when production combines individual-level output of each worker's
"cognitive" and "non-cognitive" task input. A type determines the differential ability to
perform cognitive tasks.
    We assume a competitive labor market where firms earn zero profits. In equilibrium,
the wage of skill type i with the H and L technologies are respectively

                               w Ht (i ) = t  (i )(i )         and    w Lt (i ) = (i ).                              (6)

  As in Roy (1951), workers self-select across technologies to maximize labor income.
Thus, the labor income of a worker with skill type i is

                                         wt (i ) = max{t (i ), 1}(i ).                                               (7)

    The technology-skill assignment in equation (7) plays a central role in determining
the economy's adjustment to technological shocks. Equation (7) illustrates that such an
assignment depends on the endogenous price t defining the relative value of one unit
of effective labor employed in H production, as well as the exogenous function  (i )
defining the differential productivity of type i in H production. In our theory, t is a
natural measure of inequality as it is the endogenous relative wage rate of skill types
employed in different technologies conditional on their productivity. In what follows,
we will refer to t as the relative technology-specific wage or, sometimes, simply as the
relative wage.9
    At this point, it is worth discussing the three main advantages of our theory's Roy-like
structure with skill heterogeneity defined over a continuum. First, as we discuss in detail
later, this framework allows skill-biased technological innovations to cause endogenous
changes in both relative wages and employment across technologies (conditional on the
distribution of skills). Acemoglu and Autor (2011) show that this is important to ratio-
nalize the rich patterns of changes in inequality and occupation composition observed
in developed economies. In fact, by mapping occupations to the technologies in our
theory, this structure of skill heterogeneity implies that the theory can generate the type
of within-generation worker reallocation documented in Figure 1.10 In contrast, such
   9 Note   that changes in t are not identical to changes in the relative average labor income of H employees because
of endogenous changes in the "selection" of skill types in H implied by (7) (Heckman and Honore, 1990).
  10 It is straight forward to extend our framework to have multiple worker groups defined in terms of observable

attributes like education, race or gender ­ as in Hsieh et al. (2013) and Burstein et al. (2016). In this case, different
groups may differ with respect to their distribution of skills. This creates different responses in worker allocations


                                                           9
patterns cannot be generated by variants of the canonical model in Katz and Murphy
(1992) that rely on a discrete number of skills specified in terms of observable attributes
(Acemoglu and Autor, 2011).
    Second, the presence of technology-skill complementarity allows us to formally study
which features of technologies and skills are important determinants of the economy's
adjustment to skill-biased innovations. In particular, the slope of  (i ) measures how dif-
ferent skill types are in terms of relative productivity across technologies. Thus, through
the self-selection decision in (7), it determines how much wages need to change to induce
skill types to reallocate across technologies. In other words, the slope of (i ) captures
the degree of transferability of skill types across technologies.
    Third, from a mathematical tractability perspective, having a continuum of skill types
is useful when combined with continuous time because it implies that the dynamic ad-
justment of all outcomes following technological innovations is smooth along the equi-
librium path. This allows us to sharply characterize the transitional dynamics in a way
that would not be possible with a discrete number of skill types. The reason for such
smoothness is that any relative wage change triggers the reallocation of a positive mass
of skill types through the self-selection condition (7).

Skill investment. We consider overlapping generations of workers whose birth and
death follows a Poisson process with rate . At each point in time, workers use their
labor earnings to buy the final good. Utility is the present value of the log-utility flow
discounted at rate . At time t, the expected utility from consumption is
                                                                                              ws (i )
                                         Vt (i ) =                  e-(+)(s-t) log                      ds.                 (8)
                                                             t                                 Ps

    Crucially, we endogenize the distribution of skills by allowing workers to direct their
skill investment decisions to target particular skill types. Given the future path for the
wage distribution {ws (i )}s>t , workers born at time t can pay a utility cost to select a
lottery s~t (i ) over skill types. If they do not pay the cost, their type is drawn from an
exogenous distribution of innate ability, s  ¯t (i ). A worker's type is then fixed during their
lifetime. Formally, we assume that the cost of the lottery is proportional to the Kullback-
Leibler divergence between the lottery s     ~t (i ) and the baseline distribution s¯t (i ), so that
workers of the cohort born at time t solve the following skill investment problem:
                                                        1                         1       1         ~t (i )
                                                                                                    s
                                  max                              ~t (i ) di -
                                                            Vt (i )s                          log             ~t (i ) di.
                                                                                                              s             (9)
                     ~t ( . ) :
                     s
                                   1
                                     ~t (i )di =1   0                                 0             ¯t (i )
                                                                                                    s
                                  0 s


    The skill investment problem in (9) for entering generations allows our model to ra-
across technologies after technological innovations.



                                                                          10
tionalize the differences across generations shown in Figure 1 (as well as similar patterns
that we document for Germany in Section 7). Faced with different paths of relative wages
upon entry, different worker generations will choose different optimal skill lotteries and,
therefore, will have different skill distributions. In combination with the endogenous
assignment in (7), this creates cross-generation differences in the allocation of workers
across technologies. The positive parameter  governs how easy it is for younger gen-
erations to adjust their skill investment in response to changes in the lifetime earnings
of different skill types. In the limit when   0, the economy's skill distribution is
exogenous and equal to s     ¯t (i ).
     A number of comments on these assumptions and their economic interpretation are
in order. First, as shown in Fudenberg et al. (2015), the stochastic choice formulation in
(9) is equivalent to the type of additive random utility model that is commonly used in
the labor, trade, and industrial organization literatures.11 As we show in Lemma 3, it
implies that the optimal skill lottery is a multinomial logit over a continuum. Therefore,
one economic interpretation of this environment follows from its discrete-choice analog
where the preference or innate ability of workers to invest in each skill type has an
extreme-value distribution (e.g., McFadden, 1973).12 Under this interpretation,  reflects
the amount of variation across individuals in idiosyncratic additive random utility for
specific skill types, with higher  implying lower variability. The baseline distribution
¯t (i ) is then a skill-specific utility term that is common for all workers. An alternative
s
interpretation for the uncertain skill type realization is that individuals with different
unobservables may have heterogeneous returns to education and on-the-job training ­
as documented by Carneiro et al. (2011).13
     Second, our baseline model assumes that s     ¯t (i ) is exogenous and only entering genera-
tions invest in skills. These assumptions imply the optimal skill lottery is only a function
of the future path of relative wages ­ see the problem in (9). This simplifies our analysis
as the flow of new workers to a particular point in the skill distribution is independent
of the current skill distribution. We relax both assumptions in Online Appendix 1.2 to
show that our main results do not depend on either the cost of skill investment being
infinite for older generations, nor on the skill investment technology being independent
  11 Entropy  cost functions also have a long tradition in macroeconomics (Sims, 2003, Hansen and Sargent, 2008). Yet,
the particular cost function is not crucial for our main results. This is because in later sections we take a log-linear
approximation around the stationary equilibrium. What matters then is the curvature of the distance metric around
the stationary equilibrium, similar to investment problems with a convex cost of adjustment.
  12 We do not follow this route for technical reasons: it is not possible to define independent innate ability draws

over a continuum. The skill lottery together with the entropy cost function provides an equivalent alternative. In
fact, Mat ejka and McKay (2015) give another interpretation for the multinomial logit choice structure. It arises when
individuals choose actions with imperfect information about their payoffs while paying an entropy cost for signal
acquisition.
  13 For our purposes, it is not important that workers are ex-ante identical but face uncertainty ex-post. It is easy to

extend our model to introduce worker-groups that have ex-ante different observed attributes that only affect s   ¯(i ) and
. The overall skill lottery would then be the average of lotteries across worker groups.


                                                           11
of the economy's skill distribution.14
    Our preferred economic interpretation of these assumptions is that changes in rela-
tive wages induce workers to move towards sectors or occupations that require similar
skills and thus entail minimal retraining. That is, older workers may change the technol-
ogy they work with, but do not change their skill type. Intuitively, they face a high cost
of fundamentally changing career paths by acquiring completely different skills. For
younger workers, such skill investments are less costly due to lower opportunity costs,
higher ability to learn new skills, or longer work-life horizon ­ as in environments in
the tradition of Ben-Porath (1967). Note, however, that the skill investment decision goes
beyond traditional unidimensional decisions to acquire more human capital (or whether
to attend college) that allow workers to vertically differentiate. Instead, it is a multi-
dimensional decision to direct investments toward particular sets of skills, driven both
by vertical considerations ­ expressed in absolute advantage (i ) and the relative wage
t ­ as well as horizontal considerations ­ expressed through comparative advantage
 (i ). As discussed above, this type of horizontal skill differentiation is central to capture
changes in relative employment and wages within each generation. For tractability, we
collapse into a one-time decision upon entry the skill investment that in reality occurs
through formal schooling, major college choice, and/or on-the-job learning.

3.2     Equilibrium
We are now ready to define and begin to characterize the equilibrium of the economy
introduced in Section 3.1. Because only new generations choose skill lotteries, the equi-
librium skill distribution st (i ) follows the Kolmogorov-Forward equation,

                                            s t (i )
                                                     = -  s t (i ) +  s
                                                                      ~t (i ).                                   (10)
                                             t
Finally, the economy's equilibrium must satisfy market clearing for all t. By Walras' law,
it suffices that relative demand and supply of the H good are equal:

                                                     yt = t xt                                                   (11)

where yt is given by (2) and xt is the ratio of H to L production given by (4)­(5).
  We define the equilibrium as follows.

Definition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium) Given an initial skill distribution s0 (i ) and exoge-
nous paths for { At , s
                      ¯t (i )}t0 , a competitive equilibrium is a path of the technology-skill as-
  14 Instead,
            what is important for mathematical tractability is that the skill investment decisions along the transition
do not depend on the initial type of an individual. When this is the case, the dynamics of the overall skill distribu-
tion become much more complex. This independence could be violated if, for example, there was inter-generation
transmission of skills, or skill acquisition had monetary costs and workers faced credit frictions.



                                                          12
signment { Gt (i ) : i  [0, 1]  { H , L}}t0 , the skill distribution {st (i )}t0 , the skill lot-
tery {s
      ~t (i )}t0 , the relative value of output {yt }t0 , the relative wage and final price index
{t , Pt }t0 , such that
  1. Given {t }t0 , { Gt (i ), s
                               ~t (i )}t0 are determined by (7) and (9).
  2. Given s0 (i ) and {s
                        ~t (i )}t0 , {st (i )}t0 is determined by (10).
  3. For all t  0, the market clearing condition (11) is satisfied and Pt is given by (3).

Static equilibrium conditions. The endogenous sorting decision in (7) determines the
assignment of skill types to technologies. It implies that types self-select to work with
the technology that yields the highest labor earnings. Thus, high-i types receive higher
relative earnings in H and choose to be employed with that technology. Since (i ) is
increasing, the assignment is described by a threshold lt characterizing the type that is
indifferent between working with any of the two technologies. The following lemma
formalizes this discussion.
Lemma 1 (Equilibrium Assignment) Worker types i  lt are employed in L with labor in-
come of wt (i ) = (i ). Worker types i > lt are employed in H with labor income of wt (i ) =
t  (i )(i ). The threshold is determined by the indifference condition,

                                           t (lt ) = 1.                                      (12)

    Lemma 1 links the relative wage t to the allocation of skill types across technologies.
Condition (12) is central to understand the impact of technological shocks on the allo-
cation of workers across technologies. The slope of  (.) at the threshold determines the
strength of comparative advantage in H of skill types slightly below lt compared to skill
type lt . Thus, the inverse elasticity of (i ) controls the subset of skill types that reallocate
across technologies in response to relative wage changes. Formally, (12) implies

                                                                    -1
                                    log lt (t )         log (lt )
                                                =                         ,
                                     log t               log lt
where lt (t ) is the implicit function defined by (12).
    We will say that technology-skill specificity is higher when  is lower because the pro-
ductivity of skills associated with higher i types decreases more when deployed to the
L-technology rather than to the H -technology. Intuitively, a lower  means that workers
are less transferable across technologies because they require higher changes in rela-
tive wages to switch technologies in order to compensate them for their lower relative
technology-specific productivity. It therefore directly governs the strength of the within-
generation reallocation adjustment margin in our theory. Technology-skill specificity is
one of the features of the economy that we will vary in order to understand how it
shapes the adjustment to skill-biased innovations.

                                                 13
   The technology-skill assignment in Lemma 1 together with equations (4)­(5) imply
that the relative supply of high-tech production is
                                                        1
                                                       lt  (i )  (i ) st (i ) di
                                 xt ( lt , st ) =          lt
                                                                                  .                   (13)
                                                          0    ( i ) s t ( i ) di

   The threshold lt is then uniquely determined by market clearing in (11).

Lemma 2 (Equilibrium Threshold) Given st (i ) and At , there is a unique equilibrium thresh-
old lt that guarantees goods market clearing,
                                           lt                         1
                          -1
                       At     ( lt )            (i )st (i )di =           (i )(i )st (i )di.          (14)
                                       0                             lt

Proof. See Appendix A.1.

Dynamic equilibrium conditions. We now turn to the entrant's forward-looking prob-
                                    ~t (i ) given the path of the relative wage {s }s>t . The
lem of choosing their skill lottery s
following lemma shows that the solution to the problem in (9) takes the form of a multi-
nomial logit function over the continuum of types. In particular, the investment on high-i
types is a function of the present value of the relative wage in high-tech production as
captured by Qt (i ).
                                                                        -(+)(s-t)
Lemma 3 (Optimal Lottery) Define log ( Qt (i ))                       t e         max{log (s (i )) , 0}ds.
The optimal lottery is
                                                                
                                                   ¯t (i )(i ) + Qt (i )
                                                   s
                                ~t (i ) =
                                s                                                     .               (15)
                                                  1
                                                    ¯
                                                 0 st ( j)( j)
                                                               + Q ( j )  dj
                                                                  t

Proof. See Appendix A.2.
   As we have already intuitively discussed, the parameter  governs the sensitivity of
the optimal lottery to changes in relative lifetime earnings across technologies. We can
now see this formally by writing

                                                  log s~t (i )/s
                                                               ~t (i )
                                                                       .
                                                  log Qt (i )/ Qt (i )

   In the rest of the paper, we refer to 1/ as the cost of skill investment. A higher cost im-
plies a less elastic relative supply of skill types coming from entering worker generations
since skill investment decisions are less sensitive to differences in Qt (i ) across skills. As
a result, the cost of skill investment crucially shapes the cross-generation adjustment
margin in our theory. It is the other feature of the economy that we will vary in order to
understand how it shapes the economy's adjustment to skill-biased innovations.

                                                        14
3.3     Skill distribution dynamics: A q-theory of skill investment
We now combine the static and dynamic equilibrium conditions to solve for the equilib-
rium path of the skill distribution as well as all other variables, given an arbitrary initial
skill distribution s0 (i ) and a constant path for { At , s
                                                          ¯t (i )}t0 . Our characterization guides
the rest of the paper. It allows us to tell the story of the economy's adjustment through
the two margins in the theory (Section 4), gain insights regarding how different features
of technologies and skills determine the adjustment dynamics (Section 5), and trans-
parently connect these determinants to the patterns we document across generations
(Section 6).
    In principle, the characterization of the equilibrium dynamics involves solving a com-
plex infinite-dimensional fixed-point problem. To see this, consider a conjectured path
for the relative wage {t }t0 . This path determines the skill investment decisions of
new generations in (15) and, as such, the path for the skill distribution {st (i )}t0 from
(10) given s0 (i ). The relative wage path also determines the assignment threshold path
({lt }t0 ) from the indifference condition (12). Taken together, the skill distribution and
the assignment threshold determine the relative supply of the high-tech input ({ xt }t0 )
in (13). In an equilibrium, the relative supply of the high-tech input needs to be equal to
its relative demand at the conjectured path for the relative wage ­ i.e., they need to be
consistent with market clearing. Yet, in order to provide an analytical characterization of
the equilibrium dynamics, we next approximate the solution of this fixed-point problem
by considering a log-linear expansion around the stationary equilibrium. In Section 8,
we numerically solve this fixed-point problem and show that our main insights are not
driven by the equilibrium approximation.
    Theorem 1 establishes that the approximate equilibrium of this economy can be rep-
resented as that of a q-theory of skill investment, where log(q) refers to the present
discounted value of the log-relative wage or, as we call it from now on, lifetime inequal-
ity:
                                                      
                                   log(qt )              e-(+)(s-t) log(s )ds.
                                                  t

Specifically, we show that one does not need to keep track of the whole skill distribution
to solve for the approximate equilibrium dynamics of qt . Instead, changes in the thresh-
old lt suffice to summarize the changes in the moments of the skill distribution that are
relevant to solve for such dynamics. As a result, the approximate equilibrium dynamics
of qt and lt are fully characterized by a system of linear differential equations.15
  15 This reduction in the dimensionality shares some parallels with the approaches in Perla and Tonetti (2014) and the

special case with linear objectives in Lucas and Moll (2014) ­ who also characterize the dynamics of a distribution by
tracking the evolution of a threshold ­ as well as that of Krusell and Smith (1998) ­ who show that aggregate dynamics
in a Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari economy with aggregate shocks can be approximated by tracking only a reduced set of


                                                           15
    Letting " ^ " denote variables in log-deviations from the stationary equilibrium, the
following theorem presents the system of differential equations that, given l      ^0 , determines
the equilibrium path of {q        ^t }t when { At , s
                             ^t , l                 ¯t (i )}t0 are constant over time.16 It then
characterizes the skill distribution, skill lottery, and relative output.

Theorem 1 (q-theory of skill investment) Suppose { At , s
                                                        ¯t (i )}t0 is constant over time.
   1. Given initial condition l   ^0 and terminal condition limt l    ^t = 0, the equilibrium dynamics
      of {q    ^
          ^t , lt } are described by the system of differential equations

                                                 l^t
                                                     = -l^t +  q       ^t                                              (16)
                                                 t            + 
                                                 ^t
                                                 q               1^
                                                     = ( + )q^t + l t,                                                 (17)
                                                 t               

       where  is a positive constant.
   2. The equilibrium {q    ^t }t0 is saddle-path stable with rate of convergence .
                       ^t , l
   3. The equilibrium dynamics of the skill distribution s ^t (i ), the optimal lottery s   ^
                                                                                            ~t (i ), and the
                                         ^ t are determined by {q
      value of relative high-tech output y                              ^
                                                                   ^t , lt }t0 and s
                                                                                   ^0 (i ).

Proof. See Appendix A.3.
   The first part of the theorem presents a system that is a rather standard one in macroe-
conomics, with one control and one predetermined variable. The system is in fact math-
ematically isomorphic to the one in the q-theory of capital investment. In our model, q     ^t is
the present discounted value of the log-relative wage in high-tech production, represent-
ing the shadow price of the human capital "asset" associated with having one additional
unit of the high-tech good. Whenever this price is higher, the incentives to invest in
high-i skills are stronger and the skill distribution changes more. Similar to the semi-
nal q-theory, we can see in (16) that parameters governing the "costs of adjustment" in
the economy's skill distribution ( and ) affect the sensitivity of changes in the state
            ^t
            l
variable (                              ^t ). In fact, together with (17), this highlights how
           t ) to the control variable (q
the dynamics of l  ^t suffice to summarize the relevant changes in the moments of the skill
distribution which both feed back into and are caused by changes in q        ^t . For example, if
the skill distribution is exogenous and thus such changes are absent ( = 0 or  = 0),
then there are no transitional dynamics. Finally, our model also features both imper-
fect substitution of human capital across technologies and heterogeneous skills. Thus,
the impact of qt on the evolution of lt also depends on the degree of technology-skill
specificity (as controlled by  ) and substitutability between goods (as measured by  ).
moments of the wealth distribution.
 16 The initial l is determined by the initial skill distribution s (i ) from the static equilibrium condition (14).
                 0                                                 0




                                                            16
     The second part shows that (locally) the equilibrium exists and is unique--a conse-
quence of saddle-path stability. The proof further shows that, given an initial condition
^0 , both l
l         ^t and q
                 ^t converge at a constant rate to the stationary equilibrium, where - is
the negative eigenvalue of the system of differential equations.
     The last part of the theorem links the equilibrium path of the optimal skill lottery, the
overall skill distribution and the relative value of output to the joint dynamics of {q      ^t }.
                                                                                        ^t , l
The proof shows that the change in the optimal skill lottery along the transition depends
centrally on the evolution of q ^t . Formally,
                                                            1
                                 ^
                                 ~t (i ) =
                                 s           Ii > l -                   ^t + o t ( i ),
                                                                s(i )di q                                       (18)
                                                        l

where ot (i ) is such that s(i )ot (i )di = 0. The parameter  crucially shapes the extent to
which a generation's skill distribution tilts towards skills associated with higher i types
when they face a higher qt at birth. The overall skill distribution is then a population-
weighted average of the skill distributions of each generation. Finally, relative output is
driven by changes in the relative wage, with 1/ controlling how the latter responds to
threshold changes.
    The reduction in dimensionality in Theorem 1 is possible for three reasons. First, the
dynamics of st (i ) only depend on log( Qt (i )) via the optimal skill lottery. Yet, log(qt ) suf-
fices to determine the value of most skill types in the investment decision ­ as opposed to
the full path of t in log( Qt (i )) ­ because most workers never switch technologies along
an equilibrium path if relative wages are close to their stationary level. Second, the mar-
ket clearing condition (14) only contains integrals of st (i ). Because of the continuum of
skill types, the effect of the marginal types that switch technologies along the transition
are of second order when evaluating changes in these integrals. Taken together, the two
observations imply that changes in l     ^t summarize the relevant changes in the moments of
the skill distribution over time as a function of q ^t , as seen in (16). Finally, since condition
(12) yields a mapping between t and lt , the dynamics of q        ^t can be written as a function
of the path of l ^t , as seen in (17).17


4     The Adjustment to Skill-biased Innovations
We are now ready to answer the first question we posed at the beginning: how do
inequality, skills, and economic activity jointly adjust over time to technological innova-
tions? We first analytically characterize the dynamic adjustment of our economy to a
permanent, unanticipated increase in the relative productivity A. We refer to this shock
  17 We conjecture that extending the model to multiple technologies is possible while keeping the q-theory represen-

tation (albeit in vector form) if skills and technologies satisfy the type of log-supermodularity assumption imposed
by Costinot and Vogel (2010).


                                                            17
as a skill-biased technological innovation since it increases the relative productivity of
skill types i sorted into the H technology. We then discuss (i) how the economy's ad-
justment over different horizons is driven by the two margins in our theory (i.e., the
reallocation of workers within a generation and changes in the skill distribution across
generations), (ii) relate the adjustment dynamics to Samuelson's LeChatelier principle
in a reduced-form representation of our theory, and (iii) present a formal measure of
how slow the adjustment is. We conclude by connecting our measure of the adjust-
ment's speed to the average and distributional welfare consequences of the skill-biased
innovation.

4.1   Dynamic responses of equilibrium outcomes
We assume that immediately prior to the shock at time t = 0- the economy is in a
stationary equilibrium. Let  log( A) > 0 be the relative productivity shock. The fol-
lowing proposition characterizes the log-change in  log(qt )  log (qt /q0- ),  log(yt ) 
log (yt /y0- ), and  log(lt )  log (lt /l0- ).

Proposition 1 (Dynamic responses) Given a skill-biased technological innovation  log( A),
the dynamic responses  log(lt ),  log(qt ) and  log(yt ) are approximated by:

                                           
   log(lt )      -                       
                      -1                -1         -t  - 1
   log(qt )  =  + 1
                       +   log( A ) +   ++  (1 - e   )      log( A)
             
                                                        + 
   log(yt )    1 +                      -1
                             Short-run                      Short- to long-run transition
                                                                                            (19)
                      
where    +  +         +    (  +  ).

Proof. See Appendix A.4.
   Figure 2 illustrates these dynamic responses together with the dynamics of the skill
distribution and skill lottery. We do so for the case where the two technologies are
substitutes in production ( > 1) and (i ) = 1.
   The first term in (19) is the immediate impact of the shock represented by the re-
sponses at t = 0 in Figure 2. In the short-run, there are increases in both relative output
( log(y0 ) > 0) and lifetime inequality ( log(q0 ) > 0). The higher relative wage in the H
technology induces the reallocation of skill types in the existing worker generations from
the L to the H technology, as can be seen from the decline in the assignment threshold lt .
This reallocation further contributes to the relative output increase. Therefore, beyond
the direct effect of the shock, the adjustment of the economy in the short-run is driven
entirely by the first margin in the theory: the reallocation of workers within existing gen-
erations whose skills are predetermined. This is how the theory rationalizes the changes

                                            18
  Figure 2: The economy's adjustment to a skill-biased technological innovation (when  > 1)




in inequality and occupational composition over short horizons following a skill-biased
innovation.
    The second term in (19) shows that, along the transition, all variables converge at
rate . The increase in the relative lifetime wage in high-tech production causes entering
                                                  ~ (i ) towards high-i types whose skills
worker generations to twist their skill lotteries s
are more complementary to H production (see bottom right panel of Figure 2). Such
differences in the skill distribution across generations (and thus their assignment to
different economic activites) is how the theory rationalizes observed cross-generation
differences in relative employment following a skill-biased innovation. This triggers
changes in the economy's overall skill distribution st (i ) as older generations are replaced
with younger generations at rate . Along the transition, the growing mass of high-i
types employed with the H technology implies a continuing process of relative output
increase and inequality decline. The rising relative high-tech output yields a decline in
the consumption price index in (3). By reducing the relative wage, the arrival of more
high-i types in younger generations triggers the displacement of marginal i types from
H production over time (i.e., lt increases along the transition).
    In the long-run, the H technology has higher relative wage, output and employment.
The increase in H employment is driven both by a skill distribution with higher mass
in high-i types and a lower assignment threshold of skill types employed in H . Finally,
note that the only source of dynamics in our theory is the skill investment decision of
generations born after the shock. Whenever incoming generations cannot invest in skills
(i.e.,  = 0), the transitional dynamics term in (19) disappears and the responses in


                                             19
the long-run and short-run are identical. Therefore, the adjustment of the economy at
longer horizons is also driven by the second margin in the theory: changes in the skill
distribution across generations.

Samuelson's LeChatelier principle in a reduced-form model. To further provide in-
tuition behind the economy's adjustment, we now connect the predictions of our theory
to those of a reduced-form demand-supply framework. Appendix A.5 shows that our
theory yields a reduced-form supply elasticity t such that relative output and wage
solve

                                log( xt ) = ( - 1) log( A) -   log(t ),                           (20)
                                log( xt ) = t  log(t ).                                           (21)

    The main feature of our theory is an increasing supply elasticity of skills across tech-
nologies (i.e., t is positive and increasing over time).18 This arises from two sources.
First, even if skills are exogenous ( = 0), the relative supply elasticity is positive be-
cause a fraction of the heterogeneous workers in the economy decides to reallocate across
technologies in response to changes in the relative wage. Second, the change in the skill
investment decision of generations born after the shock introduces an additional adjust-
ment margin for relative supply. This margin becomes stronger over time as younger
generations replace older ones, driving t upwards along the transition when  > 0.
Thus, our theory implies a form of Samuelson's LeChatelier principle: the relative sup-
ply of high-tech output is more elastic over longer horizons due to changes in the skill
distribution.
    Given that this simple reduced-form model captures the main intuition behind the
economy's adjustment, why not use it instead of our micro-founded theory? There are
two main advantages of micro-founding the dynamics of the relative supply elasticity
t . We explore both of them in the coming sections.
    The first is that we can consider how the type of technologies and skills shape the
economy's adjustment by affecting two features of the economy: technology-skill speci-
ficity and the cost of skill investment (see Section 5). In particular, Appendix A.5 shows
that if either technology-skill specificity ( ) or the cost of skill investment () are differ-
ent, then the path of t will be different as well. This also points to a risk that arises when
using reduced-form estimates of t in order to extrapolate to different contexts: a type of
threat to external validity. To see this, consider a researcher that obtains estimates of the
path of t from a particular technological transition. Suppose this researcher uses such
estimates to make predictions about the dynamic consequences of a new technology in
a different economy or historical context. The researcher will obtain biased predictions
 18 The   canonical model of Katz and Murphy (1992) is a special case of our theory with t = 0.


                                                         20
about the economy's adjustment at all horizons whenever technology-skill specificity or
the cost of skill investment are different across episodes.
    The second advantage is that we can use reduced-form responses to technological
innovations that span short periods of time in order to learn about structural parameters
(e.g.,  and ) that govern responses at longer horizons (see Section 6). This allows the
proper computation of the full implications of new technologies for labor markets. It
also points to a risk associated with naively extrapolating from estimated reduced-form
responses in the economy over any given horizon. To see this, consider a researcher who
knows  and obtains  T and  log A from the estimated impact of a technological shock
on relative output and wages at horizon T . Suppose this researcher then uses her esti-
mates to analyze the consequences of skill-biased innovations. The time-varying nature
of t implies that predictions will be biased for any period other than T . Specifically,
the researcher's predictions will overestimate (underestimate) inequality changes and
underestimate (overestimate) relative output changes for any period after (before) T .

How slow is the adjustment? We conclude this section by defining a measure that
summarizes the importance of transitional dynamics and, therefore, gives a formal way
of quantifying whether the economy's adjustment is fast or whether it slowly plays
out over many generations. Specifically, we define the discounted cumulative impulse
response (DCIR).
   Intuitively, the DCIR is the answer to the question: from the point of view of gen-
erations alive just before the arrival of a technological innovation, how different is the
adjustment they expect to see during their lifetime compared to the long-run adjust-
ment? We will say that the economy's adjustment is slower when existing generations
expect to miss more of the overall adjustment during their lifetime (i.e., the DCIR is
larger).
Definition 2 (Discounted Cumulative Impulse Response) For any variable zt and inno-
vation  log( A), the discounted cumulative impulse response DCIR(z) is:
                                                   log(zt )       log(z )
                     DCIR(z) =              e-t             dt -          .
                                    0              log( A)        log( A)
    Formally, the DCIR is the distance between the long-run response and the expected
response of log(zt ) during the initial generations' lifetime, since all generations born be-
fore the innovation have exponentially distributed death probabilities with rate . This
is a convenient measure of the importance of transitional dynamics in our context for
a number of reasons. First, it encodes not only the convergence rate , but also other
relevant features of the impulse responses like how front-loaded they are. For instance,
one could have an adjustment where the short- and long-run changes are almost identi-
cal--implying a DCIR close to zero--but the rate of convergence  from the short- to the

                                                  21
long-run is very low. According to the DCIR, we would intuitively say that it is a fast
adjustment since almost all of the overall adjustment is completed on impact, whereas
looking at  alone suggests a slow adjustment. Second, the DCIR does not mechani-
cally scale with the replacement rate of generations. If  is higher, this mechanically
increases  (making the adjustment faster) but it also decreases the expected lifetime of
a generation. Finally, in the next sections, we show that this measure not only is relevant
for analyzing the welfare consequences of skill-biased innovations, but also is tightly
connected to the two adjustment margins in our theory.

4.2   Changes in average welfare and lifetime welfare inequality
We now compute the average and distributional welfare consequences of skill-biased
innovations. Our welfare measure is the ex-ante expected utility of individuals born at
each point in time (equation (9)). Given the log-utility assumption, the consumption-
equivalent gain is the change in the ex-ante utility times ( + ). From equations (7) and
(9), the consumption-equivalent utility of cohort  is
                     1                     1              1     ~ (i )
                                                                s                      
U  ( + )                 ~ (i ) log (i ) + Q (i ) -
                         s                                  log           di -            e-(+)(t- ) log Pt dt ,
                 0                                               ¯( i )
                                                                 s                  

where s ~ (i ) is the skill distribution of cohort  , log( Q (i )) is the present-discounted
value of max{log(t  (i )), 0} defined in Lemma 3, and Pt is the price index in (3).
    The welfare of each generation has two components. The first is the average wage
across skill types net of the skill lottery cost. This term depends on the relative wage
t through log( Q (i )) because a fraction of workers is employed in high-tech produc-
tion. The second term is the consumption price index that equally affects all skill types.
Importantly, due to the cost of good H , the price index in (3) is decreasing in high-tech
productivity A but increasing in t .
    To obtain an average welfare measure across generations U       ¯ , we take an utilitarian
approach by considering a weighted average of the ex-ante utility of different genera-
tions, where generation- 's weight is re-r as in Calvo and Obstfeld (1988). To obtain a
measure of average lifetime welfare inequality     ¯ , we first convert lifetime inequality for
generation  into a consumption-equivalent measure ( + ) log q and then aggregate
all generations using the welfare weights. Then, average welfare and lifetime welfare
inequality are
                                                                              
            ¯ =r
            U                    e-r U d       and    ¯  (  +  )r                e-r log(q )d .
                          0                                               0

   Appendix A.6 characterizes the first order changes in average welfare U ¯ U¯ - U0-
and lifetime welfare inequality  ¯       ¯ - log(q0- ) caused by  log( A). We use this


                                                     22
characterization to establish that the welfare consequences of technological innovations
depend crucially on how slow the adjustment is.
Proposition 2 (Changes in average welfare and lifetime welfare inequality) Assume
that the H income share is larger than its employment share and that r = . Then, for a given
                    log(q )
long-run elasticity log( A )
                             ,

                                U ¯                                 ¯
                                                            
                               log( A)                           log( A)
                                              < 0 and                           > 0.
                              DCIR(q)                           DCIR(q)
Proof. See Appendix A.6.
    Intuitively, a higher DCIR(q) arises when the relative supply of H goods increases
more slowly over many generations. This then implies that, during their lifetimes, gen-
erations born before the shock expect to see a smaller fraction of the long-run increase in
relative output and decline in the price index. Yet, they expect to experience even higher
inequality compared to those generations born in the long-run (since q remains high for
longer). As a result, everything else equal, the average welfare increase will be smaller
and the average lifetime welfare inequality increase will be larger.19


5     Determinants of Skill-biased Transitions
In this section, we establish how the type of innovations affect the relative strength
of the two adjustment margins in the theory and, therefore, determine the dynamics
of inequality, the skill distribution, and economic activity. Our main results focus on
one summary measure of such dynamics: the discounted cumulative impulse response
in Definition 2. They thus answer the second question we posed: what features of
innovations and skills determine whether the adjustment is fast or whether it slowly
plays out over many generations?
    We show that a technological transitions is slower and more unequal whenever our
theoretical economy features higher technology-skill specificity, i.e., whenever an inno-
vation is biased towards economic activities intensive in skills which differ more from
those used in the rest of the economy. In addition, the adjustment is slower if the cost of
skill investment for entering generations is lower ­ for example, because the sets of skills
used in the activities improved by the innovation are easier to learn. The reason is that,
in both cases, the adjustment is driven more by the slow change in the skill distribution
across generations as opposed to the fast reallocation of workers within a generation.
  19 Note also that, when the adjustment is slower and transitional dynamics more important, a researcher using

reduced-form estimates of changes in inequality  log T over some horizon T will obtain more biased estimates of
the true average and distributional welfare consequences of the shock. This is because she will wrongly conclude
that the change in lifetime welfare inequality is ( + ) log q T =  log T , which may be higher or lower than   ¯
depending on the estimation horizon T .


                                                      23
5.1       Comparative statics with respect to technology-skill specificity
We now compare the dynamic adjustment of two economies featuring high and low
technology-skill specificity. We interpret this as a comparison between two episodes of
adjustment triggered by distinct types of skill-biased innovations that impact different
sets of economic activities. In one episode, an innovation augments the productivity of
the H technology by  log( A), where H corresponds to occupations or sectors intensive
in skills that are markedly different from those used in the rest of the economy (represented
by the L technology). That is, this episode is associated with a high technology-skill
specificity economy where a worker skill type has a markedly different productivity in the
L and H technologies. In the other episode, the productivity of the H technology is again
augmented by  log( A) but H instead corresponds to occupations or sectors intensive
in similar skills to those used in the rest of the economy. That is, this episode is instead
associated with a low technology-skill specificity economy.
    Figure 3 illustrates the adjustment in these two economies.20 The black lines show the
responses of an economy with a high value of  (i.e., low technology-skill specificity).
The blue lines show the responses of an economy with a low value of  (i.e., high
technology-skill specificity). In Appendix A.7, we support the graphical representation
in Figure 3 with Proposition A.1 establishing how  affects the short- and long-run
responses, the cumulative impulse response, and the rate of convergence.
                                     Figure 3: Comparative statics with respect to 
             log( )                                                     log( )
                                                                        log( )
             log(    )
             log(    )
              log(   )                                                  log(    )
             log(    )                      - Low specificity (high )   log(    )
             log(      )                    - High specificity (low )   log(    )
                                                                        log(     )

                           0                                                          0
                               Panel A: Relative output                                   Panel B: Lifetime inequality

              log( )
                                                                               s( )
             log(      )
                                                                                                                               ()
             log(    )
                                                                                                                               ()
                                                                                                                               ()
              log(     )
              log( )
              log( )


                           0                                                                                               1

                           Panel C: Assignment Threshold                                    Panel D: Skills distribution


   In the short-run, when technology-skill specificity is higher (lower  ), a smaller mass
                                                                            | log(l0 )|
of workers reallocate across technologies in response to the shock (i.e.,               > 0).
That is, the within-generation adjustment margin is weaker. As a result, relative wages
 20 The   figure shows the case where  > 1 and the threshold's cumulative response increases with  .


                                                                        24
                                                                                          | log(q0 )|
and lifetime inequality q increase more in the short-run (i.e.,                                         < 0) whereas
                                                | log(y0 )|
relative output increases less (i.e.,          > 0). The larger increase in q then implies
                                                   
that younger entering generations have stronger incentives to invest in those skills that
are more complementary to the H technology. As a result, the optimal skill lotteries s ~ (i )
are further tilted towards high i skill types and there are larger differences in the skill
distribution between old generations alive before the shock and young generations born
after.21 That is, the cross-generation adjustment margin becomes endogenously stronger.
Ultimately, the overall magnitude of the adjustment of yt and qt that happens along the
transition is larger because larger changes in the skill distribution take place as younger
generations replace older generations. Formally, we measure this as the cumulative
                                                                      
                                                                       ^t dt
                                                                     0 q
impulse response function being larger (e.g.                                   < 0) ­ graphically, the blue shaded
areas being larger than the black shaded                 areas.22
    To summarize, when the type of innovations and skills are such that an economy
features high technology-skill specificity, technological transitions will be driven more
by changes in the skill distribution across generations than the reallocation of workers
within a generation. This is because the muted reallocation of workers at shorter hori-
zons causes larger endogenous changes in the skill distribution along the transition due
to the larger increases in lifetime inequality.23 The next theorem shows that, as result,
the economy's adjustment will not only be more unequal but also slower.
Theorem 2.1 (DCIR comparative statics with respect to  ) Following a skill-biased inno-
vation  log( A), lifetime inequality (q) and relative output (y) adjust slower in economies fea-
turing higher technology-skill specificity (lower  ). Formally,

                                       DCIR(q)                    DCIR(y)
                                               < 0,                       < 0.
                                                                    
                                                        
                                                  0 q^t dt
Proof. We have that DCIR(q) =                  +  log( A)           . From Proposition A.1 in Appendix A.7,
                                                                     
we know that when  is higher then  and                                ^
                                                                    0 qt dt     are both smaller. The proof for yt
is analogous.

   As a final remark, we point out that the slower adjustment in economies featur-
ing higher technology-skill specificity does not mechanically follow from the fact that
  21 This follows directly from the fact that s
                                              ~ (i ) is proportional to q
                                                                        ^ in (18) and q
                                                                                      ^ is larger for all  when technology-
skill specificity is higher.
  22 Moreover, while the larger changes in the skill distribution could have implied a larger (smaller) overall long-run

adjustment in relative output (lifetime inequality), it turns out that the smaller (larger) short-run response dominates.
Thus, the long-run adjustment in relative output (lifetime inequality) is smaller (larger) in the economy with higher
technology-skill specificity.
  23 We conjecture this intuition is more generally applicable. After a shock, economies with a less mobile stock of

a factor experience stronger changes in the flow of entrants because of larger changes in relative prices ­ e.g., if old
vintages of physical capital are less adaptable to a new sector, then the flow of firm entrants with newer capital
vintages will be larger.


                                                            25
reallocation is smaller in the short-run, or from the fact that old generations are re-
placed slowly at rate . Instead, it follows from the skill distribution responding more
to the stronger relative wage change. To make this point clear, Proposition 3 shows that
technology-skill specificity has no effect on the DCIR of q and y when we shut down
either changes in the skill distribution or inequality (  0 or   ).

Proposition 3 (Interaction of technology-skill specificity with  and  ) When the cost
of skill investment is large (  0) or when H and L are highly substitutable (  ), then
technology-skill specificity has no effect on how slow q and y adjust.

       DCIR(y)             DCIR(q)                     DCIR(y)            DCIR(q)
                      =                   = 0,                       =                  =0
                  0                   0                                              

Proof. See Appendix A.8.

5.2    Comparative statics with respect to the cost of skill investment
We now investigate the effect of the cost of skill investment for young generations on
the economy's dynamic adjustment following the same skill-biased innovation  log( A).
We interpret this comparative static exercise as a comparison between episodes of ad-
justment where the sets of skills intensely used in the activities improved by a given type
of innovation may have been harder or easier to learn. Or, alternatively, as a compari-
son between economies that differ in their educational systems, availability of vocational
training for younger workers, or presence of retraining programs for older generations.
    Figure 4 illustrates the responses of two economies. The blue lines depict the adjust-
ment of an economy with a low cost of skill investment investment for young generations
(i.e., high value of ). The black lines represent the responses of an economy with a high
cost instead (i.e., low value of ). Proposition A.2 in Appendix A.7 supports this figure.
    In the short-run, both economies exhibit identical responses in relative output and
worker reallocation. This follows from the fact that  does not affect the self-selection
decisions of generations born before the shock. That is, it does not affect the within-
generation adjustment margin. However, a higher  attenuates the short-run increase in
lifetime inequality because future relative wages fall by more due to the larger increase
in the future supply of high-i skills implied by the more responsive skill lottery in (18).
The larger change in the skill distribution of the economy with a lower investment cost
(i.e., higher ) has two important implications for its dynamic adjustment to the shock.
First, in the long run, it implies that relative output (lifetime inequality) increases more
(less). Second, as the following theorem shows, it implies a slower, more back-loaded
adjustment in relative output and inequality. Intuitively, when the cost of skill invest-
ment for younger workers is lower, transitional dynamics become more important since


                                                 26
                                 Figure 4: Comparative statics with respect to 

          log( )                                                log( )
          log( )                                                log( )
          log(   )


          log(   )                         - High cost (low )   log(     )
          log(     )                       - Low cost (high )   log(     )
                                                                log(     )

                       0                                                      0
                           Panel A: Relative output                               Panel B: Lifetime inequality

          log( )
                                                                       s( )

          log(     )                                                                                                   ()
          log(   )                                                                                                     ()
          log(   )

                                                                                                                       ()

          log( )



                       0                                                                                           1

                       Panel C: Assignment Threshold                                Panel D: Skills distribution




there are larger changes in the skill distribution. That is, the cross-generation adjustment
margin is stronger.

Theorem 2.2 (DCIR comparative statics with respect to ) Following a skill-biased inno-
vation  log( A), lifetime inequality (q) and relative output (y) adjust slower in economies with
a lower cost of skill investment for younger workers (higher ). Formally,

                                           DCIR(q)                      DCIR(y)
                                                   > 0,                         >0
                                                                         

Proof. The proof is analogous to the one for Theorem 2.1 but using Proposition A.2 in
Appendix A.7 instead.

5.3   Back to the LeChatelier principle
To better understand the previous comparative statics, it is useful to return to the
reduced-form supply elasticity t introduced in Section 4. The different dynamic im-
plications of changing  or  arise because the two parameters shape different horizons
of this elasticity. Appendix A.5 formally shows these implications. Here, we illustrate
them with Figure 5.
    Both higher values of  and  increase the elasticity in the long-run, but the timing
of the rise is different for the two. Specifically, increasing  flattens the path of t
but increasing  steepens it. Intuitively, a higher  front-loads more the response in the
relative supply of H by making it easier for skill types to reallocate across technologies in
response to the shock. That is, it strengthens the within-generation adjustment margin.


                                                                27
           Figure 5: Effect of  and  on the elasticity of relative output supply ( t )




This in turn reduces the relative wage change in the short-run and, as a result, attenuates
changes in the skill distribution and t over time. That is, it weakens the cross-generation
adjustment margin. In contrast, a higher  implies that it is easier for new generations to
invest in skills. This increases the importance of the cross-generation margin compared
to the within-generation margin, amplifying changes in the skill distribution and t
across horizons.
    This discussion indicates when researchers should be more cautious about extrapo-
lating from observed changes at short horizons: economies where technology-skill speci-
ficity is higher and/or the cost of skill investment for young generations is lower. In such
economies, the adjustment is slower and more back-loaded, implying larger changes in
all outcomes across generations.

5.4   Extensions: additional determinants of skill distribution dynamics
The theory so far has ignored several determinants of the dynamics of the skill distribu-
tion along the transition. In Online Appendix 1.2, we present three extensions that relax
some of the assumptions of our baseline model. For all extensions, our comparative
static results above with respect to  and  remain valid.

Learning-from-others. Our first extension considers a "learning-from-others" external-
ity. Specifically, we relax the assumption that the reference distribution s ¯ (i ) in the
skill investment problem is exogenous and fixed over time. Instead, we assume that
certain skills may be easier to acquire than others because workers can "learn from oth-
ers" when such skills are already abundant in the economy. This extension introduces
a backward-looking element into the skill investment problem and complementarities




                                               28
in skill investment decisions across generations.24 It yields dynamic responses that are
qualitatively similar to those of our baseline economy when  is higher and  is lower,
thus making the adjustment slower.

Skill investment by old workers. Our second extension relaxes the assumptions that
workers can only invest in new skills upon birth. We allow an exogenous fraction of
workers that were present before the skill-biased innovation to re-optimize their skill in-
vestment "as if" they were a young generation entering at time t = 0. One interpretation
of this is that old workers can now re-train after the innovation arrives. This extension
yields responses that are qualitatively similar to our baseline when  is higher, making
the adjustment faster.

Population growth. Our third extension allows for population growth by making birth
and death rates different. This increases the rate of convergence , making the adjust-
ment faster.


6       Observable Implications at Short Horizons
We now use the results above to address the following question: What do we learn about
the dynamic effects of new technologies over many generations from reduced-form evi-
dence that spans short periods of time? Our answer relies on the observable predictions
directly associated with the parameters controlling the two adjustment margins in the
theory: technology-skill specificity ( ) and cost of skill investment (). As discussed
above, these parameters are central determinants of the full adjustment dynamics fol-
lowing technological innovations.
   In deriving such observable predictions, we take into account two considerations.
First, there are practical challenges when analyzing transitions over long periods. Either
because the technological innovations are recent and thus the adjustment is still ongoing
or because the effects of new technologies are typically harder to separate from other
confounding shocks over longer horizons. We thus relate the structural objects in our
theory to responses that can be measured over short horizons.
   Second, we acknowledge that measuring several of our outcomes requires strong
assumptions that would reduce the credibility of any empirical investigation based on
our theory. For example, "selection forces" imply that the relative wage in efficiency
units, t , is not the relative average labor income. Furthermore, qt is a forward-looking
variable, so measuring it requires observing t along the full transition. Finally, the
measurement of the skill distribution st (i ) and the technology-skill assignment lt require
    24 This
       is similar to the cross-generation complementarities that arise in the environment considered by Chari and
Hopenhayn (1991).


                                                       29
taking an explicit stance on observable attributes determining a worker's skill vector
(e.g., college graduation), leading to misspecification if the chosen attributes do not fully
determine technology-specific skills.
    Given these considerations, we map technologies in our theory to sectors/occupations
that are differentially affected by technological innovations. We then study the short-run
impact of technological innovations on payroll and employment across different sectors
and/or occupations. Our novel insight is that changes in these outcomes for different
generations are connected to technology-skill specificity ( ) and cost of skill investment
(). As a result, even if we only observe these changes at short horizons, they are infor-
mative about how economies adjust at longer horizons.
    In Sections 4 and 5, we have already characterized the short-run response of relative
payroll. We now focus on the short-run responses of two additional outcomes: (i) the
relative employment of the "old" generations born before t = 0 (i.e., within-generation
change) and (ii) the difference between the relative employment of the "young" gener-
ation born at t = 0 and the "old" generations born before t = 0 (i.e., cross-generation
change). These are the same type of outcomes that we presented for many countries
in Figure 1. We formally define the elasticity of these outcomes to the technological
innovation as

                                                            
                             1               l0
                                                                                                       l
                            l0 s0 (i ) di / 0 s0 (i ) di
                                                                                       1
                                                                                         ~0 (i )di / 0 0 s
                                                                                      l0 s                ~0 (i )di
                  log     1                  l -
                                                            
                                                                                log
                                              0 s (i ) di                              1               l0
                         l - s0 (i ) di / 0       0
                                                                                      l0 s0 (i ) di / 0 s0 (i ) di
      within                                                         cross
                          0
      0                                                        and   0                                                .
                              log( A)                                                   log( A)

   The following theorem shows how  and  affect these elasticities.

Theorem 3 (Observable implications in the short-run)

          |within
           0      |             |within
                                 0      |                              |cross
                                                                        0     |            |cross
                                                                                            0     |
                    > 0,                  = 0,                 and              < 0,                >0
                                                                                            

Proof. See Appendix A.9.
    In terms of relative employment in the short-run, economies with higher technology-
skill specificity (i.e., lower  ) experience weaker within-generation responses for older
workers, but stronger cross-generation differences in relative employment of younger
versus older workers. Intuitively, the lower  weakens the within-generation adjustment
margin in our theory. Given the size of the innovation, a lower  yields a smaller real-
location of skill types across technologies. At impact, this attenuates the reallocation of
older workers, amplifies the increase in relative wages, and, consequently, induces larger
differences in the skill distribution across generations.

                                                               30
    The theorem also describes how short-run relative employment responses depend on
the cost of skill investment for younger generations. A lower investment cost (i.e., higher
) does not affect the within-generation response because the skills of older workers are
predetermined. The lower cost however leads to stronger changes in the skill invest-
ment decisions of young workers, giving rise to stronger cross-generation differences in
relative employment.
    Together, Theorems 2.1­2.2 and 3 indicate the type of observable short-run responses
to new technologies that are consistent with the beginning of a particularly slow and
unequal transition. Consider estimates that point to a small within-generation elastic-
ity and a large cross-generation elasticity. This is consistent with high technology-skill
specificity and/or small costs of skill investment for young workers. As a consequence,
through the lens of our theory, the adjustment should be more unequal and unfold
slowly over many generations. This is precisely the type of responses that Figure 1 il-
lustrates for recent cognitive-biased innovations. Such patterns are thus features of slow,
back-loaded transitions in which the response of inequality (economic activity) is much
stronger (weaker) in the short-run than in the long-run.
    Finally, we point out that the results in this section are intended to clearly illustrate
the observable implications of two determinants of technological transitions. For this
reason, we analyze how they affect the instantaneous relative employment elasticity to
the one-time, permanent shock  log( A). However, the use of these results to recover
the structural parameters of the model face two further practical challenges: the shock
is neither directly observed nor fully completed at a point in time. In Online Appendix
3, we show that we can account for these challenges when we set parameters by match-
ing theoretical and empirical impulse response functions. Intuitively, we can use the
observed response of relative payroll in Proposition 1 to recover the size of the shock.
We can also use the sum of theoretical impulse response functions to allow for a se-
quence of unanticipated shocks.25 In Section 8, we use these insights to parameterize
our model using estimates of the impact of cognitive-biased innovations on employment
and payroll across occupations and generations.


7     Cognitive-biased Transitions: Evidence from Germany
Our theoretical results established that technology-skill specificity and the cost of skill in-
vestment for entering generations are connected to within- and cross-generation changes
in relative employment and payroll following technological innovations. Qualitatively,
this links the two structural determinants of technological transitions to the type of
 25 Technically, our approach permits a sequence of uncorrelated shocks. When shocks are persistent, one needs to

modify our procedure to account for responses of skill investment decisions to expected future shocks.



                                                       31
patterns across occupations and generations we documented in Figure 1. However,
such patterns may not provide a fully adequate account of the dynamic adjustment to
cognitive-biased innovations. For example, they are subject to concerns about confound-
ing shocks driving cognitive-intensive employment growth. They also do not provide
any direct evidence about the changes in skill investment decisions that drive the tran-
sitional dynamics in our theory. Moreover, by not relying on a specific innovation, they
are not informative about how the impact of new technologies changes over time.
    For these reasons, we now move beyond these aggregate patterns to provide addi-
tional evidence coming from Germany's dynamic adjustment to recent cognitive-biased
innovations. We first investigate generation-specific changes in employment, payroll,
and numbers of trainees across narrowly defined occupations with different degrees of
cognitive-intensity. We then exploit quasi-random cross-regional variation in adoption
timing of broadband internet in the early 2000s to estimate the dynamic impact of this
particular technology on the growth of employment and payroll in cognitive-intensive
occupations for different worker generations.
    Overall, the evidence shows strong employment responses for younger generations
in cognitive-intensive occupations compared to the muted reallocation of older genera-
tions. In fact, we document that young workers increase their investment on cognitive
skills through vocational training in cognitive intensive occupations. Moreover, the rela-
tive employment and payroll responses become stronger over time as predicted by our
theory's version of the LeChatelier's principle. The adjustment patterns are thus con-
sistent with high technology-skill specificity and slow changes in the skill distribution
across generations.

7.1   Data
We base our analysis on the labor market data in the LIAB Longitudinal Model between
1995 and 2014. We follow Card et al. (2013) to construct a sample of employed males
aged 15-64. We first construct a dataset with yearly outcomes for 120 occupations in West
Germany. We then construct a second dataset with annual outcomes for each occupation
in 323 districts in West Germany. Appendix B describes the data construction. Online
Appendix 2 presents summary statistics and additional details.
   We define cognitive-intensive occupations as being those disproportionately aug-
mented by recent innovations, like the computer and the internet. We thus map this
set of occupations to the H technology in the theory. This approach follows an ex-
tensive literature documenting that recent innovations had a stronger positive impact
on cognitive-intensive jobs whose daily activities require problem-solving, creativity, or
complex interpersonal interactions --e.g. Autor et al. (2003), Spitz-Oener (2006), Autor
and Dorn (2013), Akerman et al. (2015). We use the BERUFNET data to measure each

                                           32
occupation's cognitive intensity using the share of time spent on analytical non-routine
and interactive tasks. Figure 6 graphically depicts how the use of recent innovations
varies with the cognitive-intensity of the occupation. It shows that usage of both in-
ternet and computers are strongly correlated with time spent on cognitive tasks across
occupations.
   We construct outcomes for two worker generations. The "Young" generation com-
prises workers born after 1960, and the "Old" generation includes all other workers.
The young generation was at most 35 years old in 1995 when it represented 58% of the
German labor force. Its overall employment share then increased to 89% in 2014 when
workers were at most 54 years old. We also define a trainee sub-sample with workers
whose employment status was a trainee, student trainee, or intern. In this sub-sample,
98% of all workers are below 30 years old and the mean age is 21. Notice that, in line
with our theory, Figure 6 documents that there are no systematic differences in internet
and computer usage across workers of different ages employed in the same occupation.26

      Figure 6: Internet and Computer Usage by Occupation: Within- and Cross-Generation




   Note. Sample of 85 occupations in the 2012 Working Condition Survey. For each occupation, we compute the share of
   individuals reporting intensive internet and computer usage on their job. Young generations defined as workers aged below
   40 years and Old generations defined as all workers aged above 40 years. The occupation cognitive-skill intensity is the share
   of time spent on cognitive-intensive tasks in the BERUFNET dataset (2011-2013). Figure reports the lowess smooth fit.




7.2     Cognitive intensity and labor market outcomes across occupations
Our first piece of evidence investigates whether the type of generation-specific trends
in Figure 1 also holds for narrowly defined occupations over different horizons in Ger-
many. We therefore move from the sharp predictions of our two-technology theory to
look at employment trends across multiple occupations. This yields more variation to
  26 These results complement the finding in Spitz-Oener (2006) that there were small cross-cohort differences in the

change of the task content of German occupations in the 1990s. In results available upon request, we attest that these
patterns are similar if we define young generations to include workers who are less than 30, 35 or 45 years old.


                                                                33
empirically investigate the main mechanisms in our theory.
  For each worker generation g and year t, we estimate the following linear regression:
                                           g          g        g    g ¯                    g
                                      log Yo,t - log Yo,1995 = t +  t C o+                 o ,t                               (22)
         g                                                                          ¯ o is
where Yo,t is an outcome in occupation o at year t for workers of generation g, and C
the cognitive intensity of occupation o.
   Table 1 reports the estimation of equation (22) in the periods of 1995-2000 (Panel A)
and 1995-2014 (Panel B). We report the estimated impact of the occupation's cognitive
intensity on the log-change of employment in columns (1)­(3), payroll in columns (4)-(6),
and number of trainees in column (7).

      Table 1: Cognitive intensity and labor market outcomes across occupations in Germany

 Dependent variable:        Employment Growth                                       Real Payroll Growth                      Trainee
                           All    Young    Old                                     All     Young     Old                     Growth
                           (1)     (2)     (3)                                     (4)      (5)       (6)                      (7)
 Panel A: Change in 1995-2000
     Cognitive intensity           0.388***     0.650***      0.113***          0.340***      0.616***     0.157***          0.379*
                                    (0.076)      (0.098)       (0.043)           (0.048)       (0.070)      (0.037)          (0.209)
 Panel B: Change in 1995-2014
     Cognitive intensity           1.488***     1.894***      0.871***          1.535***      2.029***     1.044***          2.121***
                                    (0.225)      (0.234)       (0.229)           (0.227)       (0.238)      (0.223)           (0.385)
Note. Sample of 120 occupations. Each panel reports the estimate for the dependent variable over the indicated time period. Young
cohort defined as all workers born after 1960 and Old cohort as all workers born before 1960. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




    Column (1) indicates that occupations with higher cognitive intensity experienced
stronger employment growth. This differential employment response is larger over
longer horizons. Compared to the least cognitive-intensive occupation, the employment
growth in the most cognitive-intensive occupation was 143% higher in 1995-2014. Impor-
tantly, columns (2)­(3) indicate that cognitive-intensive employment growth was weaker
for older generations than for younger generations. In fact, estimated coefficients for the
old generation are at most one-half those of the young generations. These results show
that the German trends in Figure 1 also hold across more disaggregated occupations
with different levels of cognitive intensity. Moreover, these responses become stronger
over the period of analysis.
    Columns (4)-(6) show that the relative payroll responses are slightly stronger than
the relative employment responses in 1995-2014. This suggests that there were only
small relative changes in the average earnings of those employed in cognitive-intensive
occupations. As discussed before, in our theory, these relative payroll responses combine


                                                                34
changes in both the relative marginal value of labor and the worker "selection" in more
cognitive intensive occupations. So, the difference between columns (4) and (1) do not
correspond to the response of the relative wage per efficiency units of more cognitive-
intensive occupations. In fact, the small responses in relative average earnings for both
young and old are consistent with strong selection forces created by entry of marginal
workers with lower occupation-specific productivity than infra-marginal workers.27
    Column (7) shows that occupations with a higher cognitive intensity experienced
stronger growth in the number of trainees. Trainee programs are an important part of
the formal training of young individuals in Germany ­ especially for non-degree occu-
pations (Eckardt, 2019). As such, changes in the occupation allocation among trainees
are a proxy for the changes in the skill investment decision of incoming generations
in our theory. So, the estimated coefficient suggests that new generations tilted their
investments towards cognitive skills in 1995-2014.
    Taken together, this evidence again speaks qualitatively to the main mechanisms in
our model. The small responses in employment for old workers suggest that the skills
required in more cognitive intensive occupations are rather different from those used in
other occupations. The large differences in employment responses across generations
suggest that the cost of skill investment is smaller for younger workers than for older
workers. In fact, young workers increase their investment on cognitive skills by becom-
ing trainees in occupations with a higher cognitive intensity. The larger overall responses
at longer horizons are consistent with our theory's version of the LeChatelier's principle.
    One concern with this interpretation is that our estimates are not tied to a single tech-
nological innovation. Instead, they may be driven by different innovations introduced
sequentially in the period ­ e.g. computers, industrial robots, or the internet. Thus,
while our interpretation remains qualitatively valid, it is hard to quantitatively connect
the estimates above to the mechanism in our theory because the empirical estimates are
not impulse response functions to one-time permanent shocks. That is, the estimated
dynamics may potentially confound both the endogenous skill distribution dynamics
and the exogenous sequence of innovations. We address this concern in the next section.

Robustness. Online Appendix 2.3.1 investigates the robustness of our findings. Table
2.2 shows that results are qualitatively similar over different horizons. Table 2.3 shows
that the positive relative employment growth in cognitive occupations is driven by the
top third of occupations in terms of cognitive intensity. Table 2.4 shows that results are
similar when we either change the definition of the young generation, restrict the sample
to native-born Germans, or control for exposure to trade and immigration shocks.
  27 An extreme version of this pattern arises in assignment models with a Frechet distribution of technology-specific
skills where average earnings are identical in all occupations (Hsieh et al., 2013; Burstein et al., 2016).



                                                         35
7.3       Dynamic adjustment to broadband internet adoption
In this section, we analyze the dynamic response to one cognitive-biased innovation: the
introduction of broadband internet in the early 2000s.28 There are two main reasons to
focus on this particular innovation in Germany. First, it resembles the one-time perma-
nent shock studied in Section 4 since its adoption was fast: the share of households with
broadband access increased from 0% in 2000 to over 90% in 2009. Second, it is possible to
explore cross-regional variation in adoption timing to estimate impulse response func-
tions of labor market outcomes for different worker generations. We do so by following
Falck et al. (2014) to isolate exogenous spatial variation in adoption timing implied by the
suitability of pre-existing local telephone networks for broadband internet transmission.

Empirical Strategy. Our goal is to estimate the dynamic impact of broadband internet
adoption on labor market outcomes across districts in Germany. For each year between
1996 and 2014, we estimate the following linear specification

                                
      g       g                                                                               g    g     g
   Yio,t - Yio,1999 =                     (c    c ¯
                                           t +  t Co ) 1[ g=c] DSLi + o,t +  g,t + Xio,t t +             io,t ,   (23)
                         c{young, old}

                                                                                                                  g
where o is an occupation, i is a district, and g is a generation. In this specification, Yio,t is
an outcome, DSLi is the broadband internet penetration in district i in 2005 (normalized
to have standard deviation of one), and C   ¯ o is the time-invariant measure of the cognitive
intensity of occupation o. The specification includes generation-year fixed effects that
capture nationwide trends for different cohorts, as well as occupation-year fixed effects
that absorb confounding shocks affecting an occupation equally in all regions. We also
                             g
include a control vector Xio,t to absorb confouding shocks associated with the pretrend
growth in 1995-1999 and the initial demographics of the district.29
    We are mainly interested on the impact of broadband internet adoption on the rela-
                                                                                     g
tive outcomes of more cognitive intensive occupations for each generation:  t in equa-
tion (23). To understand the interpretation of this coefficient, consider region A whose
broadband internet penetration in 2005 was one standard deviation higher than that of
                      g
region B. At year t,  t is the difference between regions A and B in the relative outcome
of more cognitive intensive occupation among workers of generation g.
   28 As shown by Akerman et al. (2015), broadband internet expanded the relative demand for more educated workers

in non-routine jobs inside firms. In Figure 6, we showed that internet usage is higher in more cognitive-intensive
occupations and does not differ across worker cohorts conditional on their occupation.
   29 We follow Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017) and Freyaldenhoven et al. (2018) by explicitly controlling for pretrends.

As argued by the latter paper, pretrends caused by unobserved confounding effects might exist even when they are
not actually observed in the data due to estimation error, implying they should be controlled for in estimation. The
demographic controls are the college graduate population share, the manufacturing employment share, the immigrant
employment share, and the age composition of the labor force. In the Online Appendix we report estimates based on
alternative control sets.



                                                          36
                                            g
    The unbiased estimation of  t requires an exogenous source of variation on the adop-
tion of broadband internet across districts. However, internet penetration is unlikely to
be random since adoption should be faster in regions with workers more suitable to use
that technology. For instance, this would be the case if broadband internet providers
decide to first enter regions with a growing number of young individuals specialized in
cognitive-intensive occupations.
    To circumvent this issue, we follow Falck et al. (2014) by exploiting variation in the
location of pre-existing main distribution frames (MDFs) of the telephone network. The
initial roll-out of DSL internet in Germany used the pre-existing telephone network. The
transmission technology could not supply high-speed internet to areas more than 4200m
away from an existing MDF. Thus, regions located close to MDFs were more likely to
adopt broadband internet early. The use of MDF location as an instrument then requires
that, conditional on controls, the determinants of MDF construction in the 1960s were
orthogonal to the determinants of changes in labor market outcomes in the 2000s, except
through their effect on broadband internet penetration in 2005. As argued by Falck et al.
(2014), the location of MDFs in the 1960s did not take into account how attractive the
nearby region was for broadband internet suppliers in the 2000s. This is reasonable
because one of the main determinants of the MDF location was the availability of large
empty building sites. In addition, MDFs could be used to provide telephone connections
over much larger distances than they could be used to provide broadband internet.
    We construct two instrumental variables that measure the district's population share
located in areas where the existing telephone network could not be used to supply high-
speed internet. These variables are aggregates of the municipality-level variables in Falck
et al. (2014). The first variable is a count of the number of municipalities in the district
that did not have a MDF within the municipality, and whose population-weighted cen-
troid was further than the cut-off threshold of 4200m to the municipality's MDF. The
second variable counts the number of municipalities that satisfied the conditions in the
first variable, but were further hampered by the lack of MDFs in neighboring municipal-
ities that were closer than 4200m.30 We then estimate (23) using the exogenous variation
induced by these two measures. Specifically, since the observation unit in equation (23)
is an occupation-generation-district triple, our instrument vector includes the two mea-
sures interacted with generation dummies and the cognitive intensity of each occupation
o, C¯o.
    Appendix B investigates how broadband internet penetration in 2005 responded to
our two measures of the cost of expanding broadband access across districts. Appendix
Table B.1 shows that regions with higher values of these cost measures had a lower
share of households with broadband access in 2005. To test for weak instruments in our
 30 Appendix   Figure B.1 presents the pattern of cross-district variation in the cost measures.



                                                           37
specification with multiple endogenous variables, Appendix Table B.2 shows that we
obtain high values for the Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistics for all variables (Sanderson
and Windmeijer, 2016).

                                                                                   young
Results. Panel A of Figure 7 reports the estimates of old    t and  t    implied by equa-
tion (23) for each year between 1996 and 2014. Prior to 2003, regions with early DSL
expansion did not experience differential growth in the relative outcomes of more cog-
nitive intensive occupations for old and young workers. After 2005, there is a significant
impact on the relative employment of young cohorts in more cognitive intensive occu-
pations. In 2014, the point estimate suggests that a region with a one-standard deviation
higher broadband internet penetration in 2005 had 0.5 log-points more young workers
employed in the most cognitive-intensive occupation than in the least cognitive-intensive
occupation. However, we do not find such an effect for old cohorts ­ if anything, the
effect is negative. Online Appendix Figure 2.3 shows that the cross-generation difference
is statistically different from zero for every year after 2006.
    In our theory, the small relative employment response of old generations suggests
that technology-skill specificity is high (i.e.,   0). In this case, most workers from
old generations do not switch occupations as their skills would have a lower value in
the more cognitive-intensive occupations. The positive cross-generation difference in the
relative employment response indicates that incoming generations tilt their investments
towards skills more suitable for cognitive-intensive occupations (i.e.,  > 0).31 This
creates changes in the skill distribution across generations.
    In Panel B of Figure 7, we investigate how early broadband expansion affected the rel-
ative payroll of more cognitive intensive occupations for all worker generations. Specif-
ically, we estimate equation (23) with a single generation c containing workers of all
ages in the district. This is the empirical analog of the impulse response function for
relative output yt presented in Section 4. Again, we find no evidence of responses in the
pre-shock period of 1996-2005. Starting in 2006, there is a slow and steady increase in
the relative payroll of more cognitive-intensive occupations. In our theory, this is consis-
tent with broadband internet augmenting the relative productivity of cognitive intensive
occupations when cognitive and non-cognitive intensive occupations are substitutes in
production (i.e.,  > 1).

Additional results and robustness. In Online Appendix 2.3.2, we analyze the robust-
ness of our estimates. Table 2.5 shows that results are qualitatively similar when we drop
the pretrend control, but estimated coefficients are less precise and slightly smaller in
  31 In
      line with this mechanism, Online Appendix Table 2.7 shows that early adopting regions experienced stronger
growth in the number of trainees in more cognitive intensive occupations.




                                                      38
           Figure 7: Impact of early DSL adoption on more cognitive-intensive occupations




    (a) Relative employment response by generation                     (b) Relative payroll response for all generations
Note. Left panel: estimation of equation (23) for log-employment as dependent variable in the sample of 2 generations, 120 oc-
cupations and 323 districts. Right panel: estimation of equation (23) for log-payroll as dependent variable in the sample of 120
occupations, 323 districts, and a single generation with all working-age employed individuals. For each year, the dot is the point
             g
estimate of  t . Young cohort defined as all workers born after 1960 and Old cohort as all workers born before 1960. All regressions
are weighted by the district population size in 1999 and include occupation-time and generation-time fixed-effects. Baseline controls
include the following district variables in 1999: college graduate population share, manufacturing employment share, immigrant
employment share, district age composition, and the dependent variable pre-shock growth in 1995-1999. Bars are the 90% confidence
interval implied by the standard error clustered at the district level.



magnitude. Results are also similar when controlling for district-generation-year fixed-
effects, so that identification comes purely from the differential effect of the shock on
occupations with a higher cognitive intensity. Table 2.6 further shows that our esti-
mates are similar when we use alternative definitions of the young generation. Finally,
Table 2.6 reports estimates using a sample excluding workers employed in large es-
tablishments that might have received broadband internet access early through private
networks. Consistent with this intuition, this sample yields quantitatively stronger esti-
mates.


8      How Different are Cognitive-biased Transitions?
Our empirical results establish that recent cognitive-biased innovations, like the arrival of
broadband internet in the 2000s, gave rise to weak reallocation of older generations and
large cross-generation differences in occupation composition changes. The theoretical
results in Sections 5 and 6 indicate that these response patterns are consistent with
this type of innovations being biased towards occupations intensive in skills which were
markedly different from those used in the rest of the economy, i.e., an economy featuring
relatively high technology-skill specificity.
    In this section, we ask: if technological innovations had not been cognitive-biased
and had instead been biased towards economic activities intensive in skills which were


                                                                39
more similar to those used in other activities, how different would the economy's ad-
justment have been? To answer this counterfactual question, we first use the evidence
for Germany to discipline the structural parameters in our theory. Second, we solve for
the full non-linear equilibrium dynamics--instead of approximating them--following a
skill-biased innovation that reallocates 30 percent of employment across the two tech-
nologies in the long-run. We then compare the adjustment dynamics under our bench-
mark parameterization to those that result from a counterfactual parameterization asso-
ciated with a lower technology-skill specificity.32 We conclude by providing suggestive
evidence that the U.S. and German economies in the mid-century might have featured
lower technology-skill specificity than in recent decades.

8.1     Counterfactual Exercise: the role of technology-skill specificity
Parameterization. We begin by parameterizing the model to match the empirical im-
pulse responses shown in Section 7.3. As above, we map the H technology to cognitive-
intensive occupations. We then select the model's parameters in two steps.
    We first externally calibrate the parameters (,  , r ). We set the discount rate  to
match an annual interest rate of 2%. We follow Hsieh et al. (2013) by setting the elasticity
of substitution across occupations  equal to 3.33 Finally, we set the discount rate of social
welfare to r =  + , so that the social discounting of future generations is identical to
the discounting of worker's future utility.
    We then select the parameters governing production technologies ((i ),  (i )) and the
skill distribution dynamics (, ,  ) to match the estimates in Figure 7 under the as-
sumption of a one-time, permanent shock in 2004.34 The decline in the share of the old
workers in total employment from 1997 to 2014 implies  = 0.057, i.e, an expected work-
ing life-span of about 18 years after age 35. The small response in the cognitive-intensive
employment of old generations yields an  close to zero, and the large young-old gap
in the relative employment response implies  = 0.35. Online Appendix 3 presents the
matching procedure, along with the model's goodness of fit.

Results. We use the parameterized model to study the consequences of a cognitive-
biased innovation that increases the employment share in the cognitive-intensive technol-
ogy from 20% to 50%. These values approximately correspond to the cognitive-intensive
  32 This exercise thus gives a sense of the magnitudes involved in our comparative static results in Section 5 and also
shows that they are not driven by the first-order approximations.
  33 We do not try to estimate the demand elasticity of substitution across technologies since it requires observing an

exogenous shock to the skill distribution, as in Katz and Murphy (1992).
  34 This is the last year for which the relative employment response of young workers is not statistically significant at

10%. In parameterizing the model, we maintain our baseline assumption of a single shock. However, as discussed in
the Online Appendix, we can adapt the procedure to a sequence of unanticipated shocks.




                                                           40
employment share in 1997 of the countries with the lowest and the highest cognitive-
intensive employment share among those listed in Figure 1 (Portugal and Netherlands,
respectively). Thus, our results can be seen as analyzing the transitional dynamics of a
shock that generates convergence in cognitive-intensive employment shares across such
countries.
    We focus here on how slow the adjustment is, as measured by DCIR(q), as well as
the impact on average welfare (U    ¯ ) and lifetime welfare inequality ( ¯ ), as defined in
Section 4.2. For completeness, we show the full dynamic responses in Online Appendix
3. Table 2 shows that the increase in the average consumption-equivalent welfare is 46%
and the increase in lifetime welfare inequality is 39%. These large effects follow from
the substantial shock size necessary to induce the reallocation of almost one-third of the
economy's labor force.
    Our theory indicates that the impact of the shock is remarkably different over differ-
ent horizons. We quantify this by reporting the `Short-run' changes in average welfare
and inequality at the moment of the shock, and the `Long-run' changes in the same out-
comes across stationary equilibria.35 Inequality increases by 70% in the short-run, but it
falls to 30% in the long-run. The inequality decline unfolds slowly over generations: the
DCIR(q) of 0.9 implies that workers born right before the shock experience (in expec-
tation) an increase in inequality during their lifetime that is 90% larger than the corre-
sponding change in the long-run. Similarly, the average consumption-equivalent welfare
gain is 31% right after the shock, but this increases to 55% in the long-run. Moreover,
this calculations quantify the large biases induced by naively extrapolating from changes
observed over short or long horizons that do not account for slow transitional dynamics.
    The remaining rows of Table 2 report the welfare consequences of the same shock in
a counterfactual economy with lower technology-skill specificity (i.e., higher  ).36 The
second panel of Table 2 shows that the higher  implies a faster transition in which
DCIR(q) is 0.4 (relative to 0.9 in the baseline economy). This follows from the smaller
cross-generation differences in the skill distribution that arise because of the weaker
inequality increase in the short-run (i.e., 45% in the counterfactual economy compared
to 76% in the baseline economy). The lower inequality increase is a consequence of the
stronger within-generation reallocation of old workers at impact. This also leads to a
stronger decline in the price index, which translates into a higher average welfare gain
  35 Formally, the `Short-run' calculation assumes that changes observed at impact are permanent, while the `Long-

run' calculation assumes that the changes observed in the long-run were permanent and happened at impact.
  36 We use an estimate of  = 0.75 that is consistent with technology-skill specificity associated with a broader set

of occupations beyond cognitive-intensive ones. Estimates in the literature are typically not reported in terms of
 . Instead, they report the elasticity of relative occupation-level employment with respect to a change in relative
                           log(e)
occupation-level wages:  log( ) . Estimates for this elasticity are between 1 and 2 ­ e.g., see Hsieh et al. (2013). Given
that the equilibrium employment share is 0.5 in the long-run of our economy, a reported relative employment elasticity
of 1.5 (the mid-point between 1 and 2) implies  = 0.75.



                                                           41
in the short-run (40% in the counterfactual economy compared to 31% in the baseline
economy). Moreover, these calculations confirm that the biases from not accounting for
transitional dynamics are much smaller when the adjustment is faster.

                 Table 2: Changes in Average Welfare and Lifetime Welfare Inequality

                                                  Baseline                   Low specificity
                                              (  0,  = 0.35)                ( = 0.75,  = 0.35)
                                               U¯         ¯                  U¯         ¯
                           True               46%           39%             44%            29%
                           Short-run          31%           76%             40%            45%
                           Long-run           55%           30%             47%            24%

                           DCIR(q)                      0.9                            0.4
      Note. The table reports the the changes in average welfare U  ¯ and lifetime welfare inequality   ¯ implied by a shock
      calibrated to increase the employment share in cognitive-intensive occupations from 20% to 50% between stationary
      equilibria. `True' corresponds to the measures that fully account for the economy's transitional dynamics. `Short-run'
      assumes that changes at impact are permanent. `Long-run' assumes that long-run changes happened at impact.




8.2     Historical trends across generations and occupations
The counterfactual exercise above speaks to the possibility that the economy's adjust-
ment to cognitive-biased innovations may be quite different than to other types of in-
novations. That is, cognitive-biased innovations lead to a particularly unequal and slow
adjustment because they are biased towards economic activities intensive in skills which
are markedly different from those used in the rest of the economy. We now provide
suggestive evidence that the high technology-skill specificity observed in the U.S. and
German economies after 1990 might not have been a feature of these economies before
1990. That is, prior to 1990, the main innovations (technological or otherwise) driving
changes in employment composition might have been biased towards occupations inten-
sive in skills which were similar to those used in other economic activities. If this was the
case, compared to the adjustment in recent decades, our theory's key prediction is that
we should have observed similar changes in occupation composition for all generations
before 1990.
   We thus next investigate whether the observed cross-generation differences in oc-
cupational composition changes pre and post 1990 are consistent with this narrative.
To obtain a measure of the expanding occupations that is consistent over time, we no
longer rely on the set of cognitive intensive occupations since past innovations may have
impacted a different set of economic activities. Instead, for each country and period,
we define a set of impacted occupations as the top tercile of occupations in terms of
employment expansion among young workers. Through the lens of our theory, since

                                                               42
young workers differentially invest in new skills to work on occupations that became
more attractive, their employment decisions provide a revealed-preference way of recov-
ering the occupations experiencing positive demand shocks under the assumption of no
shocks to the cost of investing on different skills.37
    Table 3 reports the employment growth trends in the three occupations with the high-
est growth among young workers. Columns (1) and (3) report substantial growth in these
occupations for both periods and countries. Interestingly, columns (2) and (4) show that
the two periods differ in the relative magnitude of the cross- and within-generation com-
ponents of employment changes. As in Figure 1, there is a large cross-generation differ-
ence in recent years when most expanding occupations were cognitive intensive. How-
ever, such cross-generation differences were much smaller before 1990 when changes in
the occupation composition were more similar for young and old generations. In this
earlier period, the set of expanding occupations was less cognitive intensive, with ser-
vices and retail occupations at the top of the list in both countries. In fact, Germany did
not have any cognitive intensive occupation among the fastest growing occupations in
1970-1987.38
  Table 3: Cross-generation differences in occupational composition changes pre and post 1990

                                     Early period (pre 1990)                Recent period (post 1990)
                                                            young                                   young
                                                      log(et       old )
                                                                / et                          log(et       old )
                                                                                                        / et
                                    T  log et                                T  log et
                                    1       all                              1       all
                                                         log et
                                                              old                                log et
                                                                                                      old

                                        (1)                (2)                   (3)               (4)
               Germany                1.94%               0.173                1.59%              0.456
               United States          0.91%               0.206                1.45%              0.476
      Note. Columns (1) and (3) report the annualized growth rate in the three 2-digit ISCO occupations with the highest
      change in log employment share in the period among young workers in the country (where T is the number of
      years in the period). For the top 3 occupations by log-employment growth for young workers, columns (2) and (4)
      report the ratio between the log-change in the cross-generation difference in employment shares and the log-change
      in employment share for old workers. Early period: 1970-1987 for West Germany and 1960-1990 for the United States.
      Recent period: 1997-2017 for Germany and 2000-2015 for the United States. Sample of males in two age groups:
      "Young" workers aged 15-39yrs and "Old" workers aged 40-64yrs.




    This evidence indicates that it is not always the case that young and old workers have
very different trends in occupation employment growth. Prior to 1990, changes in oc-
cupation composition did not exhibit the large cross-generation differences observed in
recent years. Such patterns are consistent with an economy featuring lower technology-
skill specificity, potentially due to different types of innovations driving employment
   37 We use again the nine aggregate occupations in the 2-digit ISCO classification that we used to construct Figure 1.

Our primary data source for the early period is the individual-level Census data downloaded from IPUMS interna-
tional. We compute changes in occupation employment shares for males in 1970-1987 for Germany and 1960-1990 for
the United States. For the later period, we use the same data used to construct the trends in Figure 1.
   38 In Online Appendix 2.4, we attest that cross-generation differences in occupation employment growth become

stronger in every 20-year period since 1960 for the United States.



                                                              43
changes in the decades before 1990.39


9       Conclusions
We develop a theory where overlapping generations of workers are heterogeneous over
a continuum of technology-specific skills. Technological transitions are driven both by
the reallocation of workers within a generation and changes in the skill distribution
across generations. We characterize the equilibrium dynamics of this economy, show-
ing that they resemble those of a q-theory of skill investment. This allow us to sharply
characterize the determinants of transitional dynamics and welfare following a skill-
biased innovation, as well as derive observable predictions for changes in labor market
outcomes within and across generations. We then use these insights to study the ad-
justment of developed economies to recent cognitive-biased technological innovations.
Several pieces of evidence show strong responses of cognitive-intensive employment for
young but not old generations.
    Taken together, we derive two broad takeaways from this piece. First, the evidence
suggests that transitions following cognitive-biased innovations may be particularly un-
equal and slow to play out because this type of innovations are biased towards economic
activities intensive in skills which are markedly different from those used in other ac-
tivities. This results in an economy featuring high technology-skill specificity where the
adjustment is mostly driven by slow changes in the skill distribution across generations
as opposed to the fast reallocation of workers within a generation. These features are
not universal though. If other episodes of adjustment, past or future, involved different
types of innovations and skills, then they would also vary in how slow and unequal
they are. Second, caution should be exercised when interpreting technological transi-
tions based on evidence over short time horizons. This may lead to overly pessimistic
views of the consequences of new technologies for inequality and average welfare. Yet,
observed changes for different generations, even at short horizons, are useful when com-
bined with a theory of technological transitions. Looking at the decisions of younger
workers allows us to "see the future" and thus appropriately derive the full implications
of technological innovations.
    We conclude by commenting on how some ideas developed in this paper may be
useful to tackle other questions in future research. It is relatively straightforward to
extend the theory to multiple sectors in order to study how economies adjust to more
nuanced labor demand shocks (e.g., trade liberalizations, routine-biased innovations), to
    39 This
         is of course just one of many possible interpretations of this evidence, so we do not claim that it establishes a
causal impact of past innovations. For example, the generation-specific shocks in college graduation rates documented
in Card and Lemieux (2001) may help explain why young and old generations have similar changes in employment
composition in the 1970s and 1980s.



                                                           44
include different worker groups (e.g, gender, race) in order to analyze changes in dis-
crimination, or to reinterpret sectors as regions in order to study migration. Moreover,
future work can address normative questions related to the optimal speed of adjustment
to technological (and trade) shocks or the role of workers with more transferable skills
in providing aggregate insurance against these shocks. Finally, the notion that within-
and cross-generation changes at short horizons are informative about structural param-
eters governing elasticities at longer horizons can be used both to improve on empirical
projections about future labor market conditions as well as to discipline other dynamic
models with, for instance, incumbents and entrant firms.

References
Abramitzky, R., Lavy, V., and Segev, M. (2019). The effect of changes in the skill premium
 on college degree attainment and the choice of major. Technical report, National Bu-
 reau of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for
 employment and earnings. In Handbook of labor economics, volume 4, pages 1043­1171.
 Elsevier.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2017). Robots and jobs: Evidence from us labor markets.
 Working Paper 23285, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018). The race between man and machine: Implications
 of technology for growth, factor shares, and employment. American Economic Review,
 108(6):1488­1542.
Adão, R. (2016). Worker heterogeneity, wage inequality, and international trade: Theory
 and evidence from brazil. Unpublished paper, MIT.
Akerman, A., Gaarder, I., and Mogstad, M. (2015). The Skill Complementarity of Broad-
 band Internet. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1781­1824.
Atkeson, A., Burstein, A., and Chatzikonstantinou, M. (2018). Transitional dynamics
 in aggregate models of innovative investment. Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
Atkeson, A. and Kehoe, P. J. (2007). Modeling the Transition to a New Economy: Lessons
 from Two Technological Revolutions. American Economic Review, 97(1):64­88.
Atkin, D. (2016). Endogenous skill acquisition and export manufacturing in mexico.
 American Economic Review, 106(8):2046­85.
Autor, D. and Dorn, D. (2009). This job is "getting old": Measuring changes in job
 opportunities using occupational age structure. American Economic Review, 99(2):45­
 51.
Autor, D. H. and Dorn, D. (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polariza-
 tion of the us labor market. American Economic Review, 103(5):1553­97.
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (2003). The Skill Content of Recent Technologi-
 cal Change: An Empirical Exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1279­
 1333.

                                           45
Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings.
  Journal of political economy, 75(4, Part 1):352­365.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985). Debt, deficits, and finite horizons. Journal of political economy,
  93(2):223­247.
Buera, F. J. and Kaboski, J. P. (2012). The rise of the service economy. American Economic
 Review, 102(6):2540­69.
Buera, F. J., Kaboski, J. P., and Shin, Y. (2011). Finance and development: A tale of two
 sectors. American economic review, 101(5):1964­2002.
Burstein, A., Morales, E., and Vogel, J. (2016). Changes in between-group inequality:
 computers, occupations, and international trade. Technical report, mimeo.
Calvo, G. A. and Obstfeld, M. (1988). Optimal time-consistent fiscal policy with finite
 lifetimes. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 411­432.
Card, D., Heining, J., and Kline, P. (2013). Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West
 German Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):967­1015.
Card, D. and Lemieux, T. (2001). Can falling supply explain the rising return to col-
 lege for younger men? a cohort-based analysis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 116(2):705­746.
Carneiro, P., Heckman, J. J., and Vytlacil, E. J. (2011). Estimating marginal returns to
 education. American Economic Review, 101(6):2754­81.
Caselli, F. (1999). Technological revolutions. American economic review, 89(1):78­102.
Chari, V. V. and Hopenhayn, H. (1991). Vintage human capital, growth, and the diffusion
 of new technology. Journal of political Economy, 99(6):1142­1165.
Charles, K. K., Hurst, E., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2018). Housing booms and busts, labor
 market opportunities, and college attendance. American Economic Review, 108(10):2947­
 94.
Costinot, A. and Vogel, J. (2010). Matching and inequality in the world economy. Journal
 of Political Economy, 118(4):747­786.
Dix-Carneiro, R. and Kovak, B. K. (2017). Trade liberalization and regional dynamics.
 American Economic Review, 107(10):2908­46.
Dvorkin, M. and Monge-Naranjo, A. (2019). Occupation mobility, human capital and the
 aggregate consequences of task-biased innovations. Technical report.
Eckardt, D. (2019). Are chemists good bankers? returns to the match between training
  and occupation. Technical report, LSE.
Falck, O., Gold, R., and Heblich, S. (2014). E-lections: Voting behavior and the internet.
  American Economic Review, 104(7):2238­65.
Freyaldenhoven, S., Hansen, C., and Shapiro, J. M. (2018). Pre-event trends in the panel
  event-study design. Working Paper 24565, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fudenberg, D., Iijima, R., and Strzalecki, T. (2015). Stochastic choice and revealed per-
  turbed utility. Econometrica, 83(6):2371­2409.

                                            46
Galor, O. and Moav, O. (2002). Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4):1133­1191.
Ghose, D. (2019). Trade, internal migration, and human capital: Who gains from india's
 it boom?
Goldin, C. D. and Katz, L. F. (2009). The Future of Inequality: The Other Reason Ed-
 ucation Matters So Much. Scholarly articles, Harvard University Department of Eco-
 nomics.
Hansen, L. P. and Sargent, T. J. (2008). Robustness. Princeton university press.
Heckman, J. J. and Honore, B. E. (1990). The empirical content of the roy model. Econo-
 metrica, 58(5):1121­1149.
Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L., and Taber, C. (1998). Explaining rising wage inequality:
 Explorations with a dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with het-
 erogeneous agents. Review of economic dynamics, 1(1):1­58.
Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., and Valentinyi, Á. (2014). Growth and structural transfor-
 mation. In Handbook of economic growth, volume 2, pages 855­941. Elsevier.
Hobijn, B., Schoellman, T., and Vindas, A. (2019). Wages during structural transforma-
 tion: The importance of cohort labor supply decisions.
Hsieh, C.-T., Hurst, E., Jones, C. I., and Klenow, P. J. (2013). The allocation of talent and
 us economic growth. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Katz, L. F. and Murphy, K. M. (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: supply and
 demand factors. The quarterly journal of economics, 107(1):35­78.
Kim, D.-I. and Topel, R. H. (1995). Labor markets and economic growth: lessons from
  korea's industrialization, 1970-1990. In Differences and changes in wage structures, pages
  227­264. University of Chicago Press.
Krusell, P. and Smith, Jr, A. A. (1998). Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroe-
 conomy. Journal of political Economy, 106(5):867­896.
Lagakos, D. and Waugh, M. E. (2013). Selection, agriculture, and cross-country produc-
  tivity differences. American Economic Review, 103(2):948­80.
Lee, D. and Wolpin, K. I. (2006). Intersectoral labor mobility and the growth of the
  service sector. Econometrica, 74(1):1­46.
Lucas, R. E. and Moll, B. (2014). Knowledge growth and the allocation of time. Journal
 of Political Economy, 122(1):1­51.
Matejka, F. and McKay, A. (2015). Rational inattention to discrete choices: A new foun-
 dation for the multinomial logit model. American Economic Review, 105(1):272­98.
Matsuyama, K. (1992). A simple model of sectoral adjustment. The Review of Economic
 Studies, 59(2):375­387.
McFadden, D. (1973). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior.
Moll, B., Rachel, L., and Restrepo, P. (2019). Uneven growth: Automation's impact on
 income and wealth inequality.

                                             47
Murphy, K. M. and Topel, R. H. (1987). The evolution of unemployment in the united
 states: 1968-1985. NBER macroeconomics annual, 2:11­58.
Ngai, L. R. and Pissarides, C. A. (2007). Structural change in a multisector model of
 growth. American economic review, 97(1):429­443.
Perla, J. and Tonetti, C. (2014). Equilibrium imitation and growth. Journal of Political
  Economy, 122(1):52­76.
Porzio, T. and Santangelo, G. (2019). Does schooling cause structural transformation?
Rogerson, R. (2008). Structural transformation and the deterioration of european labor
 market outcomes. Journal of political Economy, 116(2):235­259.
Roy, A. D. (1951). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford economic papers,
 3(2):135­146.
Sanderson, E. and Windmeijer, F. (2016). A weak instrument f-test in linear iv models
  with multiple endogenous variables. Journal of Econometrics, 190(2):212­221.
Sims, C. A. (2003). Implications of rational inattention. Journal of monetary Economics,
  50(3):665­690.
Spitz-Oener, A. (2006). Technical change, job tasks, and rising educational demands:
  Looking outside the wage structure. Journal of labor economics, 24(2):235­270.
Yaari, M. E. (1965). Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and the theory of the consumer.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 32(2):137­150.




                                           48
Appendix
Appendix A                   Proofs
A.1     Proof of Lemma 2
We obtain (14) by applying this expression into the relative supply expression in (13)
and the relative demand expression in (2). We can re-write it as
                                                                1
                                             -1                lt  (i )  (i ) st (i ) di
                                          At              =            l
                                                              (lt ) 0 t (i )st (i )di

The right-hand side is strictly decreasing in lt , converges to zero as lt  1, and converges
to infinity as lt  0. Then, existence and uniqueness of a solution follows from applying
Bolzano's theorem.

A.2     Proof of Lemma 3
The FOC of workers' skill-accumulation problem are:

                                                1                             ~t (i )
                                                                              s
                                    Vt (i ) -             1 + log                         - t = 0
                                                                              ¯t (i )
                                                                              s
                                                                          1
                                                              t               ~t ( x )dx - 1
                                                                              s                    =0
                                                                      0

   Integrating over i  [0, 1], we obtain an equation characterizing t :
                                                      1
                                       log                ¯t (i )eVt (i) di
                                                          s                             = t + 1
                                                  0

   Therefore,

                                                                     ¯t (i )eVt (i)
                                                                     s
                                                ~t (i ) =
                                                s                  1
                                                                                           .
                                                                     ¯       Vt ( j) dj
                                                                  0 st ( j)e

   Using the wage expressions and assignment function in Lemma 1, we can write the
value function of a worker i at time t as
                                                                  
Vt (i ) =          e-(+)(s-t) log(ws (i ))ds -                       e-(+)(s-t) log( Ps )ds
            t                                                 t
                                                                                                                        
      =            e-(+)(s-t) (log(s (i )(i ))Iils + log((i )) (1 - Ii<ls )) ds -                                          e-(+)(s-t) log( Ps )ds
            t                                                                                                       t
            log((i ))                                                                              
      =               +            e-(+)(s-t) log (s (i )) Iils ds -                                  e-(+)(s-t) log( Ps )ds
              +             t                                                                  t




                                                                      49
                                     -(+)(s-t)
                                   t e         log(s  (i ))Iils ds
   By defining Qt (i )  e                                                           , we obtain
                                                                               
                                                               ¯t (i )(i ) + Qt (i )
                                                               s
                                           ~t (i ) =
                                           s                                                               .
                                                              1
                                                                ¯
                                                             0 st ( j)( j)
                                                                           + Q ( j )  dj
                                                                              t


A.3     Proof of Theorem 1
Part 1. We begin by solving for the stationary skill distribution s(i ) implied by (10) and
(12)

                                                                                                               
                                                                                 (i )                          +
                                                             ¯( i )
                                                             s        (i ) max{ (l ) , 1}
                                   ~( i ) =
                          s (i ) = s                                                                                                                    (A.1)
                                                            1                    (i )                          +
                                                              ¯
                                                           0 s( j)    ( j) max{ (l ) , 1}                              dj

   We then take a first order approximation around the stationary equilibrium of equa-
tions (10), (12) and (14). We obtain
        ^t (i )
        s
                = -s
                   ^t (i ) + s ^
                               ~t (i )                                                                                                                  (A.2)
         t
             ^t =  y
             l         ^t                                                                                                                               (A.3)
                  -1
                               1                          (i )  (i ) s (i )                    l                      (i ) s (i )
             ^t =
             l                   ^t (i )
                                 s                                                di -             ^t (i )
                                                                                                   s                                      di            (A.4)
                   +                                   1                                                         l
                                                      l  (i )  (i ) s (i ) di
                             l                                                             0                         (i )s(i )di
                                                                                                                0

where
                                                  (l )s(l )l                   (l )(l )s(l )l
                                                  l
                                                                      +        1
                                                                                                                .
                                                 0    (i )s(i )di             l  (i )  (i ) s (i ) di
   Differentiating (A.4) with respect to time, we get that

          ^t
          l                        1   ^t (i )
                                       s                   (i )  (i ) s (i )                       l   ^t (i )
                                                                                                       s                     (i ) s (i )
             =                                            1
                                                                                    di -                                l
                                                                                                                                               di
          t     +                       t                                                               t
                                                         l  (i )  (i ) s (i ) di
                               l                                                               0                            (i )s(i )di
                                                                                                                       0

   Applying (A.2) to this expression, we obtain

   ^t
   l                                       1                 (i )  (i ) s (i )                         l                    (i ) s (i )
         ^t +  
      = -l                                     ^
                                               ~t (i )
                                               s                                     di -                  ^
                                                                                                           ~t (i )
                                                                                                           s                                   di   .   (A.5)
   t          +                                            1                                                           l
                                                          l  (i )  (i ) s (i ) di
                                       l                                                           0                        (i )s(i )di
                                                                                                                      0

    We now guess and verify that lt converges monotonically along the equilibrium path.
                                ^0 < 0. We omit the analogous proof for l
We establish this starting from l                                           ^0 > 0. Whenever
^0 < 0 and increases monotonically along the equilibrium path, we have that for all s > t,
l
types i < lt are employed in technology L and types i > l are employed in technology
H . Also, for workers with i  (lt , l ), there exist a  (i ) such that they work in H for all


                                                                      50
t < s < t +  (i ) and in L for all s > t +  (i ). Thus, given the definition of Qt (i ), we get
                                
                                1 t +  (i )
                                                                                i  lt
                                            e - (  +  )( s - t ) log(s  (i ))ds
                      Q t (i ) = e t                                            i  ( lt , l ) (A.6)
                                        1
                                  (i ) + q
                                                                    t           il

   This implies the following expression for the optimal lottery:
                                    
                                 - t e-(+)(s-t) log(            s
                                                               ) ds
             ~
              s (i )
              ~( l )
              s
                     ~
                     s t ( l ) e                                                                                                  i  lt
                                        - (  +  )  (i ) )                
              ~( i )  ( i )  +  ( 1 - e
    ~t (i ) = s
    s                                                                 - t+ (i) e-(+)(s-t) log(  s
                                                                                                ) ds                                              (A.7)
              ~( l )  ( l )
              s
                                                          ~
                                                          s t ( l ) e                                                             i  ( lt , l )
             
             s
              ~( i )
                     ~ (l )
                     s
              ~( l ) t
              s
                                                                                                                                  il

   The log-linearization of (A.7) implies
                                         ^
                                         s         ^         ^ t Ii  l t -  q
                                                   ~t (l ) - q
                                         ~t (i ) = s                        ^ t +  ( i ) Ii  ( l t , l ) .                                        (A.8)

   By replacing (A.8) into the expression inside the parenthesis in (A.5), we obtain

                              1                 (i )  (i ) s (i )                        l               (i ) s (i )
                                  ^
                                  ~t (i )
                                  s                                       di -               s^
                                                                                              ~t (i ) l                     di =
                                              1
                          l
                                             l      ( i )  ( i ) s ( i ) di               0
                                                                                                       0   ( i ) s ( i ) di
                                                  l                                                        (i ) s (i )
                                                     q    ^ t Ii  l t + q     ^ t +  ( i ) Ii  l t      l
                                                                                                                                di =
                                                0                                                          ( x  ) s (  x ) dx
                                                                                                       0
                                                                            l                                   (i ) s (i )
                                                        q ^t -                    q^t - q   ^t +  (i )     l
                                                                                                                                   di
                                                                          lt                                     ( x  ) s ( x ) dx
                                                                                                          0

where the last line uses our guess that lt  l for all t.
   Then, given our guess that lt increases monotonically along the equilibrium path,
from (12) we see that t decreases monotonically along the equilibrium path. This
implies that q ^t > q
                    ^t+ (i) > 0 for all i and all t. So, we can show that the term inside the
integral is of second order:
       l                                  (i ) s (i )                      l              (i ) s (i )                  maxi(lt ,l ) (i )s(i )l
0          ^t - q
           q    ^t +  (i )                                   di                ^t
                                                                               q                            di                                    ^t q
                                                                                                                                                  l  ^t  0.
      lt                             l                                   lt          l                                       l
                                    0    ( x )s( x )dx                              0    ( x )s( x )dx                      0    ( x )s( x )dx

   We then obtain (16) by replacing this expression back in (A.5).
   To show (17), we differentiate the definition of log(qt ) with respect to time:

                                            log(qt )
                                                     = -log(t ) + ( + )log(qt ).
                                              t
   Notice that indifference condition (A.5) immediately implies that             ^t .
                                                                     ^ t = -(1/ )l



                                                                               51
Then, by log-linearizing the expression above and replacing, we obtain (17)
                                                   ^t
                                                   q   1^
                                                      = l          ^t .
                                                          t + ( + )q
                                                   t   

Part 2. We now derive the policy functions, show that the equilibrium is saddle-path
stable, and verify that lt increases monotonically along the equilibrium path.
                                                                   ^t
                                                                   l      ^           ^t .
   We start by guessing that the policy functions are given by    t = -  lt and q
                                                                                ^t =  l
By replacing this guess into (16)­(17), we obtain the following system:
                                                                          
                                                  - = -  +                    
                                                                           + 
                                                 1
                                              - = + ( + ) .
                                                 

   The second equation immediately yields the expression for  . To get the expression
for , notice that substituting the expression for  into the first equation implies that
                                                                             
                                    ( - )( +  + ) +                              = 0,
                                                                              + 

which yields the following solutions

                                                              2                        
                       =- ±                                       +  ( + ) +               .
                         2                              2                               + 

   Because the term inside the square root is always positive, two solutions always exist
with one being positive and the other negative. This implies that the equilibrium is
saddle-path stable. The positive solution is the speed of convergence of lt .
                                         ^t = l
   Finally, the equilibrium threshold is l     ^0 e-t . Then, if l
                                                                 ^0 < 0, this implies that lt
increases monotonically along the equilibrium path, which verifies our initial guess and
completes the proof of the theorem.

Part 3. Notice that           ^
                              ~t (i )di =
                       s (i ) s                         ~t (i ) - s(i ))di = 0. Using (A.8) , we have that
                                                       (s
                            1
                  0=                   ^
                                       ~t (i )di
                                s (i ) s
                        0
                                              l
                     ^
                     ~t (l ) - 
                    =s                              ^ t Ii < l t + q
                                                    q              ^t+ (i) Ii(lt ,l ) s(i )di
                                          0
                                           l                                   l
                     ^
                     ~t (l ) -
                    =s                                    ^t + 
                                                  s(i )di q                        ^t - q
                                                                                   q    ^t+ (i) s(i )di
                                          0                                   lt

    We can use use the same arguments as in Appendix A.3 to show that the last term is
of second order. Thus,
                                                                      l
                                                  ^
                                                  ~t (l ) =
                                                  s                               ^t
                                                                          s(i )di q
                                                                  0


                                                                   52
and, therefore,
                                          l
                  ^
                  ~t (i ) =
                  s                           s(i )di q     ^ t Ii < l +  ( q
                                                      ^t -  q                    ^ t +  ( i ) ) Ii  ( l t , l ) .
                                                                            ^t - q
                                      0

                                                          ^t e- (i) . So,
                                             ^t +  (i ) = q
   To prove the result, we use the fact that q
                                  l
              ^
              ~t (i ) =
              s                       s(i )di q     ^ t Ii < l +  ( q
                                              ^t -  q                    ^ t +  ( i ) ) Ii  ( l t , l )
                                                                    ^t - q
                              0
                                                                   l
                     = Ii > l  q
                               ^t - 1 -                                              ^t (1 - e- (i) )Ii(lt ,l )
                                                                               ^t +  q
                                                                       s(i )di q
                                                               0
                                                     1
                     =    Ii > l -                               ^t + o t ( i )
                                                         s(i )di q
                                                 l

where ot (i )  q ^t (1 - e- (i) )Ii(lt ,l ) and has s(i )ot (i )di = 0.
   Finally, the dynamics of the skill distribution and the relative value of output follow
from equations A.2 and A.3:

                                                                                    t
                                                 ^0 (i )e-t +
                                       ^t (i ) = s
                                       s                                                e( -t) s
                                                                                               ^
                                                                                               ~ (i )d ,
                                                                                0
                                                            1^
                                               ^ t = (  - 1) l
                                               y               t
                                                            

A.4    Proof of Proposition 1
Using the definitions yt and qt together with Theorem 1, we have


                    log(yt ) = ( - 1) (log( A) - log( ) - ^ t)
                                       = ( - 1) log( A) - log( ) + ^ 0 e-t                                           (A.9)
                    log(qt ) = log(q) + q
                                        ^t
                                1            1
                             =     log( ) +    ^ 0 e-t
                                                                                                                    (A.10)
                               +            ++
   Furthermore,

                      log(lt ) = - log(t ) = - log( ) + ^ 0 e-t                                                     (A.11)

We next derive the long-run change log( ) and the short-to-long-run change ^0

Long-run. In this case the skill distribution is given by (A.1), so that the equilibrium




                                                                           53
threshold solves
                                                                                                              
                               l                                      1                                (i )   +
           A  -1  ( l )            ¯(i )(i )((i ))
                                   s                 +   di =             ¯( i )  ( i )  ( i )  ( i )
                                                                          s                                       di
                           0                                      l                                   (l )
   Consider a log-linear approximation around the final stationary equilibrium:

                                                                             1
                    ( - 1)log( A) +                  +                         +  log(l ) = 0
                                                             +               

   Thus,
                                                          
                           log(l ) = -                                      ( - 1) log( A)
                                                         
                                                +        +        + 

   From equation (12), log( ) = - 1
                                    log(l ) and, therefore,

                                                         1
                           log( ) =                                         ( - 1) log( A)                             (A.12)
                                                     
                                               +     +          + 

Short-to-Long We start by deriving the change in the skill distribution using (A.1):
                                         ^0 (l ) - + log( ) if i > l . Along the transition,
                                                   
^0 (i ) = s
s         ^0 (l ) if i < l and s
                               ^0 (i ) = s
the change in the assignment threshold is determined by (14) given the change in the
skill distribution:
                                             ^0 = -  log( )
                                       + l
                                                   +
   Then,
                                                   1  
                                          ^0 =
                                                         log( )                                                        (A.13)
                                                  +   + 

Dynamic responses We now use the derivations above to show that

                                                                                           
                               1        
     log(lt ) = -      1+                 (e-t - 1) ( - 1) log( A)
                  +        +  + +  + 
                                   

                                                         
                  1              (  - 1)    
     log(yt ) =      (1 +  ) +                 (1 - e-t ) ( - 1)log( A)
                 +              +  +
                                            + 
                                                                  +
                           1             1                 -  -t
     log(qt ) =                                  1+          e   ( - 1) log( A)
                    +  +
                                         +                 
                                     +

where the last line uses the solution to  from Theorem 1.




                                                             54
A.5     Proof of Demand-Supply representation in (20)­(21)
The demand equation in (2) immediately implies that

                          log xt = ( - 1) log( A) -   log t .

   We guess and verify the responses in Proposition 1 can be derived from a relative
supply equation with the following form:

                                     log xt = t log t .

     By combining the supply and demand equations, the change in relative wage is given
by
                                           1
                             log t =          ( - 1) log( A)
                                         t + 
   We now derive the expression for  log t implied by Proposition 1. The demand
equations in (2) implies that
                                                     1
                            log t =  log( A) +          log yt ,
                                                    1-
which combined with Proposition 1 yields

                              1                           1
               log t =               -    (1 - e -  t )     ( - 1) log( A).
                             +                           + 

     Equalizing the two expressions above for  log t , we obtain
                                                   + 
                                t +  =                       ,
                                          1-    ( 1 - e -t )
                                               

which implies that
                                      + (1 - e-t )
                              t =                     .
                                    ( +  )( + ) + e-t
   This establishes the representation in (20)­(21) that yields the same path for  log t
and  log yt implied by Proposition 1. Since e-t  1 for all t  0, this expression implies
that t > 0 for all t. In addition, we can verify that t is increasing over time because

                     t    ( +  )( + ) +  + 
                       =                      2
                                                e-t > 0.
                     t                   -
                         (( +  )( + ) + e ) t


A.6     Proof of Proposition 2
The following proposition first characterizes the induced changes in average welfare
U  ¯  U ¯ 0 - U0- and lifetime inequality   ¯     ¯ 0 - log(q0- ). It is easy to then see
that Proposition 2 follows from the expressions for U  ¯ and  because, when r = ,
  r        ^
           q
r + 0 log( A) d  = DCIR ( q ).


                                             55
Proposition 4 (Average welfare and lifetime welfare inequality) The changes in average
welfare U¯ and lifetime inequality ¯ are approximately:

                                     y     y      e
                     U
                     ¯ =                  log( A) -
                                              -                                          ¯
                                   1 + y 1 + y 1 + e
                                               
                     ¯ = ( + )  log(q ) + r
                                                q^ d 
                                          r+ 0
              1                         l
where e      l    s(i )di /            0    s(i )di is the relative high-tech employment in the long-run.

Proof.
   We have that, because of the envelope theorem, for any   0-

                                                               1               ~ (i )
                                                                               s
                         U =            ~ (i )V (i )di -
                                        s                          ~ (i )log
                                                                   s                     di
                                                                                ¯( i )
                                                                                s
                                        s(i )(V (i ) - V (i ))di + U

   Then, for   0
                                                               (i ) max(t  (i ), 1)
      U - U =                e-(+)(t- )             s(i )log                         didt
                                                                       Pt
                                                          (i ) max((i ), 1)
               -             e-(+)t            s(i )log                         didt
                    0                                               P
                         1                                                         
                             s(i )di              e-(++)(t- ) ^  dt -                 e-(++)(t- ) P
                                                                                                  ^ dt
                     l                                                          
                                y     1                   1              1
               =-                          y^0 -     s(i )di ^0            e-
                              1 + y 1 -            l                    ++
                                y         1
               =-                   -       s(i )di q^
                              1 + y     l

   Also, for  = 0-
                         1      1               y        1     1
   U - U0-                         log ( ) +
                             s(i )di                              log(y )
                   l           +              1 + y  - 1  + 
                     1          1               y        1
              =        s(i )di     log ( ) +                  (log( A) - log( ))
                   l           +              1 + y  + 
                  y         1              y         1
              =                log( A) -        -      s(i )di log (q )
                1 + y  +                 1 + y     l




                                                              56
   Then,
                                                          
        U
        ¯ = ( + )(U - U0- ) + ( + )r                          e-r (U - U )d
                                                      0
                                              y                   1                                
             ( + )(U - U0- ) -                    -                   s(i )di ( + )r                  e -r  q
                                                                                                            ^ d 
                                            1 + y             l                                0
                  y                   y                   1
            =         log( A) -           -                   s(i )di ¯
                1 + y               1 + y             l

   Finally, using Proposition 1,
                                            
                     ¯ = (  +  )r              e-r log(q )d
                                        0
                                                                               
                           = ( + )log(q ) + ( + )r                                e -r  q
                                                                                        ^ d 
                                                                           0
                                                   r
                            ( + )log(q ) + ( + )     ^0
                                                     q
                                                 r+
                                                  r     
                            ( + )log(q ) + ( + )         ^ d 
                                                         q
                                                 r+ 0



A.7   Comparative Statics with respect to  and 
Proposition A.1 (Comparative statics with respect to  ) Assume that  > 1. Then,
  1. Short-run adjustment

                      log(y0 )              | log(l0 )|                          log(q0 )
                               > 0,                     > 0,                              < 0;
                                                                                  

  2. Long-run adjustment

                      log(y )               | log(l )|                             log(q )
                              > 0,                     > 0,                                < 0;
                                                                                    

  3. Rate of convergence

                                                 
                                                  <0
                                                 

  4. Cumulative impulse response

                                                      ^t dt                             
                       |y
                        ^ t | dt                      l                ?
                                                                                         ^
                      0                          0                                     0 qt dt
                                 < 0,                                      0,                         < 0;
                                                                                        




                                                 57
Proposition A.2 (Comparative statics with respect to ) Assume that  > 1. Then,
  1. Short-run adjustment

                       log(y0 )               |log(l0 )|             log(q0 )
                                = 0,                     = 0,                 <0
                                                                      

  2. Long-run adjustment

                      log(y )                 |log(l )|              log(q )
                              > 0,                      < 0,                 <0
                                                                      

  3. Rate of convergence

                                                    
                                                     >0
                                                    

  4. Cumulative impulse response

                                                     ^t dt                    
                 |y
                  ^ t | dt                           l                         ^
               0                                0                            0 qt dt
                                    > 0,                           > 0,                      >0
                                                                             
                               =0                             =0                        =0


   Next, we prove each of the items of the two propositions above.
  1. Short-run adjustment

                                        -1
                             log(y0 ) =     ( - 1)log( A)
                                           1-
                                         + 
                                        1    1
                         log (q0 ) =          +  (  - 1)  log ( A )
                                      +  +           +
                                       1  1
                                      =       ( - 1)log( A)
                                      +   + 
                                       
                        |log(l0 )| =     ( - 1) log( A)
                                      + 

    The first and last lines show that log(y0 ), |log(l0 )| are increasing in  and inde-
    pendent of . Since  is decreasing in  , the second line shows that log(q0 ) is
    decreasing in  . Since  is increasing in , the third line shows that log(q0 ) is
    decreasing in .




                                                    58
2. Long-run adjustment
                                                                      
                                                          -1
                         log(y ) = 1 -                            
                                                                       ( - 1)log( A)
                                                   +  +           +
                                                  1           1
                         log (q ) =                             ( - 1)  log( A)
                                     +  +
                                                              +
                                                          +
                                         
                          log(l ) = -                             ( - 1) log( A)
                                       +  +                +


  Then, it is straightforward to see that log(y ) is increasing in both  and , while
  the opposite holds for log(q ). Moreover, , |log(l )| is increasing in  but de-
  creasing in .
3. Rate of convergence
  From the expression for  in Theorem 1 it is straightforward to see that is decreasing
  in  and increasing in .
4. Cumulative impulse response
                                                           
                                  1      1   +                      -1
                      |y
                       ^ t |dt = - y^0 =                                ( - 1) log( A)
              0                            +  +                      + 
                                                              +
                                   1         1                -1 1
                         ^t dt =
                         q           ^0 =
                                     q                             ( - 1) log( A)
                  0                        +  +
                                                               +
                                                          +
                                            
                       ^t |dt =
                      |l                       |y
                                                ^ t |dt
              0                    -1   0

                                            
  The second line shows that 0 q   ^t dt is decreasing in  , since  is decreasing in
                    
   . Furthermore, 0 q^t dt is increasing in  around  = 0. This is because  is
                                                              1      1
                                                                       
                                                                   + +
                                                                       +
  increasing in ,  =  when  = 0, and                                       is bounded.
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                            1     +
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                 + +
                                                                                                       +
  The first line shows that 0 |y
                               ^ t |dt is increasing in  around  = 0 since                       
  is bounded. To show that it is decreasing in  , we show that:




                                                      59
                  
           1   +          -1
      log(                + )
              + +    +              1 1                                                   
                                =                2
                                                   -                                -
                                      + 2 ( +  )      +  +
                                                                                         + 
                                                                            +
                                                                                                           
                                          -   +  +    1      1                                             
                                = -  1 -                 +                                                  < 0
                                                                                                           
                                              + 2  ( +  )  +  +
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                       +
                                               <1 because >

                 ^                                                                        
      Finally, 0 |l t | dt is increasing in  around  = 0, since it is proportional to 0 | y  ^ t |dt.
      However, the derivative with respect to  is ambiguous. This is because the con-
                                                                       
      stant of proportionality  /( - 1) is increasing in  while 0 |y      ^ t |dt is decreasing in
      .

A.8    Proof of Proposition 3
From the proof of Proposition A.1 in Appendix A.7, we have that
                                                 
                   
              0 |qt |dt
                      ^               1                    |  - 1|
DCIR(q) =                  =                       ( - )
            +  log( A)          +  +
                                           +              ( + )
                                                +
                                                
           0 |y  ^ t |dt          +                       (  - 1)2     ( +  + )        (  - 1)2
DCIR(y) =                =                                         =            ( - )           .
           +  log( A)       +   +  +                        +         +  ( + )        ( +  )2
                                                      +

   The definition of  in Theorem 1 implies that |0 = |  =  and                                           |0 =
                                                                                                        

                                                      DCIR(q)                                       DCIR(q)
 |  = 0. Taken together, they immediately imply that          |  0                                          |  =

                                                                                               =      
       DCIR(y)         DCIR(y)
0 and          |  0 =          |  = 0

A.9    Proof of Theorem 3
We start by deriving the elasticity of relative employment of old generations with respect
to  log( A). We first use a first-order approximation to write the log-change in relative
high-tech employment in terms of changes in the high-tech employment share:

                               1          1               1                  1
                  within
                  0                                           s0 (i )di -          s0 (i )di
                             log( A) e (1 - e )        l0                   l0 -

   Taking a first-order approximation around l ,




                                                 60
            1                   1
                s0 (i )di -                               ^t +  log(l )
                                     s0 (i )di  -s0 (l )l l
           l0                  l0-
                                             s0 (l )l   log(t )
                                                 s0 ( l ) l     1
                                                             -      log y0 +  log A .
                                             e  (1 - e  )       -1
where the last line uses the demand expression in (2).
  Then, using Proposition 1,

                                                   s0 ( l ) l 
                                      within
                                      0                         (  - 1),
                                                 e (1 - e )  + 

   Thus,

           |within
            0      |     s0 ( l ) l                                                                    |within
                                                                                                        0      |
                     =                    |  - 1| > 0                                       and                  = 0.
                       e (1 - e ) ( +  )2                                                               

    We first use a first-order approximation to write the relative high-tech employment
in terms of changes in the high-tech employment share:

                                     1       1                               1
                      cross
                      0                                                           ~0 (i ) - s0 (i ))di
                                                                                 (s
                                e (1 - e )  log A                        l0
                                     1       1                             1
                                                                                       ^
                                                                                       ~0 (i ) - s
                                                                                 s(i )(s         ^0 (i ))di
                                e (1 - e )  log A                        l



   To write this expression in term of fundamentals, we derive the changes in the skill
distribution between stationary equilibria. Using the expression for the stationary skill
distribution in (A.1),
                                                                                            Ii > l -
                                                                                         
                                            ¯(i )(i ) + (0- (i )) +
                                            s                                                     0
                  s0 ( i ) =                                                                                  
                                l0-                                 1
                               0      ¯( j)( j) + dj +
                                      s                            l0-
                                                                         ¯( j)( j) + (0- ( j)) + dj
                                                                         s
                   =
                                                 1                 
                  ^0 (i )  - Ii>l -
                  s                                  s( j)dj          log( )
                                             l                     +
   Recall also that the third part of Theorem 1 yields
                                                               1
                                ^
                                ~0 (i ) =
                                s            Ii > l -                      ^0 + o 0 ( i ) .
                                                                   s(i )di q
                                                           l

   Combining the expressions above,



                                                               61
                                      1             
                            cross
                            0               q  ^0 +     log( )
                                     log A          +
                                      1
                                             ^0 +  log(q ))
                                            (q
                                     log A
                                      1
                                            log(q0 )
                                     log A

   Using the expression for  log(q0 ) in Proposition 1,
                                                 
                                  cross
                                  0                     (  - 1).
                                            ( + )( +  )
                                                                                     2                 
   Using the expressions derived in Appendix A.8 and defining                       2  +   ( + ) +     +   ,
we obtain
   |cross
    0     |       1 - e                          
            =                             +-         |  - 1|
              ( +  )( + )2                       
                     1                           1         
            =                             + 1/2 - -1/2          |  - 1|
              ( +  )( + )2              2        2         + 
                     1                 -1/2  -1/2         1 
            =                                      + -             |  - 1|
              ( +  )( + )2                  2             2  + 
                     1                 -1/2  -1/2        2              1 
            =                                      +        +  ( + ) +                     |  - 1|,
              ( +  )( + )2                  2           2               2  + 

                    0|cross |
which implies that      > 0.
  Using the expressions derived in Appendix A.8,

|cross
 0     |                                                                    
         = - (1 - e  )                                ( + ) + ( +  )           |  - 1|
                       [( + )( +  )]2                                       
                                          -1/2       -1/2           1 
        =-                         2
                                                            + -                |  - 1|
             [( + )( +  )]                       2                  2 ( +  )
                                                                    2               1 
                                          -1/2       -1/2
        =-                         2
                                                            +           + ( + ) +              |  - 1|,
             [( + )( +  )]                       2              2                   2 ( +  )

                     |cross
                      0     |
which implies that              < 0.




                                                      62
Appendix B            Dynamic adjustment to broadband internet
                      adoption across regions and occupations
Data construction. The raw data in the LIAB comes in the form of entire job histories of
workers in the sample. Individual entries therefore contain worker information, as well
as information on the start and end date of a job spell for that individual, the location
(establishment), and characteristics of the job spell. We transform this data into an
annual panel dataset following the steps in Card et al. (2013), with minor modifications.
Specifically, we sequentially restrict our sample by selecting (i) males in West Germany,
(ii) those aged 15-64 years at the time of the job spell, and (iii) the job-spell within a
calendar year with maximum earnings. We then adjust wages by (i) deflating earnings
using German CPI information from FRED (Series id: DEUCPIALLMINMEI) and (ii)
replacing daily wages with Upper Earnings Limits in Card et al. (2013) for daily wages
above censor limit. Finally, we impute each individual's district of employment using
the district of the establishment of the individual's main job in each year. Since this
information only exists after 1999, we assign the establishment's district in 1999 to 1995-
1998.
    While the years represented in our data and our underlying data sample differ from
those of Card et al. (2013), our panel well represents the data used in that paper. In
results available upon request, we attest that the mean wage changes of job movers,
classified by the mean log wages of coworkers in their old and new establishments, is
similar in our data to the main findings in Card et al. (2013) (their Figure Vb).

Instrumental Variables. We link our LIAB-based worker panel to the DSL access data
from Falck et al. (2014) using the district identifiers in both datasets. We then construct
the instrumental variables discussed in Section 7.3. Figure B.1 illustrates the spatial
variation of the instruments used to estimate our baseline results.
   We start by examining the first-stage regression that relates the initial telephone net-
work to DSL access. Although the unit of observation in equation (23) is a district-
occupation-generation triple, the exogenous variation in the instrument vector comes
only from cross-district variation. Therefore, to provide a clear picture of the exogenous
variation underlying the first-stage regression, we first examine the impact of the instru-
ment vector Zi on the district's share of population with broadband internet access in
2005, DSLi . That is, we begin by estimating the following linear regression:

                                  DSIi = Zi  + Xi  +     i

where Zi is the vector of instruments described in 7 and Xi is the vector of district-level
controls used in the estimation of (23). We refer to the first instrument as "MDF Density
Measure" (number of municipalities in the district without a MDF in a 4200m radius) and
to the second instrument as "Alternative MDF Availability" (number of municipalities in
the district without a MDF in a 4200m radius and without access to an alternative MDF
in a neighboring district in a 4200m radius).
    Table B.1 shows that districts with adverse initial conditions for internet adoption had
a lower share of households with high-speed internet in 2005. Columns (1) reports the
first-stage estimates controlling for the baseline set of district-level controls. We can see

                                             63
that the F statistic of excluded variables remains high in the presence of these controls.
    As discussed in Section 7, equation (23) has multiple endogenous variables since
they include DSL access interacted with occupation cognitive intensity and worker gen-
eration dummies. Table B.2 tests for weak instruments. We obtain uniformly high first-
stage Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistics (Sanderson and Windmeijer, 2016) in all specifi-
cations, indicating that there are sufficiently many strong instruments to instrument the
multiple endogenous variables.
                       Figure B.1: Spatial Variation in the Instrumental Variables




       Note. Panel A illustrates the number of municipalities across districts in Germany that did not have access to
       an MDF within the 4200m radius ("MDF Density Measure"), as described in Section 6.2. Panel B illustrates
       the number of municipalities across districts that did not have their own MDF and did not have access to an
       alternative MDF in a neighboring district "Alternative MDF Availability".


        Table B.1: First-stage regressions ­ Share of households with DSL access in 2005

                                                                          (1)             (2)
                            MDF density measure                        -0.020         -0.018
                                                                        (0.005)        (0.005)
                            Alternative MDF availability                 0.002          -0.001
                                                                        (0.001)        (0.002)
                            Baseline controls                             Yes             No
                            F statistic                                  26.49           43.06
            Note. Sample of 323 districts in West Germany. All regressions are weighted by the district popula-
            tion size in 1999. Baseline controls include the following district variables in 1999: college graduate
            population share, manufacturing employment share, immigrant employment share and workforce age
            composition. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

   Table B.2: First-stage SW F-statistics for estimation of equation (23) in Panel A of Figure 7

            Instrumented Variable                                                     1997      2007       2014
            Young Generation*DSL Access                                               18.74     18.78      19.04
            Old Generation* DSL Access                                                19.04     17.57      20.45
            Young Generation*DSL Access*Cognitive Intensity                           21.95     20.48      19.77
            Old Generation*DSL Access*Cognitive Intensity                             21.31     18.57      22.32
            Note. Sample of 2 cohorts, 120 occupations and 323 districts. Table reports the Sanderson-Windmeijer
            F-statistic for each endogenous regressor when estimating equation (23).




                                                             64
Online Appendix (not for publication)
Appendix 1             Theoretical Analysis
1.1   Microfoundation of the Production Functions in equations (4)-(5)
      of the paper
Consider two firms: high-tech (k = H ) and low-tech (k = L). Assume that the output of
firm k at time t aggregates per-worker output xkt (i ),
                                                        1
                                         Xkt =              xkt (i )skt (i )di,
                                                    0

where skt (i ) is the quantity demanded of workers of type i at time t by firm k.
   The output of workers of type i depends on their skills to perform cognitive and
noncognitive tasks, { aC (i ), a NC (i )}, as well as how intensely each task is used in the
firm's production process:

                                       xkt (i ) = aC (i )  k a NC (i )1-  k ,

where  k denotes the production intensity of firm k on cognitive tasks.
   In our model, technology-skill specificity arises whenever firms are heterogeneous in
terms of task intensity and workers are heterogeneous in terms of their skills bundle.
To see this, suppose that firm H 's technology uses cognitive tasks more intensely than
firm L's technology,  H >  L , and that a worker of type i is able to produce a higher
cognitive-noncognitive task ratio than a worker of type j, aC (i )/ a NC (i ) > aC ( j)/ a NC ( j).
In this case, i has a higher relative output with the cognitive-intensive technology H
than j, x Ht (i )/ x Lt (i ) > x Ht ( j)/ x Lt ( j), and, therefore, type i is more complementary to
the cognitive-intensive technology H than type j.
   To map this setting to the production functions in equations (4)-(5) of the paper,
we assume that high-tech production is more intensive in cognitive tasks than low-tech
production,  H >  L . We also assume that types differ in terms of their skill bundle and,
without loss of generality, impose that high-i types are relatively better in performing
cognitive-intensive tasks.

  1. High-tech technology H uses cognitive tasks more intensely than Low-tech tech-
     nology L:  H >  L .

                          aC (i )     H - L
  2. Define (i )         a NC (i )
                                              and (i )  aC (i )  L a NC (i )1-  L . Assume that high-i
      types have higher cognitive-noncognitive task ratio:  (i ) is increasing in i.

1.2   Extensions
This section discusses the extensions described in Section 5.



                                                            65
1.2.1        Learning-from-others
We relax the assumption that the reference distribution s       ¯ (i ) in the skill investment
problem is exogenous and fixed over time. Instead, we assume that certain skills may be
easier to acquire than others because workers can "learn from others" when such skills
are already abundant in the economy. Formally, we assume that the baseline distribution
¯ (i ) is a geometric average of a fixed distribution ¯ (i ) and the current skill distribution
s
in the economy s (i ) at the time where generation  is born,

                                             ¯ (i ) = s (i ) ¯ (i )1- ,
                                             s                                              [0, 1).

    Note that as  increases it becomes easier for workers to choose skill lotteries that put
more weight in those skill types that are already abundant in the economy. As opposed
to our benchmark case ( = 0), this extension with  > 0 introduces a backward-looking
element to the skill investment problem and complementarities in skill investment deci-
sions across generations.
    In what follows, we reproduce the key steps that change in the proofs in Appendix A.3.
First, we log-linearize the extended version of (A.7). We begin by noting that the station-
ary distribution exist and is
                                                                                                                          1      
                                      s ( i )  ( i )1-  w ( i )  +                                       ( i ) w ( i ) 1-   + 
                       s (i ) =                                               = s(i ) =                                   1                  .
                                    1                                                              1
                                   0 s( j)
                                                  ( j)1- w( j) + dj                               0      (i ) w (i )     1-   +        di

   Then, we obtain that
                            ^
                            s           ^t (i ) - s
                            ~t (i ) =  (s                    ^         ^ t Ii < l t -  q
                                                             ~t (l ) - q
                                                  ^t (l )) + s                         ^ t +  ( i ) Ii  ( l t , l ) .

   Second, replacing the above in the expression inside the parenthesis in (A.5),

                                                             1               (i )  (i ) s (i )                     l                   (i ) s (i )
                                                                 ^
                                                                 ~t (i )
                                                                 s                                    di -             ^
                                                                                                                       ~t (i )
                                                                                                                       s                                   di     =
                                                                            1                                                     l
                                                                           l  (i )  (i ) s (i ) di
                                                         l                                                     0                      (i )s(i )di
                                                                                                                                 0
       1                 (i )  (i ) s (i )                   l                                                                          (i ) s (i )
           ^t (i )
           s          1
                                                  di -                      ^ t Ii < l t -  q
                                                                  ^t (i ) - q
                                                                  s                         ^ t +  ( i ) Ii > l t                 l
                                                                                                                                                                di =
                     l  ( x )  ( x ) s ( x ) dx
   l                                                     0                                                                            ( x )s( x )dx
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                  +  ^                               l                                            (i ) s (i )
                                                                           ^t - 
                                                                     lt +  q                             ^t - q
                                                                                                         q    ^t +  (i )                 l
                                                                                                                                                                  di
                                                                                                 lt                                          ( x )s( x )dx
                                                                                                                                        0

where the last line uses (A.4) annd (A.3).
   Third, as in the proof in Appendix A.3, we can show that the last term inside the
integral is of second order. Thus, replacing the above expression back in (A.5), we obtain
the Kolmogorov-Forward equation for l    ^t in the economy with learning-from-others,

                                                  ^t
                                                  l               ^t +  q
                                                     = -  (1 -  ) l       ^t .
                                                  t                    + 



                                                                            66
   Fourth, since the law of motion for q ^t is the same as in the benchmark model, this
implies that the equilibrium is saddle-path stable where the new  in the economy with
learning-from-others is the positive solution to
                                                                         
                                ((1 - ) - )( +  + ) +                        = 0.
                                                                          + 
   Finally, the optimal lottery in the economy with learning-from-others is
                                                                1
                            ^         ^t (i ) + Ii>l -
                            ~t (i ) = s
                            s                                               ^t + o t ( i ).
                                                                    s(i )di q
                                                            l

   Next, we reproduce the key steps that change in Appendices A.4 and A.7. First, from
the expression for the stationary distribution above, note that the long-run skill supply
                                                   1
elasticity in the learning-from-others economy is 1-   as opposed to simply .
   This implies that the dynamic responses are

                                                                                        
                           1           1   
log(lt ) = -      1+                          (e-t - 1) ( - 1) log( A)
             +                1
                      +  + 1- +
                                     1 -   + 
                                                             
             1               (  - 1)       1    
log(yt ) =      (1 +  ) +                          (1 - e-t ) ( - 1)log( A)
            +              +  +    1     1-+
                                                      1-   + 
                        1             1             -  (1 -  ) -  t
log(qt ) =                                    1+              e     ( - 1) log( A)
              +  +           1        +              (1 -  )
                            1-   + 

where the last line follows from the equation for the new .
   Second, note that the short-run responses for lt and yt are identical than in the bench-
mark model. The long-run responses are larger (smaller) in magnitude for yt (for lt )
in the economy with learning-from-others since the long-run skill supply elasticity is
                        1      1  
larger and thus           1  1-   +  is larger. As for the DCIR, note that  is smaller
                       + + 1- +
                                                                                              1     1   
in the learning-from-others economy. Together with the fact that                                1  1-   +    is
                                                                                           + + 1- +
larger, they imply that the DCIR of both yt and lt is higher in the learning-from-others
economy.
   Third, for qt we have that
                                        1             1
             log(q ) =                       1
                                                        ( - 1) log( A)
                                 +  +
                                                      +
                                            1-   + 
                                  1        1
             log(q0 ) =                                                 ( - 1) log( A)
                                 +  ( +  +             1
                                                    + ++ )
                                      1   
                                     1-   +              1   1 1
                      ^t dt =
                      q                    1
                                                                  ( - 1) log( A).
               0                   +  + 1-             +  +    + 
                                              +



                                                       67
   Then, since  is smaller, the short- and long-run responses are smaller in magnitude
and the DCIR is larger in the economy with learning-from-others.
   Finally, we note that the proofs for the comparative statics in Appendix A.7 with
respect to  and  are unchanged. To see this, it suffices to show that the dynamics
for qt , lt , yt in the economy with learning-from-others are equivalent to those from a
                                                                    1
re-parameterized benchmark economy where  = (1 - ),  = 1-               and  =  + .


1.2.2    Old generations skill investment
We now let a fraction of workers that were present before the shock re-optimize their
skill investment "as if" they were a young generation entering at time t = 0. Formally,
the skill distribution on impact now becomes


                                     s 0 ( i ) = ( 1 -  ) s 0- ( i ) +  s
                                                                        ~0 (i ),

where  is the fraction of workers in the generation present before the shock that can
re-optimize.
   The first thing to note is that this does not change any of the transitional dynamics
given the new initial skill distribution on impact. As such Theorem 1 is unchanged.
However, the initial conditions and the dynamic responses do change. Next, we repro-
duce the key steps that change in Appendix A.4.
   The deviation from the skill distribution on impact from the new stationary distribu-
tion is now

        ^0 (i ) = s
        s         ^0- (i ) +  s ^
                                ~0 (i ) - s
                                          ^0- (i )
                                                                                                 1
                = (1 -  ) s  ^0 (l ) - Ii>l        log( ) +  Ii>l -                                          ^0 +  o ( i )
                                                                                                     s(i )di q
                                            +                                                l

   where the long-run change log( ) is the same as in the benchmark model.
   Following the same steps as in the benchmark proof, this then implies that

                                     1    (i )  (i ) s (i )                       l    (i ) s (i )
                     ^0 =
                   + l                                          ^0 (i )di -
                                                                s                                         ^0 (i )di
                                                                                                          s
                                          1                                            l
                                         l  (i )  (i ) s (i )
                                 l                                            0             (i ) s (i )
                                                                                      0
                                               
                             = - (1 -  )         log( ) + q
                                                          ^0 .
                                               +




                                                         68
   Thus,
                    1^
             ^0 = - l
                       0
                    
                     1                   
                =             log( ) -      log( ) + q
                                                     ^0
                   +   +                +
                     1                                  
                =             log( ) -      log( ) +     ^0
                                                         
                   +   +                +            ++
                         1-      1    
                =            1  +   + 
                                        log( ).
                  1 +  ++  +  

   Finally, using the above together with the expression for log( ) in equations (A.9)-
(A.11), we obtain:


                       1                                          1 -  -t
        log(yt ) =             1 +  + ( - 1)               1-           e                ( - 1)log( A)
                      +                                         1 +  -
                                                                       

                     1         -  1 -  -t
        log(qt ) =       1+             e                  ( - 1) log( A)
                                1 +  -
                                       

                                              1 -  -t
        log(lt ) = -             1+                 e -1                 ( - 1) log( A)
                          +                 1 +  -
                                                   


   Then, mathematically, the dynamic responses in the economy where old generations
can re-optimize their skills are similar to those in the benchmark economy except that
                                           1- 
the function e-t is now multiplied by        - < 1. This immediately implies that: the
                                                  1+    
long-run responses are the same in both economies, the short-run responses of y and
l (of q ) are now larger (smaller) in magnitude, and the DCIR of all variables is now
smaller. Hence, in many ways, this new economy behaves qualitatively similar to an
economy with a lower degree of skill specificity (higher  ), with the exception that long-
run responses are unchanged.

1.2.3    Population growth
We now assume that the size of entering generations is µ as opposed to . This implies
that the population growth rate is µ - . The Kolmogorov-Forward equation describing
the evolution of the skill distribution becomes


                           e (µ-)t s t (i )
                                            = -  e (µ-)t s t (i ) + µ e (µ-)t s
                                                                              ~t (i ).
                                t




                                                      69
   Then, we have that
                                 s t (i )
                                          = - µ s t (i ) + µ s
                                                             ~t (i ).
                                  t
   The remaining elements in the model remain the same. Hence, the economy with
population growth is identical to our benchmark economy except that the convergence
rate  is higher iff µ >  since it is now the positive solution to:

                                                              µ
                              ( - µ)( +  + ) =                   .
                                                              + 

   Then, if µ > , the short- and long-run dynamic responses for yt , lt remain un-
changed, the short-run response of q is smaller in magnitude, and the DCIR of all vari-
ables is lower. The opposite holds when µ < .


Appendix 2           Empirical Analysis
2.1   Cognitive intensity and use of new technologies across occupa-
      tions in Germany
This section analyzes the types of tasks required by cognitive-intensive occupations. Fig-
ure 2.1 reports the correlation between the occupation's intensity in cognitive skills and
the share of individuals in that occupation reporting they intensely perform each of the
listed tasks. The top tasks performed in cognitive-intensive occupations are directly re-
lated to technological innovations recently introduced in the workplace: working with
internet, in particular, and with computers, more generally. On the other extreme, in-
dividuals employed in the least cognitive-intensive occupations tend to perform routine
tasks associated with manufacturing and repairing. The results in Figure 2.1 are con-
sistent with the evidence establishing the heterogeneous impact of new technologies on
different tasks performed by workers ­ e.g., Autor et al. (2003), Spitz-Oener (2006), Autor
and Dorn (2013), and Akerman et al. (2015).

2.2   Sample statistics
This section reports the summary statistics of our baseline sample. We first focus on
the increase in inequality, measured by the standard deviation of log wages, in our
sample. Figure 2.2 compares the overall change in inequality together with the between
district-generation-occupation component, which we measure using the residual log-
wage dispersion from a mincer regression including dummies for the district-generation-
occupation estimated for each year. Between 1997-2012, overall inequality in our sample
increased by about 8.5 log points. Moreover, the between district-generation-occupation
component explains about half of the increase in inequality during this period. In results
available on request, we attest that each of these characteristics alone does not account




                                                70
for the inequality rise.40
   Table 2.1 presents summary statistics underlying the FDZ microdata used in our
empirical analysis. They illustrate the evolution of the number of employees, ages and
log-wage of the baseline generations used in estimation.

Figure 2.1: Cross-occupation correlation between cognitive intensity and performance of different
tasks




          Note. Sample of 85 occupations. The occupation task intensity is the share of individuals in that occupation
          reporting to intensively perform the task in the 2012 Qualification and Working Conditions Survey. The occu-
          pation cognitive-skill intensity is the share of time spent on cognitive-intensive tasks in the BERUFNET dataset
          (2011-2013).




                              Figure 2.2: Aggregate Trends in Log Wage Variance




                   Note. Estimation of the aggregate standard deviation of log wages on the full LIAB sam-
                   ple and the residual dispersion in log wages from a mincer regression including district-
                   occupation-generation dummies. Estimates are changes in dispersion relative to 1999.


  40 We  also attest that the explanatory power of the between district-generation-occupation component is similar to
that of the between establishment component of log-wage variance, which Card et al. (2013) point as the main driver
of the inequality increase in Germany during this period. Notice that this is not mechanical because there are nearly
50 times as many establishments as district-occupation-generation triples in our sample.


                                                                71
                        Table 2.1: Summary Statistics: German Microdata

                                                                      1995         2014
                        Number of observations
                           Born before 1960 ("Old")                 185,751      96,045
                           Born after 1960 ("Young")                251,451      538,590

                        Mean log wage
                           Born before 1960 ("Old")                    4.54         4.42
                           Born after 1960 ("Young")                   4.15         4.54

                        Mean age
                           Born before 1960 ("Old")                   44.86        60.53
                           Born after 1960 ("Young")                  28.22        39.56

                  Note. Sample of male workers in LIAB data, living in West Germany, employed
                  full-time with a positive wage in 120 occupations. Generations as defined in the
                  table.




2.3     Robustness and Additional Results
2.3.1   Cognitive intensity and labor market outcomes across occupations
This section investigates complements the results presented in Section 7.2 of the paper.
    We first report the impact of cognitive-intensity on occupation employment growth
for different time horizons. The estimates in Table 2.2 show that results are qualitatively
similar for 1995-2000 and 1995-2010. We can also see that the estimated coefficients
increase continuously throughout the period of analysis.
    We then investigate the impact of cognitive-intensity on occupation employment
growth with a more flexible specification that allows for different coefficients for dif-
ferent levels of cognitive-intensity. As is clear from Table 2.3, the results in Table 1 of the
paper are driven largely by an increase in employment for all generations in the most
cognitive intensive occupations (above the 60th percentile of cognitive intensity). This
increase is substantially stronger for the young generation. Some evidence of polariza-
tion is also evident for the young generation, as they also disproportionately enter the
least cognitive intensive occupations.
    Table 2.4 investigates the robustness of the estimates of equation (23) reported in
Table 1 of the paper. Panel A of Table 2.4 reports similar results when we include
occupation-level controls for import and export exposure and the growth in the fraction
of migrants in the occupation. Panel B shows that results are also robust to restricting the
sample to native-born German males only. Panel C presents results where the "Young"
generation is defined alternatively as those born after 1965 or 1955. As expected, when
the definition of the young generation is further restricted to include only more recent
cohorts, the coefficient on "Young" is stronger. The opposite happens if we relax the
young definition to include older cohorts. Panel C also shows that results are similar if
the "Young" generation is defined as those aged below 40 in each year (as in Figure 6 of
the paper).


                                                        72
     Table 2.2: Cognitive intensity and labor market outcomes across occupations in Germany

 Dependent variable:        Employment Growth                                          Real Payroll Growth                       Trainee
                           All    Young    Old                                        All     Young     Old                      Growth
                           (1)     (2)     (3)                                        (4)      (5)       (6)                       (7)
 Panel A: Change in 1995-2000
     Cognitive intensity            0.388***      0.650***       0.113***         0.340***       0.616***      0.157***           0.379*
                                     (0.076)       (0.098)        (0.043)          (0.048)        (0.070)       (0.037)           (0.209)
 Panel B: Change in 1995-2005
     Cognitive intensity            0.778***      1.150***       0.290***         0.741***       1.158***      0.404***            0.545
                                     (0.111)       (0.130)        (0.079)          (0.086)        (0.114)       (0.063)           (0.427)
 Panel C: Change in 1995-2010
     Cognitive intensity            1.110***      1.523***       0.454***         1.036***       1.525***      0.539***           0.768*
                                     (0.137)       (0.149)        (0.125)          (0.111)        (0.133)       (0.091)           (0.430)
 Panel D: Change in 1995-2014
     Cognitive intensity            1.488***      1.894***       0.871***         1.535***       2.029***      1.044***          2.121***
                                     (0.225)       (0.234)        (0.229)          (0.227)        (0.238)       (0.223)           (0.385)
Note. Sample of 120 occupations. Each panel reports the estimate for the dependent variable over the indicated time period. Young
cohort defined as all workers born after 1960 and Old cohort as all workers born before 1960. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




Table 2.3: Cognitive intensity and labor market outcomes across occupations in Germany: Per-
centiles specification

 Dependent variable:                  Employment Growth                               Real Payroll Growth                          Trainee
                                    All    Young      Old                           All      Young      Old                        Growth
                                    (1)       (2)     (3)                           (4)        (5)       (6)                          (7)
    Low: below P30                -0.012   0.286** -0.946***                      0.220*    0.590*** -0.875***                    -0.790***
                                  (0.128)  (0.137)  (0.129)                       (0.132)    (0.140)  (0.135)                       (0.178)
    Medium: P30-P60               -0.054    -0.046   0.031                        -0.086     -0.036    -0.014                       -0.112
                                  (0.194)  (0.205)  (0.208)                       (0.195)    (0.208)  (0.202)                       (0.274)
    High: above P60              0.812*** 1.038*** 0.531***                      0 .816*** 1.099*** 0 .592***                      1.052***
                                  (0.156)  (0.166)  (0.016)                       (0.158)    (0.169)  (0.157)                       (0.237)
Note. Sample of 120 occupations. The table reports the estimate for the dependent variable over the time period 1995-2014. Occupations
have been classified into 100 percentiles based on cognitive intensity, and separate coefficients estimated for percentiles below 30, 30-60 and
above 60. Young generation defined as all workers born after 1960 and Old generation as all workers born before 1960. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                  73
Table 2.4: Cognitive intensity and labor market outcomes across occupations in Germany: Ro-
bustness

 Dependent variable:                                                 Employment Growth                               Trainee
                                                          All         Young   Old     Difference                     Growth
                                                          (1)          (2)     (3)        (4)                          (5)
 Panel A: Alternative control set, 1995-2014
   Controls for immigration and trade 1.426***                       1.807***      0.841***        0.966***          2.029***
                                           (0.261)                    (0.279)       (0.252)         (0.376)           (0.457)
 Panel B: Alternative sample definition, 1995-2014
   Native-born Males Only                 1.396*** 1.807***                        0.778***        1.029***          2.194***
                                           (0.226)   (0.235)                       (0.231)         (0.340)            (0.385)
 Panel C: Alternative generation definition, 1995-2014
   Young: Born after 1965                 1.488*** 2.137***                       0.857***         1.280***          2.121***
                                           (0.225)   (0.299)                       (0.246)          (0.387)           (0.385)
   Young: Born after 1955                 1.488*** 1.639***                       0 .967***         0.671*           2.121***
                                           (0.225)   (0.268)                       (0.290)          (0.395)           (0.385)
   Young: Aged Below 40 in each year 1.488*** 1.748***                            0.773***         0.975**           2.121***
                                           (0.225)   (0.294)                       (0.246)          (0.383)           (0.385)
Note. Sample of 120 occupations, sample periods as defined in the table. Columns (1)­(3) report the estimated coefficient on
the occupation's cognitive intensity in equation (23) of the paper. Column (4) reports the difference between the coefficients in
columns (3) and (2). Each row defines a separate robustness exercise. The row "Controls for immigration and trade" includes a set
of baseline controls: growth in occupational exposure to exports during the sample period, growth in occupational exposure to
imports during the sample period, and growth in the fraction of immigrants in the occupation during the sample period. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                74
2.3.2   Dynamic adjustment to broadband internet adoption (Section 7.3)
This section complements the results presented in Section 7.3 of the paper. We first
turn to a more careful investigation of the robustness of the results in Figure 7 in the
paper. Table 2.5 investigates how our baseline set of controls affects estimates. The
three panels of Table 2.5 present estimates for the entire post-shock period of the sample
(1999-2014, Panel A), the period during which DSL was rolled out across German regions
(1999-2007, Panel B), and the period before the shock (1996-1999, Panel C). Each panel
includes the results of our baseline specification, as well as alternative specifications in
which (i) we drop the pre-trend control, and (ii) we augment baseline controls with
district-generation-year fixed effects.
    Consider first the impact of the pretrend control in the second row of each panel. Re-
sults indicate that this control increases the magnitude and the precision of the estimates
coefficients in the period of 1999-2007 and 1999-2014. However, it has the opposite im-
pact on the pre-shock period of 1996-1999. In this pre-shock period, there are marginally
significant negative responses without the pretrend control.
    Turning to the specification including district-generation-year fixed effects, we can see
that results are remarkably similar to our baseline estimates. This is reassuring as this
specification includes a restrictive set of controls that absorb all potential confounding
shocks that affect each district-generation pair in a year. In this case, identification comes
purely from the differential effect of early broadband expansion on occupations with a
higher cognitive intensity. That is, this control set captures any pre-existing variation that
might have resulted in a district receiving broadband access early, including differential
immigration into a district that received DSL or differential aging or birth patterns in the
district over time.
    Table 2.6 investigates the robustness of the baseline estimates in Figure 7 of the paper
to the sample specification. The two panels present estimates for the entire post-shock
period of the sample (1999-2014, Panel A), and the period during which DSL was rolled
out across German regions (1999-2007, Panel B). All specifications include the baseline
set of controls.
    The second row of each panel shows that results are similar if we restrict the sample
to only include workers born in Germany. This suggests that the inclusion of immigrants
in our sample does not drive our baseline results.
    We consider next several alternative definitions of the young generation based on
(i) cohorts groups born after 1955, 1965 or 1970, and (ii) age groups aged below 35, 40
or 45 in each year. For all definitions, the coefficient on the cognitive intensity of the
occupation for young workers is positive and strongly significant, while that for the old
generation is insignificant and close to zero. As before, the coefficient in column (2) is
stronger when we restrict the young generation to cohorts born in more recent years.
Similar patterns arise when we define the young generation based on a lower or higher
age cutoff in each year. This is consistent with our theory since the entering cohorts are
those adjusting their skills in response to the introduction of broadband internet in the
regional labor market.
    The last row of each panel reports estimates when we restrict the sample by excluding
workers employed in establishments belonging to the top 25 percentile of establishment
sizes. This exercise accounts for the likelihood that the largest establishments in Ger-
many acquired DSL earlier through specialized private connections. In this case, we

                                             75
would expect adjustment in these establishments to have occurred earlier, biasing our
results to zero. In line with this intuition, estimated coefficients are stronger than the
baseline for all workers in column (1) and for the young-old gap in column (4). This
indicates that our instrument seems to generate variation in the roll-out of broadband
internet that mostly affected the occupation composition of small establishments across
German districts.
    Table 2.7 investigates the impact of early DSL adoption on investment in cognitive
skills by young workers in the district. Specifically, it reports the estimation of  t in
equation (23) when the outcome is the number of trainees of all ages in an occupation-
district. Our estimates suggest that regions where DSL expansion happened faster also
experienced stronger growth in the number of trainees in more cognitive intensive occu-
pations. This evidence is consistent with our model's prediction that, after the arrival of
a cognitive-intensive innovation, incoming cohorts increase their investment in the skills
used in more cognitive intensive occupations.
    Finally, Figures 2.3 to 2.5 complement and extend the impulse responses shown in
the main text.




                                            76
Table 2.5: Impact of early DSL adoption on more cognitive-intensive occupations: Alternative
control sets

                Dependent variable:                                Employment Growth
                                                        All         Young   Old    Difference
                Control Set                             (1)          (2)     (3)       (4)
                Panel A: 1999-2014
                  Baseline                           0.240***      0.482***        -0.065        0.546**
                                                      (0.085)       (0.154)       (0.193)        (0.287)
                   No Pretrend Control               0.177**       0.292***        -0.026         0.319
                                                      (0.087)       (0.114)       (0.189)        (0.222)
                   District-Year Effects             0.149**       0.475***        -0.035        0.510*
                                                      (0.067)       (0.160)       (0.203)        (0.302)
                Panel B: 1999-2007
                  Baseline                           0.077*        0.223***        -0.138        0.361**
                                                     (0.043)        (0.092)       (0.116)        (0.177)
                   No Pretrend Control                0.015          0.137         -0.200         0.337
                                                     (0.061)        (0.085)       (0.127)        (0.149)
                   District-Year Effects              0.093         0.234**        -0.134        0.368*
                                                     (0.060)        (0.098)       (0.125)        (0.019)
                Panel C: 1996-1999
                  Baseline                            -0.002         0.011         -0.019          0.029
                                                     (0.026)        (0.030)       (0.031)        (0.049)
                   No Pretrend Control               -0.109*        -0.141*        -0.074         -0.068
                                                     (0.065)        (0.077)       (0.084)        (0.061)
                   District-Year Effects              0.012          0.011         -0.022         0.034
                                                     (0.032)        (0.032)       (0.032)        (0.050)
          Note. Sample of 2 cohorts, 120 occupations and 323 districts. Sample periods as defined in the ta-
          ble. Column (1) reports the estimated coefficient on interaction between the occupation cognitive
          intensity and district DSL access in equation (24) for a single generation of working-age employed
          individuals. Columns (2)-(3) report the estimated coefficients on interaction between the occupation
          cognitive intensity, generation dummies and district DSL access in equation (24) for the old and young
          generations. Column (4) reports the difference between the coefficients in columns (3) and (2). Gen-
          erations are the baseline generations with young workers those born after 1960. All regressions are
          weighted by the district population size in 1999 and include a set of baseline district-level controls
          as well as occupation-year and generation-year fixed effects. Each row defines a separate robust-
          ness exercise. "District-Year Effects" are estimated as district-year fixed effects in column (1) and as
          district-year-generation fixed effects in columns (2)-(4). Standard errors clustered at the district-level
          in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                              77
Table 2.6: Impact of early DSL adoption on more cognitive-intensive occupations: Sample selec-
tion

             Dependent variable:                                            Employment Growth
                                                                   All       Young   Old    Difference
             Sample Definition                                     (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)
             Panel A: 1999-2014
               Baseline                                        0.240***       0.482***       -0.065       0.546**
                                                                (0.085)        (0.154)      (0.193)        (0.287)
                 Native-born Males Only                        0.223***       0.446***        0.074       0.372**
                                                                (0.078)        (0.143)      (0.144)        (0.208)
                 Young: born after 1970                                       0.714***       -0.048       0.789**
                                                                               (0.182)      (0.242)        (0.371)
                 Young: born after 1965                                       0.612***       -0.171       0.783***
                                                                               (0.157)      (0.201)        (0.303)
                 Young: born after 1955                                       0.573***       -0.298       0.871**
                                                                               (0.196)      (0.233)        (0.355)
                 Young: Aged < 35 in each year                                0.612***        0.059       0.553***
                                                                               (0.139)      (0.139)        (0.203)
                 Young: Aged < 40 in each year                                0.529***        0.076       0.453**
                                                                               (0.164)      (0.163)        (0.237)
                 Young: Aged < 45 in each year                                0.445***        0.159         0.286
                                                                               (0.170)      (0.198)        (0.266)
                 Small Establishments Only                     0.309***       0.466***       -0.128       0.594**
                                                                (0.083)        (0.140)      (0.183)        (0.286)
             Panel B: 1999-2007
               Baseline                                         0.077*        0.223***       -0.138       0.361**
                                                                (0.043)        (0.092)      (0.116)        (0.177)
                 Native-born Males Only                          0.054         0.145*         0.037         0.108
                                                                (0.045)        (0.092)      (0.105)        (0.171)
                 Young: born after 1970                                       0.449***       -0.070        0.518*
                                                                               (0.120)      (0.191)        (0.289)
                 Young: born after 1965                                       0.298***       -0.168       0.465**
                                                                               (0.092)      (0.118)        (0.183)
                 Young: born after 1955                                       0.203**        -0.155       0.358***
                                                                               (0.087)      (0.115)        (0.167)
                 Young: Aged < 35 in each year                                0.118**         0.095         0.022
                                                                               (0.066)      (0.095)        (0.130)
                 Young: Aged < 40 in each year                                0.195**         0.030         0.165
                                                                               (0.086)      (0.104)        (0.166)
                 Young: Aged < 45 in each year                                0.206***        0.091         0.115
                                                                               (0.090)      (0.111)        (0.174)
                 Small Establishments Only                      0.129*        0.263**        -0.170       0.434**
                                                                (0.070)        (0.103)      (0.120)        (0.181)
  Note. Sample of 2 cohorts, 120 occupations and 323 districts. Sample periods as defined in the table. Column (1) reports
  the estimated coefficient on interaction between the occupation cognitive intensity and district DSL access in equation (24)
  for a single generation of working-age employed individuals. Columns (2)-(3) report the estimated coefficients on interaction
  between the occupation cognitive intensity, generation dummies and district DSL access in equation (24) for the old and young
  generations. Column (4) reports the difference between the coefficients in columns (3) and (2). All regressions are weighted
  by the district population size in 1999 and include a set of baseline district-level controls, pretrend controls, occupation-year
  and generation-year fixed effects. Each row defines a separate sample selection exercise: (i) baseline sample restricted to only
                                                                78 based on year of birth or age cutoff in each year, and (iii)
  Germans ("Native-born"), (ii) different definitions of young workers
  baseline sample restricted to workers employed in establishments below the 75th percentile of all establishment sizes ("Small
  Establishments Only"). Standard errors clustered at the district-level in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Table 2.7: Impact of early DSL adoption on the number of trainees in more cognitive-intensive
occupations

                                  Dependent variable:             Training Growth

                                                                             (1)
                                  Panel A: 1999-2014
                                    Baseline                               0.415*
                                                                           (0.237)
                                  Panel B: 1999-2007
                                    Baseline                                0.305
                                                                           (0.247)
                                  Panel C: 1996-1999
                                    Baseline                                -0.093
                                                                           (0.044)
          Note. Sample of 120 occupations and 323 districts. Sample periods as defined in the table. Table
          reports the estimated coefficient on interaction between the occupation cognitive intensity and district
          DSL access in equation (24) for a single generation of working-age individuals whose employment
          status is a trainee or intern in each year. All regressions are weighted by the district population size
          in 1999 and include a set of baseline district-level controls as well as occupation-year fixed effects.
          Standard errors clustered at the district-level in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                            79
Figure 2.3: Impact of early DSL adoption on employment in more cognitive-intensive occupa-
tions: Old and Young generations




(a) Relative employment response for each genera-                       (b) Cross-generation difference in responses
tion
Note. Estimation of equation (23) in the sample of 2 cohorts, 120 occupations and 323 districts. Dependent variable: log employment.
                          g                                                             young
The left panel reports  t for olf and young generations, and the right panel reports  t       - old
                                                                                                  t . All regressions are weighted by
the district population size in 1999 and include occupation-time and cohort-time fixed-effects. Baseline controls include the following
district variables in 1999: college graduate population share, manufacturing employment share, immigrant employment share, district
age composition, and the dependent variable pretrend growth in 1995-1999. Bars are the associated 90% confidence interval implied by
the standard error clustered at the district level.



Figure 2.4: Impact of early DSL adoption on payroll in more cognitive-intensive occupations: Old
and Young generations




  (a) Relative payroll response for each generation                     (b) Cross-generation difference in responses
Note. Estimation of equation (24) in the sample of 2 cohorts, 120 occupations and 323 districts. Dependent variable: log employment.
                          g                                                             young
The left panel reports  t for olf and young generations, and the right panel reports  t       - old
                                                                                                  t . All regressions are weighted by
the district population size in 1999 and include occupation-time and cohort-time fixed-effects. Baseline controls include the following
district variables in 1999: college graduate population share, manufacturing employment share, immigrant employment share, district
age composition, and the dependent variable pretrend growth in 1995-1999. Bars are the associated 90% confidence interval implied by
the standard error clustered at the district level.




                                                               80
Figure 2.5: Impact of early DSL adoption on more cognitive-intensive occupations: All genera-
tions




(a) Relative employment response for all generations                    (b) Relative payroll response for all generations
Note. Estimation of equation (24) in the sample of 120 occupations and 323 districts for a single generation of working-age employed
individuals. Dependent variable: log employment (left) and log payroll (right). All regressions are weighted by the district population
size in 1999 and include occupation-time fixed-effects. Baseline controls include the following district variables in 1999: college graduate
population share, manufacturing employment share, immigrant employment share, district age composition, and the dependent variable
pre-shock growth in 1995-1999. For each year, the dot is the point estimate of  all
                                                                                 t , and the bar is the associated 90% confidence interval
implied by the standard error clustered at the district level.




                                                                  81
2.4   Occupations composition changes for young and old workers in
      different periods
This section investigate further the changes in cross-generation differences in occupation
composition over time for the United States. We focus on the United States because
it has individual-level data from the U.S. Census containing 2-digit ISCO occupation
information for 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2015. We use this data to select
a sample of males aged 16-64 years old in each year. For each occupation o, we use this
sample to compute the change in the average age of its workers between years t and
t0 ( A¯ o ,t  A¯ o ,t - A
                        ¯ o,t ) and the change in the employment share in the same period
                             0
(eo,t  eo,t - eo,t0 ). We then compute the correlation between  A  ¯ o,t and eo,t across the
nine occupations weighted by their employment share in 1960.
    Table 2.8 shows that, in line with Figure 1, the expanding occupations in recent peri-
ods attracted young individuals, leading to reductions in the average age of its workers.
However, this was not the case in previous periods. Between 1960 and 1990, the correla-
tion between changes in average age and employment share were much weaker. In fact,
this correlation was positive in 1960-1980.

   Table 2.8: Changes in mean age and employment share across occupations, United States


                                       Period           Corr ( A¯ o ,t ,  e o ,t )
                                      2000-2015               -0.53
                                      1990-2010               -0.63
                                      1980-2000               -0.60
                                      1970-1990               -0.03
                                      1960-1980                0.35
                 Note. For each period, the table reports the correlation between  A    ¯ o,t and eo,t
                 across the nine 2-digit ISCO occupations (weighted by their employment share in
                 1960). For each occupation and period,  A  ¯ o,t is the change in the mean age and
                 eo,t is the change in employment share. Sample of males 16-64 years old in the
                 United States.




Appendix 3            Numerical Analysis
This appendix discusses in detail the parameterization of the model. We first present the
theoretical impulse response functions for the relative employment of different worker
generations. Second, we describe the procedure to select the parameters that match the
theoretical and empirical impulse response functions. Finally, we use the parameterized
model to quantitatively evaluate the dynamic adjustment to cognitive-biased technolog-
ical innovations.

3.1   Impulse response functions of relative employment by generation
As a first step to parameterize our theory using the empirical impulse response functions
in Section 7.3 of the paper, we derive the theoretical responses of generation-specific


                                                         82
relative employment. To this end, we consider the same one-time permanent change in
A at t = 0. We define older generations as those born before period t = - x and younger
generations as those born at period t = - x. In period t  0, the relative high-tech
employment of these worker generations are given by
                  1                                         1                   t ( -t) 1
       old       lt s0 (i ) di          young       ~ 0 e-t
                                                    x      lt s0 (i ) di   +   0 e
                                                                                               ~
                                                                                            lt s (i ) did 
      et     =    lt
                                 and   et       =           l                   t  (  - t ) lt
                                                                                                            ,
                 0 s0 (i ) di
                                                    ~0 e-t 0 t s0 (i )di
                                                    x                      +   0 e          0 
                                                                                               ~
                                                                                               s ( i ) did 

where x  ~0  1 - e- x is the population share of the young generation at t = 0.
    For both worker groups, the technology-skill assignment is identical and determined
by the threshold lt . Notice that all workers of the old generations have the pre-shock
skill distribution, s0 (i ). However, the skill distribution of young generations combines
the pre-shock distribution, s0 (i ), and the post-shock lotteries, s   ~ (i ). The overlapping
generation structure of the model implies that the relative share of workers in the young
generation with the pre-shock skill distribution decays at the constant rate .
    We allow the young group to include workers born before the shock (since x 
0). This circumvents the challenge of identifying the cohorts that start adjusting their
skills after the shock, which arises because, in practice, technologies may not be adopted
instantaneously and young workers may still invest on skills after entering the labor
force (in the form of vocational training or on-the-job learning). It is also possible to
allow part of the workers born before the shock to adjust their skills at t = 0. In this
                                                                                        ~0 (i ). This
case, rather than s0 (i ), the initial skill distribution would be a mix of s0 (i ) and s
extension does not alter our main qualitative insights, but reduces the magnitude of the
short-to-long adjustment in the economy.

Relative employment of old generation. We show below that the change in the relative
employment of old generations is

                                          1              
                          old
                     log et                         1-    (1 - e-t ) ( - 1) log A                               (3.1)
                                      +  e H             

where e H is the high-tech employment share at t = 0- .
   Among old generations, the increase in the relative productivity of high-tech produc-
tion induces the reallocation of workers towards high-tech production whenever  > 1.
The expression indicates that this positive effect on relative high-tech employment be-
comes weaker over time. This follows from the expansion of high-i skills among younger
generations, which displaces old workers with marginal skills from high-tech produc-
tion ­ i.e., those with skills i  (l0 , l ). Importantly, expression (3.1) shows that the
magnitude of the increase in relative employment of older generations is decreasing in
the degree of technology-skill specificity (i.e., increasing in  ).

Relative employment of young generation. Turning to the employment response among
young generations, we show below that

                            young          old            1 - e-t
                   log et             log et   +                        ( - 1) log A.                           (3.2)
                                                               ~ 0 )e-t
                                                      1 - (1 - x

                                                        83
    This expression indicates that the evolution of the allocation of young workers has
two components. The first term captures the change in technology-skill assignment
and, since it is the only determinant of the relative employment of old generations, it
can be approximated by  log et     old . The second term captures the change in the skill

investment decision of incoming cohorts. At each point in time, this term is positive as
young workers distort skill investment towards high-i skills that became more valuable
in high-tech production. We can also show that the cross-generation difference grows
shortly after the shock. Importantly, expression (3.1) indicates that the cross-generation
difference in the response of relative employment is decreasing in the skill investment
cost (i.e., it is increasing in ).

Relative payroll for all workers. For completeness, we also re-write the impulse re-
sponse function for relative payroll in Proposition 1:

                                                               -1
                   log yt =   1 +  +      ( - 1)(1 - e-t )          log( A)             (3.3)
                                                                + 
                        
where    +  +           +     (  +  ).

Responses for multiple shocks. We now consider a sequence of unanticipated shocks,
{ log An }n N , happening at periods { t } N . We consider the approximate equilibrium
             =1                           n n =1
dynamics around the final stationary equilibrium.
    For simplicity, we consider the case in which the old group only includes individuals
born before t1 . For any period t > t N , we can sum the impulse response functions in
(3.1) and (3.3) to obtain

                       old     (  - 1) 1                           -t
                  log et                      1-        log A +           ~
                                                                   e  log A             (3.4)
                               +  e H                             

                   -1                     (  - 1)               (  - 1) -  t
       log yt =               1 +  +                 log A -                  ~
                                                                       e  log A         (3.5)
                    +                                             
                       N                            N
where  log A  n                               ~
                        =1  log An and  log A  n=1 e
                                                         tn  log A .
                                                                    n
    These expressions indicate that responses in all variables include a static component
                                                                            N
associated with response at impact to the combination of all shocks, n       =1  log An , and
a dynamic component associated with the weighted average of the shocks discounted by
                                     N     tn  log A .
the time at which they happen, n      =1 e          n
    To derive the cross-generation component, we consider the young generation born
after t N . Relative to the old generation born before the first shock, we have that

        young                      (  - 1)
  log(et                  old
                ) -  log(et   )            (e-t - e-t ) log A
                                                            ~ + (1 - e-t ) log A . (3.6)
                                     
   We again have two components. Since the young generation makes skill investment
decisions after all shocks have happened, there is a static component associated with
the combination of all shocks. However, in this case, the dynamics is driven by two


                                               84
eigenvalues:  and . This arises because young generations are replaced at rate  while
prices change at rate .

3.2   Proof of equations (3.1), (3.2), and (3.6)
Proof of equation (3.1). We first use a first-order approximation to write the log-change
in relative high-tech employment in terms of changes in the high-tech employment share:
                                                   old
                                                  et                     1
                          old
                     log et   = log                old
                                                                                        eold     old
                                                                                         H ,t - e H ,0-
                                                  e0 -         (1 - e H , ) e H ,

                   1
where eold
       H ,t =     lt s0 (i ) di.
   Since                1
                (1- e H , ) e H ,
                                      eold     old
                                       H ,t - e H ,0-     is a second order term, we get the approxima-
tion:
                                    old                        1
                               log et                                        eold     old
                                                                              H ,t - e H ,0-
                                                  (1 - e H,0- )e H,0-
   We have that
                                                           1                  1
                                    eold     old
                                     H ,t - e H ,0- =          s0 (i )di -         s0 (i )di
                                                          lt                 l0-

   By approximating these expressions around l ,

                                    eold     old                              ^
                                     H ,t - e H ,0-  - s0 ( l ) l  log( l ) + lt

                                                    (s0 (l )l )   log(t )
                                                    (s0 (l0- )l0- )   log(t )
                                                    (1 - e H,0- )  log(t )
where the third equality follows from the fact that  (s0 (l )l )  log(t ) is a second order
term, and the last equality follows from normalizing the initial skill distribution to be
uniform (which implies s0 (l0- )l0- = 1 - e H,0- ).
   Combining the two expressions,

                                              old                   1
                                         log et                           log(t )
                                                               e H,0-

   Using the demand expression in equation (2) of the paper,

                                 old               1                1
                            log et                         -           log yt +  log A
                                                 e H,0-             -1




                                                               85
     Using the expression for the evolution of yt in Proposition 1 of the paper,

                            1                                        
               old
          log et                                 -1 -  -              ( - 1)(1 - e-t ) + ( +  )  log A
                          e H,0-      +                              

                                          1                               
                          old
                     log et                                        1-      (1 - e-t ) ( - 1) log A,
                                        e H,0-    +                       
which is identical to (3.1).

Proof of equation (3.2). We first use a first-order approximation to write the log-change
in relative high-tech employment in terms of changes in the high-tech employment share:
                  young                                            young           young
               et             old
                             et           1         e H,t - e H,0-       eold      old
                                                                          H ,t - e H ,0-
          log( young ) - log( old )                                  -
              e0-            e0-      1 - e H ,           e H ,               e H ,
                                               1               young                young
                                    =                         e H,t - eold                old
                                                                       H ,t - e H ,0- - e H ,0-
                                      (1 - e H , ) e H ,
                                               1             young
                                    =                      e H,t - eold
                                                                     H ,t
                                      (1 - e H , ) e H ,
where the last equality follows from the fact that before the shock old and young make
                    young
identical choices, e H,0- = eold
                             H ,0- .
   Using the definition of employment shares for each generation,

                            1                                  1                            t                 1                      1
 young
e H ,t    - eold
             H ,t                                ~ 0 e-t
                                                 x                 s0 (i )di +                  e( -t)            ~ (i )did
                                                                                                                  s            -         s0 (i )di
                              ~ 0 )e-t
                     1 - (1 - x                               lt                        0                    lt                    lt
                            1                           t                 1
                                                            e( -t)              ~ (i ) - s0 (i )) did
                                                                               (s
                              ~ 0 )e-t
                     1 - (1 - x                     0                    lt

     Thus,
          young     old                                                                                  t             1
         et        et              1                 1
log( young ) - log( old )                                                                                    e( -t)         ~ (i ) - s0 (i )) did
                                                                                                                           (s
    e0-            e0-                                 ~ 0 )e-t
                           (1 - e H , ) e H , 1 - (1 - x                                             0                lt
                                                                                                                                         (3.7)
     We now consider the following approximation:
                                 1                                       1
                                      ~ (i ) - s0 (i ))di 
                                     (s                                             ^
                                                                                    ~ (i ) - s
                                                                              s(i )(s        ^0 (i ))di
                                lt                                   l




                                                                   86
                   ^0 (i ) using the expression for the stationary skill distribution
   Then, we derive s

                                                                                            Ii > l -
                                                                                         
                                                ¯(i )(i ) + (0- (i )) +
                                                s                                                 0
                     s0 ( i ) =                                                                        
                                    l0-                                1
                                   0      ¯( j)( j) + dj +
                                          s                           l0-
                                                                            ¯( j)( j) + (0- ( j)) + dj
                                                                            s
                         =
                                                     1                
                     ^0 (i )  - Ii>l -
                     s                                   s( j)dj         log( )
                                                 l                    +
   Using the third part of Theorem 1 of the paper,
                     1                                                       
                          ~ (i ) - s0 (i ))di  e H, (1 - e H, ) q
                         (s                                     ^ +              log( )
                    lt                                                     +
                                                                       ^ +  log(q))
                                               = e H , (1 - e H , )  ( q                                            (3.8)

   We now apply this expression into (3.7):
        young               old                                                 t
       et                  et            
log(    young ) - log(          )                                                   e( -t) ( q
                                                                                             ^ +  log(q)) d
       e0-                  old
                           e0-             ~ 0 )e-t
                                  1 - (1 - x                                0

                                                                                t
                                                                                    e( -t) q
                                                                                           ^0 e- d + (1 - e-t ) log(q)
                                             ~ 0 )e-t
                                    1 - (1 - x                              0
                                                                       
                                                                         (e-t - e-t )q
                                                                                     ^0 + (1 - e-t ) log(q)
                                             ~ 0 )e-t
                                    1 - (1 - x                         -

   Notice that Proposition 1 of the paper implies that
                                                               1
                                             log(q) =            ( - 1)  log A
                                                               
                                                     1                -
                                   log(q0 ) =               1+                       ( - 1)  log A
                                                                      
                                                                            1-
                           ^0 =  log(q0 ) -  log(q) =
                           q                                                   ( - 1)  log A
                                                                             
   Thus,
            young             old
        et                   et               1
 log(       young ) - log(    old
                                  )                     -  t
                                                             (e-t - e-t ) + (1 - e-t ) ( - 1) log A
        e0-                  e0-      1 - ( 1 - ~
                                                x 0 ) e   

                                          1 - e-t
                                                        ( - 1) log A,
                                               ~ 0 )e-t
                                      1 - (1 - x

which is equivalent to (3.2).




                                                                   87
                                                                 ~0 = 1,
Proof of equation (3.6). Equations (3.7)­(3.8) remain valid. For x
                                                              t
                       young
                 log(et                  old
                               ) -  log(et   )                    e( -t N ) ( q
                                                                              ^ +  log(q)) d
                                                          0

where
                                                      N
                                        ^ = e -  t
                                        q            q
                                                     ^t n e  t n .
                                                     n =1
   Thus,
                                                            N
                                            
                                              (e-t - e-t )  q
           young
   log(et                    old
                   ) -  log(et   )                              ^tn etn + (1 - e-t ) log(q)
                                            -              n =1

   Notice that Proposition 1 of the paper implies that
                                                         N
                                               1
                                   log(q) =      ( - 1)   log An
                                                        n =1

                                            1-
                                   ^t n =
                                   q           ( - 1)  log An
                                             
                                        N                        N
   Using the definitions of  log A  n                         ~
                                          =1  log An and  log A  n=1 e
                                                                       tn  log A ,
                                                                                n
the combination of the expressions above imply that

            young                       (  - 1)
       log(et                 old
                    ) -  log(et   )             (e-t - e-t ) log A
                                                                 ~ + (1 - e-t ) log A
                                          

3.3     Parameterization by impulse response matching
We now describe how to parameterize our theory to match the empirical impulse re-
sponse functions in Section 7.3. To this end, we map the H technology in our theory
to the set of production activities performed by cognitive-intensive occupations. We
calibrate our theory in two steps. In the first step, we exogenously specify a subset of
parameters and functions in the theory. We set the discount rate to match an annual
interest rate of 2%,  = 0.02. We calibrate the elasticity of substitution across cognitive
and non-cognitive intensive occupations to  = 3. Finally, for all welfare calculations,
we specify welfare-weights re-rt with r =  +  so that the social discounting of future
generations is identical to the discounting of worker's future utility.
    We also specify functional forms for the productivity of skill types in the two tech-
nologies. We abstract from differences in non-cognitive productivity across skills by
normalizing (i )  1. This implies that, for any given worker generation, employment
and payroll responses are both driven by the degree of technology-skill specificity in the




                                                   88
economy.41 In addition, we assume that  (i ) takes the form of a logistic function:

                                                               e  (i - l )
                                                   (i ) =
                                                             1 + e  (i - l )
where l is the assignment threshold in the initial stationary equilibrium. This speci-
fication is a tractable manner of capturing technology-skill specificity in the economy.
It implies that the equilibrium exists for any  > 0 since the relative productivity is
bounded. Also, by setting the midpoint of the function to l , the parameter  controls the
elasticity of (i ) for the marginal skill types in the initial equilibrium (i.e., i close to l ).
Thus,  specifies the magnitude of technology-skill specificity, 1/ .
    In the second step, we use the estimated responses of Section 7.3 to calibrate (, , ).
In doing so, we select the distribution of innate ability to normalize the initial skill distri-
bution to be uniform: s0 (i )  1.42 We formally present the parameterization procedure
next, along with an analysis of the model fit. For all parameters, we assume that the
shock starts with the roll-out of broadband internet in 2003. We then select parameters
to match the estimates for the period of 2008 to 2014 in which we find statistically sig-
nificant response in the relative payroll and relative employment of cognitive-intensive
occupations.

Generation size:  and x   ~0 . We first set x
                                            ~0 to match the 60% share of young workers in
the national population in 1997. We then select  to match the incline of 25 p.p. in the
share of young workers in population between 1997 and 2014. Specifically, we select x
and  such that
                               ^=         1
                                                 log(0.40/0.15)
                                    2014 - 1997
                                               1
                                        x = - log 0.4.
                                               
   We obtain  = 0.0574. This says that the expected work life of a worker after turning
40 years is 18 further years.

Rate of convergence: . Proposition 1 in the paper implies that it is possible to write the
impulse response function of relative output as

                                              log(yt ) = 0 + 1 e-t

where 0 > 0, 1 < 0, and  > 0.
  We select the parameter  to match the growth in the estimates response of relative
  41 The  function form of (i ) controls how labor earnings respond to changes in the employment composition across
technologies ­ for a discussion, see Adão (2016). Alternative specifications of (i ) can thus be used to match responses
in relative earnings for different worker generations.
  42 In this calibration, we select the distribution of innate ability distribution, s
                                                                                     ¯(i ), to generate a uniform distribution
of skills in the initial equilibrium: s0 (i )  1. In our theory, this normalization is innocuous since it does not affect
changes in the skill distribution for a given change in q conditional on setting  to match the short-run employment
change.




                                                             89
payroll of more cognitive-intensive occupations:
                                            2014                                      2
                      ^ = arg min
                      
                                    
                                                     ^y - 
                                                      t
                                                          ^y
                                                           2007 - 1 e
                                                                      -(t-2007)
                                                                                                                  (4)
                                           t=2008
        y
        ^ are the estimated coefficient reported in Panel B of Figure 7 of the paper.
where    t
    The minimization problem in (4) yields    ^ = 0.135. Figure 3.1 shows the fit of the
calibrated model

Cost of skill investment: . Theorem 1 of the paper implies that

                                                     = ^ -                                                        (5)

where
                                                    2          2             -1
                                            ^             
                             =               +          -          - ( + )        .                               (6)
                                           2              2
   Using expression (3.2), we have that

                          young           old                1 - e-t
                  log et          -  log et   =                            ( - 1) log A.
                                                                  ~ 0 )e-t
                                                         1 - (1 - x

   From Proposition 1 of the paper,
                                                                                          -1
                                                          1 +    - 1
               ( - 1) log( A) =  log(yt )                     +      (1 - e -  t )                                (7)
                                                           +      + 

where  = ( +  ) ( + ) + .
  Combining these two expressions, we get that
            young                                                                                   -1
     log et      -  log et
                         old
                                   1 - e-t                      1 +     -1
                             =                                        +    (1 - e -  t )                 .        (8)
               log yt                   ~ 0 )e-t
                               1 - (1 - x                        +    + 

   Using the expression for  in (5),
        young                                                                                                -1
   log et      -  log et
                       old
                                 1 - e-t                               1 +  -       - 1 -t
                           =                                   ( + )           +1-     e                          .
             log yt                   ~ 0 )e-t
                             1 - (1 - x                                            
                                                                                                                  (9)
   We then define the function:
                                       ^                                                       -1
                              1 - e-t                ^         1 + ^ -      - 1 -^
            F  ( , t )                    ^t
                                                    +                  +1-     e t                  .         (10)
                                   ~ 0 )e-
                          1 - (1 - x                                         ^

   To calibrate , we first our calibrated values of (, , ) to compute  using (6). Our
baseline calibration implies that ^ = 3.484. We then select the parameter  to match the




                                                          90
ratio of the cross-generation employment response and the payroll response:
                                                                                      2
                                        2014      ^ young - 
                                                            ^ old
                      ^ = arg min
                                 
                                                    t
                                                         ^y
                                                              t
                                                                  - F  ( , t )                 (11)
                                       t=2008                 t

where   ^ y are the estimated coefficients reported in Panel B of Figure 7 of the paper, and
          t
^ young - 
            ^ old is the cross-generation employment response obtained with the estimated
  t           t
coefficients reported in Panel A of Figure 7 of the paper.
    The minimization problem in (11) yields      ^ = 0.345. Figure 3.2 shows the fit of the
calibrated model.

Technology-skill specificity:  . The combination of (3.1) and (7) implies that

                                             1 -  (1 - e -  t )
                                                                  
                      log et
                           old     
                                                                  .
                      log yt    e H,0- 1 1 +  +  ( - 1)(1 - e-t )
                                                                  

   Using the expression for  in (5),
                                                                  ( -1)(1-e-t )
                        log et
                             old             1 - (+)+1
                                                                 .                             (12)
                        log yt    e H,0- 1 +  -  + ( -1)(1-e-t )
                                                                         (+)+1

   We then define
                                                            -1           -^t
                                                 1-          ^)+1 (1 - e     )
                                                        ^ (+
                                                        
                    F  ( , t)                                         -1            ^t
                                                                                           .   (13)
                                 e H,0- 1 + ^^ -+                                  -
                                                                  ^ (+
                                                                       ^)+1 (1 - e     )

where (^, ^,^ ) are the calibrated parameters above and e H,0- is the initial share of em-
ployment in cognitive-intensive occupations.
   We select the parameter  to match the ratio of the employment response of old
workers and the payroll response:
                                                                                  2
                                                2014        ^ old
                                                            
                           ^ = arg min
                                        
                                                            
                                                              t
                                                             ^y
                                                                  - F  ( , t)                  (14)
                                               t=2008         t

 ^ y are the estimated coefficients reported in Panel B of Figure 7 of the paper, and ^ old
   t                                                                                    t
are the estimated coefficients reported in Panel A of Figure 7 of the paper.
     The negative point estimates reported in Panel A of Figure 7 of the paper imply that
the minimization problem in (14) yields     ^ < 0. Since the employment response of old
generations is small and nonsignificant, we assume that they are identical to zero, which
yields   ^ = 0. Hence, we calibrate  = 0.01 and evaluate the model predictions under
alternative specifications of this parameter.




                                                       91
                                           Figure 3.1: Calibration of 
Note. Blue dots represent the point estimates reported in Panel B of Figure 7 of the paper. Black solid curve represents the
bet fit line with  = 0.135 obtained from the solution of (4).




                                           Figure 3.2: Calibration of 
                                                   ^ young - 
                                                             ^ old
                                                     t         t
Note. Blue dots represent the point estimates of         ^y          using the estimates reported in Figure 7 of the paper. Black
                                                          t
solid curve corresponds to F  (^ , t) with ^ = 0.354 obtained from the solution of (11).




                                                                     92
3.4   Dynamic responses to cognitive-biased technological innovations
We now present the dynamic responses in our parametrized model. As in Section 4.2 of
the paper, we evaluate a shock to A that leads to an increase in the employment share in
cognitive-intensive occupations from 20% to 50%. Figure 3.3 presents the results.
    Consider first the response at t = 0. Given that our theory abstracts from several
additional sources of dynamics, it would be wrong to interpret the impact adjustment
as happening instantaneously in reality. We view this short-run response as captur-
ing changes over the time window encompassing dynamic forces triggered by other
variables that are likely to move faster than the distribution of skills (e.g., physical cap-
ital). In other words, we prefer to interpret the "length" of the impact adjustment as
related to the time that it takes for such faster moving variables to converge to the new
long-run equilibrium. Results show that there is a substantial increase in the relative
cognitive-intensive output in the short-run. This large response is a consequence of the
large magnitude of the shock. This becomes clear when we take into account that rela-
tive employment almost does not change at impact because of the high technology-skill
specificity (i.e.,   0). The combination of the large increase in relative output and the
small increase in relative employment translates into large changes in lifetime inequality.
    Our results also indicate that the responses in all outcomes change substantially over
time (measured in terms of worker generations, 1/  18yrs). Over the course of the two
generations following the shock, the responses in relative output doubles in magnitude
due to the reallocation of workers across technologies. Such a reallocation is entirely
driven by incoming generations of young workers. This pattern is a consequence of
the change in the skill distribution across generations. The bottom right panel shows
that the initial spike in lifetime inequality induces young workers to invest in high-i
skills allocated to cognitive-intensive occupations. This gives rise to substantial skill
heterogeneity across generations. As young generations replace old generations, the
economy's skill distribution becomes more biased towards high-i types, leading to a
large decline in the present value of the relative wage in cognitive-intensive occupations
(which recedes by more than 30% over the course of two generations).




                                             93
    Figure 3.3: Dynamic responses to a cognitive-biased innovation at t = 0




Note. The figure reports the theoretical impulse response function with a shock calibrated to increase
the employment share in cognitive-intensive occupations from 20% to 50% between stationary equilibria.
Baseline calibration described in Appendix 3.3.




                                                 94
