                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     AGE DISCRIMINATION IN HIRING:
      EVIDENCE FROM AGE-BLIND VS. NON-AGE-BLIND HIRING PROCEDURES

                                          David Neumark

                                       Working Paper 26623
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26623


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2020




I am grateful to Ian Burn for helpful comments, research assistance, and collaboration on many
projects related to age discrimination. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26623.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Age Discrimination in Hiring: Evidence from Age-Blind vs. Non-Age-Blind Hiring Procedures
David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 26623
January 2020
JEL No. J14,J7

                                         ABSTRACT

I study age discrimination in hiring, exploiting a difference between age-revealed and partially
age-blind hiring procedures. Under the first hiring procedure, age is revealed simultaneously
with other applicant information and job offer rates are much lower for older than for younger job
applicants. Under the second hiring procedure, interview selections are based on detailed, age-
blind on-line applications, while subsequent interviews are not age-blind. Older applicants are
not under-selected for interviews, but after in-person interviews when age is revealed, older
applicants still face a much lower job offer rate. This evidence is strongly consistent with age
discrimination in hiring.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
    "Sometimes, not knowing what you're doing allows you to do things you never knew you could do."

                                                   ­ Nell Scovell


I. Introduction

        Economists studying discrimination in hiring increasingly rely on audit or correspondence

studies. Audit studies use actual applicants coached to act alike, and measure discrimination as

differences in job offers; correspondence studies create fake applicants (on paper, or electronically), and

measure discrimination as differences in "callbacks" for job interviews. In both types of studies, group

membership of the applicants is varied randomly, and hence is independent of other applicant

characteristics. These field experiments are generally viewed as the most reliable means of inferring

labor market discrimination (e.g., Fix and Struyk, 1993), although they are, of course, not infallible. 1 For

example, Neumark and Rich (2019) show that a number of field experiments of labor market

discrimination appear to overstate discrimination, owing to an econometric problem first identified by

Heckman and Siegelman (1993). 2

        In contrast to these field experiment studies, non-experimental studies of labor market

discrimination use the often rich sets of control variables available (at least in some data sets) to try to

account for potential productivity differences between groups. This approach has been most commonly

applied to the study of wage discrimination (see Altonji and Blank, 1999), but it has also been applied to

hiring discrimination (e.g., Holzer, 1998). The obvious challenge in using non-experimental data is that

we may not adequately control for differences between groups, hence finding spurious evidence of

discrimination (or, conceivably, spurious evidence of non-discrimination, depending on the

unobservables).

        In this paper, I take a different approach, in the context of age discrimination in hiring. I use non-



1
 For a review of this experimental evidence, see Neumark (2018).
2
 Heckman and Siegelman show that when the groups in question have different variances of the
unobservables, audit/correspondence study methods can give very misleading results. Neumark (2012)
develops a solution to this problem, which is the basis of the analysis in Neumark and Rich (2019).



                                                       1
experimental data ­ stemming from a lawsuit over age-based hiring discrimination for a restaurant chain

that opened locations throughout the country. 3 However, I exploit a difference in hiring procedures that

alters when those responsible for hiring become aware of the age of applicants. Because hiring managers

cannot act on a worker's age until they become aware of it, I use evidence on age differences in outcomes

under the different hiring procedures to identify age discrimination.

        Under the first hiring procedure, age is revealed at the same time as all other information about

the applicant (because everything is done in-person). Under this non-age-blind hiring procedure, job offer

rates for older applicants (aged 40 and over) are substantially lower than for younger applicants (by 68%,

on a baseline job offer rate for younger applicants of 14.1%). Under the second hiring procedure,

selections for interview are made on-line, and are age-blind. Subsequently, those selected are

interviewed. Under this procedure, older applicants are selected for interviews ­ the age-blind hiring

procedure ­ at equal or higher rates to younger applicants. However, after the interview ­ where age is

revealed in the same way as for the paper, in-store applicants ­ the job offer rate is much lower for older

applicants (by 40%, on a baseline job offer rate among interviewees of 30% for younger applicants). The

net result is a lower job offer rate for older applicants (by 46%, on a baseline hiring rate of 10% for

younger applicants). However, the age difference in treatment only occurs at the non-age-blind stage of

the hiring process.

        The comparison of outcomes by age in these two hiring procedures, and in the two stages of the

second procedure, provide clean evidence on age discrimination in hiring. With data from only the first

procedure (paper applications), the evidence could face the same challenge as other evidence based on

standard non-experimental ­ that the age difference could reflect unobservables associated with age. But

this alternative interpretation is contradicted by what happens under the second hiring procedure.

Recruiters do not under-select older applicants when have detailed information related to their

qualifications and experience, but do not have information on applicants' ages; but they do under-select


3
 All results reported in this paper are from reports filed in the case, although I cannot reveal the identities
of those involved. The same confidentiality restrictions preclude me from sharing the data.



                                                       2
once age is revealed at the interview stage. I also provide some corroborating evidence that customer

discrimination at least partly underlies the evidence of age discrimination.

II. Related Prior Research

        The evidence I obtain based on differences in the observability of age to those making hiring

decisions parallels some other key papers on discrimination. Goldin and Rouse (2000) is a non-

experimental study of how the switch to blind auditions for major orchestras affected the selection of

female auditionees. The variation in this study arises from the adoption by orchestras, over time, of blind

auditions where the musician plays behind a screen and other steps are taken to ensure that the musician's

identity is not known when selection decisions are made. The authors find that the selection of females

increased because of blind auditions, suggesting that there was discrimination against women prior to the

adoption of blind auditions. 4 Paralleling the argument in the Introduction, Goldin and Rouse cast their

study as complementary to audit or correspondence studies of discrimination.

        Åslund and Nordströum Skans (2012) also find evidence consistent with anonymization helping

applicants who might experience discrimination. They study anonymized job application procedures in

non-experimental data in Sweden, and find increased interviews and job offers for women, but for ethnic

minorities only increased interviews.

        Two recent experimental studies manipulate the information about applicants, with the

experimental treatment being to anonymize applicants and see if selection for interviews is affected.

Interestingly, these studies sometimes find that anonymization does not increase interviews/hiring of the

group against which discrimination might be thought to occur, which might be interpreted as evidence

against a finding of discrimination.

        Krause et al. (2012) studied economics Ph.D. applicants to a European research institute,

randomizing the anonymization of demographic information before the applications went to the hiring




4
 The use of blind auditions is chosen by the orchestra, and the authors are careful to rule out selection on
using blind auditions as an explanation of their findings.



                                                     3
committee. 5 The key result is that female applicants were more likely to be invited for interviews in the

non-anonymous sample, whereas this advantage was erased in the anonymous sample. Taken literally,

this means that there was discrimination in favor of female candidates in the non-anonymous setting,

which could not occur with anonymous applications. On the other hand, the hiring committee was aware

of the experiment, and this could have motivated them to be non-discriminatory in evaluating the non-

anonymous applications. There was, however, no such pattern regarding non-Western applications.

        A second application of this method, to hiring of minority job candidates in France, found that

minorities fared worse under anonymization, getting a smaller share of interviews (Behaghel et al., 2015).

(The hiring gap also widened, but not as much as the interview gap.) The authors suggest that this

happens because anonymization prevents firms from downweighting, for minority applicants, negative

characteristics of job applicants that are associated with minority group membership. 6 Behaghel et al.

note that the firms that agreed to participate were similar on most observables, except that they hired more

minorities. When they joined the study, then, those that received anonymous applications may have been

unable to continue preferential hiring of minorities. Under this interpretation, extending anonymization to

all employers would have ambiguous effects, depending on the extent to which non-participating

employers engage in discrimination against minorities, and anonymization prevents this.

        Although we generally think of experimental evidence as superior, in these two studies, at least,

experimenter effects may contaminate the results. Thus, it is possible that non-experimental data on

differences in outcomes depending on the information available about applicants could ­ in some

circumstances at least ­ be more reliable.

        Another potential advantage of my evidence relative to experimental studies is that the latter rely

almost exclusively on differences in callback rates (based on correspondence studies, rather than audit

studies). Some past research has found that evidence on callback rates is predictive of discrimination at


5
  After the hiring process was complete, applicants were asked for permission to use their data in the study;
65 percent agreed.
6
  They find evidence consistent with this interpretation, based on ratings of applicants in both treatments
by counselors from the public employment service.



                                                     4
the hiring stage. Studies of ethnic discrimination by the International Labor Organization (ILO),

discussed in Riach and Rich (2002), provide estimates of differences at the selection for interview stage

and the job offer stage, and find that around 90 percent of the discrimination that is detected occurs at the

selection for interview stage. And Neumark (1996) finds similar evidence in an audit study of sex

discrimination that also included a callback stage. However, a recent study of discrimination in France

against North Africans suggests that correspondence study evidence on callback rates may sometimes fail

to detect evidence of discrimination (Cahuc et al., 2019). This conclusion is based on evidence that the

observed callback rate is lower only in the private sector, while discriminatory preferences and beliefs are

similar in the two sectors ­ which the authors interpret as similarly discriminatory hiring rates in both

sectors. 7 The evidence in the current paper circumvents this issue by looking at actual hiring behavior.

        In a combination of experimental and non-experimental methods, Agan and Starr (2018) study

the effects of ban-the-box initiatives that change whether employers are aware of criminal backgrounds,

to identify the effect of information about workers' criminal backgrounds on black-white differences in

callbacks for interviews in a correspondence study. This study finds that restricting information on

criminal background seems to have increased statistical discrimination against blacks. The change in

information from ban-the-box initiatives parallels, in the present paper, the differences in information

available under the alternative hiring procedures.

III. Hiring Procedures

        The company used two different hiring procedures, switching from a paper application process

completed in stores to an on-line application process during the sample period. This generated variation

across restaurants largely based on when they opened (and it is the hiring associated with the restaurant

openings that I study).

        Under one hiring procedure ("paper applications" completed in stores), applicants for

employment submit a paper application to company personnel in person and go through a pre-screening


7
 The authors do not have an independent estimate of discrimination at the hiring stage, but cite other
evidence on similar rates of under-representation of North Africans in the private and public sectors.



                                                      5
interview. This pre-screening interview is based on a quite limited set of questions. Based on the pre-

screening interview, an applicant is or is not forwarded on in the process. If they do advance in the

process, the applicant could then go through a second interview and final interview with a company

manager. There is no data on the interview selection step, but rather just information on one distinct

outcome ­ whether a job was ultimately offered.

        From the point of view of information about age, the key feature of the paper application hiring

procedure is that the age of the applicants is observed early in the process ­ insofar as the screeners can

approximate age based on visual appearance. Because, from the start of the process, the hiring process

was not "age-blind," it is appropriate to treat the application and selection for interview steps as

combined.

        In the second hiring procedure ("electronic applications"), there are two steps. In the first step,

people apply on-line for jobs, proving detailed information on their education, their previous work

experience and history, their availability for work, whether they have reliable transportation, and more.

They also respond to a battery of about 100 questions that are used to provide a quantitative talent

assessment on dimensions that include customer service, engagement, retention, and teamwork. These

questions lead to two numerical scores ­ one based on experience, availability, and flexibility, which by

and large is based on the same pre-screening information used in the paper application process, and a

second based on the battery of talent assessment questions (both on a 1 to 100 scale). They also lead to a

three-category indicator suggesting that the manager can move ahead confidently with the candidate,

move ahead with caution, or that the manager should not consider the candidate unless other options have

been exhausted; this is based primarily on the talent assessment. The data include both of these metrics.

        In the second step, selected applicants are interviewed, in person, and job offer decisions are

made after the interview(s). Importantly, no direct information on age is elicited in the first step. In

contrast, the second step is not "age-blind" because applicants interview in-person with company

managers. I have data on both selection for interviews and whether interviewees were offered a job.

Because the first step of the process is age-blind, and the second is not, it is appropriate to study the two



                                                       6
outcomes separately (although I also look at overall hiring out of the applicant pool to provide a

comparison with the paper applications).

IV. Identifying Discrimination

        If I only had the paper applications with their single outcome based on age and other applicant

characteristics, I would be limited to testing whether there is a difference in job offer rates between older

and younger applicants conditional on controls for these characteristics ­ an approach usually termed the

"residual" approach to testing for labor market discrimination (Oaxaca, 1973). With detailed data on

applicant characteristics the residual approach can of course be informative. However, there is always the

potential objection that a researcher was unable to control for an omitted variable correlated with age that

could explain the age difference in job offer rates.

        This is where the comparison with the outcomes from the two-step process for the electronic

applications is critical. I can run a similar analysis to that for the paper applications ­ asking whether

there is a lower job offer rate to older applicants, conditional on the control variables (which are more

detailed than for the paper applications). But I can also break the process into two steps. In the first step

of this process, armed with detailed information on applicant characteristics, but blind to age, I can test

whether the company under-selects older applicants for interviews. And I can then separately examine

job offers to interviews ­ decisions that are not age blind.

        It turns out that the company does not under-select older applicants for interviews. Rather, older

applicants experience adverse outcomes (fewer job offers) only at the interview stage, when age is

revealed. This evidence from the electronic applications thus substantially undermines any argument

about an omitted variable correlated with age that explains lower job offer rates for older applicants. Put

differently, the differences in outcomes for older vs. younger applicants in the two stages of the hiring

process for electronic applications, in comparison to the difference in outcomes in the single-stage hiring

process for paper applications, provides far more rigorous evidence of age discrimination than can be

gleaned solely from the analysis of job offers by age for the paper applications controlling for detailed

applicant characteristics.



                                                       7
          There are two potential arguments that could be made against the claim that the difference in

outcomes for older vs. younger applicants in the two stages of the process of using electronic applications,

in comparison to what happens with the single-stage process for paper applications, provides rigorous

evidence of age discrimination. First, there could be an omitted variable associated with the interview

that explains the lower job offer rate for older applicants at the second stage for the electronic

applications, which was not revealed or detected in the first stage of the process, but which was revealed

in the single-stage process for the paper applications. However, given the detailed assessment of

qualifications and experience elicited in the first step of the hiring process for the electronic applications,

it is hard to imagine what legitimate, job-related difference is revealed in the interview that could justify

the age difference in job offer rates that occurs at the second stage, despite the absence of under-selection

of older applicants for interviews.

          Second, the difference in hiring procedures arises largely across restaurants, so that identification

mainly comes from differences in hiring procedures across restaurants rather than a change in hiring

procedures for given restaurant locations. 8 Thus, one could potentially be concerned that there are other

differences in hiring procedures across restaurants that could potentially explain the differences in

findings by age (although it is not clear what these would be). However, the company in question had

uniform hiring processes across restaurants. Although hiring decisions were made at the restaurant level,

all hiring managers went through the company's manager-in-training program that covered hiring, and a

training in opening new restaurants, which covered hiring and the company's interview and selection

process. The company used the same paper or electronic application forms across each restaurant, and

company documents and testimony pointed to the same general hiring criteria and processes across paper

application restaurants and electronic application restaurants (aside from the differences I have

described).

          That said, this discussion reveals the near-impossibility of definitively ruling out all alternative



8
    As discussed below, only a handful of restaurants have data using both types of hiring procedures.



                                                        8
non-discriminatory explanations of the evidence. The best one can do, it might be argued, is to explain

why the non-discriminatory explanations are highly implausible.

V. Empirical Approach

          In this section I briefly outline the models I estimate, prior to explaining the data in detail and

presenting the results. For the data from both paper and electronic applications, I estimate linear

probability models for whether applicants were offered a job (OJ). 9 I have an indicator of whether the

applicant was aged 40 or over (Age40P), which makes the applicant eligible for protection under the Age

Discrimination in Employment Act. I have dummy variables for each separate restaurant location (R).

The location controls are potentially important because the age composition of the workforce may differ

across locations, and if hiring rates also differ across locations this could generate a spurious relationship

between job offer rates and age. I have data on numerous characteristics of the applicants ­ with more-

detailed control variables for the electronic applications than the paper applications (I denote these X

without distinguishing between the paper and electronic controls). Among the latter, I also have detailed

assessment scores from the first stage of the electronic application process, before age is revealed. In

addition, for the hiring process for the electronic applications, I have data on both selection for interviews

­ decisions made before age is revealed (SEL) ­ and job offers.

          Thus, I first estimate models for job offers, using data from either the paper or electronic

applications. Letting i index individuals and j restaurant locations, these models take the form:

          OJij =  + OJAge40Pij + Xij + Rj + ij .                                                (1)

          Evidence that OJ < 0 would indicate ­ based on the residual approach to discrimination ­ that

there is age discrimination in hiring. However, I can obtain much more compelling evidence from the

data for the electronic applications.

          Using the additional information for the electronic applications, I estimate similar regressions ­

but for selections for interviews, and for job offers conditional on selection for interviews:



9
    The estimated marginal effects from probit models were nearly identical.



                                                        9
        SELij =  + SELAge40Pij + Xij + Rj + ij                                                 (2)

and

        OJij =  + OJ|SELAge40Pij + Xij + Rj + ij | {SELij = 1} .                               (3)

        Evidence that OJ|SEL < 0 while SEL = 0 would provide much more compelling evidence of age

discrimination in hiring, because information on age is only available at the job offer stage and not the

selection stage.

        There is no reason to expect  in equation (3) to be correlated with Age40P because of the

selection decision (equation (2)), because the selection decision is age-blind. Indeed, consistent with this,

the estimates of SEL in equation (2) are always near zero and generally statistically insignificant. Finally,

I have data on whether the jobs were for "front-of-house" jobs (hosts, bartenders, and servers) or "back-

of-house" jobs (line cooks, prep cooks, and stewards). "Front-of-house" jobs entail customer interaction

and providing services to guests. I use differences for these two types of jobs (denoted FOH and BOH) to

explore the potential role of customer discrimination. I also estimate all three specifications for front-of-

house and back-of-house jobs. Stronger evidence of age discrimination from front-of-house jobs would

suggest that customer discrimination plays a role (or at least perceived customer discrimination on the

part of the employer).

VI. Data

        There are multiple components of the data I use. In this section, I describe each of them in turn

and provide more detail.

Hires

        One data source I use is the employee roster covering employees by location, at new restaurants

that opened during the sample period (2010-2016). The employee roster identifies hires at these locations

around the time of the location opening. I define as hired workers those who were hired at, rehired at, or

transferred to the location of a new restaurant, starting from the time the first hire, rehire, or transfer was

made at a location, and ending a year after the location opening date, hence capturing the hiring that




                                                       10
occurred when a location opened. I focus only on hourly employees, excluding managers. 10

        Of course, I am ultimately interested in whether job applicants are offered jobs, since the job offer

is the decision the employer makes. One potential issue is if there are many individuals included in the

employee roster that I could not match to an application, which would imply that there is missing

applicant data on that person. If this happened a lot, we would have to be concerned that the application

data are not complete. In addition, I need the applicant data to capture applicant characteristics. Thus, I

use the employee roster to assess the completeness of the application data for each restaurant location. I

discarded a small number of locations that have somewhat incomplete application data. After doing this,

there is a small number of individuals in the employee roster but not the application data, whom I discard.

        I use the employee roster for two other purposes. First, as discussed below, I sometimes rely on

the roster for data on the ages of applicants. Second, while for most applicants I have information on

whether a job offer was made, this information is sometimes missing, and if a person shows up on the

employee roster but I do not have information on a job offer, I code them as having been offered a job. 11

Data on applicants

        For each restaurant location, the application data I was provided covers the earliest applications

prior to the restaurant opening through one year after the restaurant opened. (This pertains to both the

electronic and paper applications.)

        Coding age

        I obtain information on ages of applicants from different sources depending on the available data.

But I am able to verify that these sources are very consistent with each other (when data are available

from more than one source). First, dates of birth are available from employees in the employee roster. I

always use this information as definitive when I have it. The applicant data do not contain date of birth.

Date of birth on most applicants was acquired by submitting information on applicants to a company



10
   There are sometimes multiple observations at a location ­ for example, when an employee was a new
hire and then was rehired at the same location. I use the initial hire.
11
   As short-hand, I always refer to the outcome as a "job offer."



                                                     11
called Accurint, which has a proprietary algorithm to identify peoples' dates of birth based on other

information about those people ­ which in the case of the applicant data included name, address, home

phone number and/or cell phone number, and more. 12 If Accurint was able to find the applicant in the

data sources to which they match, Accurint provided us with the date of birth of the best match. The

dates of birth were either a full date of birth (containing a month, day, and year) or a partial date of birth

(missing day or month). Accurint was able to provide at least a partial date of birth for 86.96% of

electronic applicants and 81.09% of paper applicants (Appendix Table A1).

        To check the date of birth results provided by Accurint, I compared the dates of birth Accurint

provided for all employees to the company data. The year matches exactly for 94.17% of cases. (When I

looked at exact birth date, rather than only year, the match rate was still 86.99%.) There is a small

number of larger discrepancies, but these are very infrequent. Based on these results, I am highly

confident in using the date of birth information identified by Accurint. To be clear, however, these

checks were done only for the employee data for which I have a second and presumably reliable reading

of date of birth.

        For the electronic applications, there was also a method to recover an estimate of date of birth for

some applicants for whom Accurint did not provide a date of birth or who did not appear on the employee

roster. In particular, in the on-line application process, applicants were asked and sometimes report their

year of high school graduation. Given that it is very common to graduate high school at or very near age

18, year of high school graduation can convey fairly accurate information on an applicant's age. To

check this, I compared age based on year of high school graduation to age from the employee roster or

from Accurint (when only the latter was available). 13 The match rate on age in years (calculating age as

the year of application minus the year of graduation plus 18) was 99.88%. I therefore used year of high


12
   For the paper applications, to the extent that there are Social Security numbers, these were provided to
Accurint. Email addresses were available for electronic applications. Accurint relies on multiple public
records data sources, such as Department of Motor Vehicle databases, as well as some private information
sources.
13
   There is no equivalent check on the birth dates in the data for paper applications, because year of high
school graduation is not reported often in the paper applications.



                                                      12
school graduation when it was reported but age information was missing from the other sources. 14

Appendix Table A2 shows the source of date of birth information for the electronic and paper

applications, as well as the percentages for which age could not be assigned.

        One other question I can address using the employee roster is whether there is any pattern to the

ages of people that Accurint had difficulty coding. I do this by comparing the age distribution for

employees for whom Accurint returns a date of birth to the age distribution for employees for whom

Accurint does not return a date of birth. As shown in Appendix Figure A1, these distributions look quite

similar (albeit with lower frequency for the latter group). That is, there is no apparent tendency for

Accurint to fail to return dates of birth for young versus old employees.

        I determined the youngest an applicant could be on the day they applied using the dates of birth

from Accurint. For the applicants who were matched to a full date of birth, I know their exact age when

they applied for a position with the company. For the applicants who were not matched to a full date of

birth, I used the information that was provided by Accurint to provide a lower bound on the age of the

applicant. 15 If the date of birth for an applicant was missing the month, December was used for the month

of birth. If the date of birth for an applicant was missing the day of the month they were born, I use the

last day of the month.

        Application outcomes and applicant characteristics

        For the electronic applications, the applicant database from the company includes information on

interviews and job offers, capturing the dates that each applicant was interviewed and extended a job offer

(if they were). There are some people who appear on the employee roster for whom job offer information



14
   This does raise the question of whether the reported year of high school graduation was looked at, or
used as an indicator of age, by hiring managers when selecting applicants to interview at the first step of
the electronic application process, which I have characterized as age-blind. However, deposition
testimony about the hiring process indicated that the applicant's date of high school (or college) would
not be a factor in selecting who to interview. This is borne out by the evidence that older applicants are
not under-selected at this stage of the application process.
15
   When I do not know the exact date of birth, there is a small possibility that an applicant is incorrectly
assigned to the under 40 age group (as opposed to the 40 or over group). However, this misclassification
error creates, if anything, a bias against finding an age difference in job offer rates.



                                                     13
is not recorded, cases that I recode as having received an offer at the same location (since clearly they

were hired). This required matching the names and restaurant locations between the applicant data and

the employee roster ­ matches that are not always perfect because of things like different spelling of

names or shortening of names (e.g., Tim vs. Timothy). 16

         In this hiring process, managers were instructed to move only one application through the system

if an applicant submitted an application for more than one position. Thus, for applicants who submitted

more than one application, I keep the application that went farthest in the hiring process, so that I will not

miss a job offer if it occurred. 17

         For paper applications, I was provided with the paper applications filled out in person, with

identifiers for restaurant location. As noted above, the applicant first fills out a paper application for a

pre-screening interview, with a limited number of questions. I was also provided with some booklets

capturing the interviews and assessments that could follow the pre-screening interview, which include,

most importantly, information on whether a job was offered. The interview assessment results ask open-

ended questions about work experiences, covering topics such as handling stress, teamwork, and customer

service. In principle the candidate is given a score on each of these, but recording of these scores is very

incomplete.

         The applications and the interview booklets were coded to make them machine-readable, working

with an outside vendor (Bluestar) to ensure very high accuracy, including extensive review of the coding

in process. Any data that were difficult to read were indicated as missing or potentially problematic, and



16
   I do this using the "reclink" fuzzy matching algorithm in Stata. The algorithm determines the best
match for each record in one of the files. It computes a score between 0 and 1 (higher match scores
reflect a higher probability that the two records are a match, and 1 indicates a perfect match) and proposes
a match if two records have a match score between 0.6 and 1. Matches are based on the name on the
application and the name of the employee on the roster. Matches were conditional on the employee and
the electronic application originating at the same location (because it seems far less likely that an
applicant and employee record with similar names at different locations are the same person). If the
match between an employee and an application was scored 0.95 or better, it was coded as a match.
17
   If two applications stopped at the same stage (most common when they were both rejected without being
interviewed), I randomly chose one and the other was discarded (using a random number generator), so as
to not count a person's application as rejected more than once.



                                                      14
in my analysis I rely only on data that could be accurately coded without guesswork. Moreover, even if

there is some coding error (and, like with all datasets, this cannot be ruled out) there is no reason to

believe the small number of errors that might have entered the data via this coding are correlated with age

in a way that would bias estimated differences in outcomes with respect to age.

        I use data from the initial paper application as control variables in my analysis of the paper

applications. Those variables I capture and use in my analysis (which include all but a short work history,

which cannot be coded consistently), include, among others: meeting minimum age requirements; legal

work status; whether the person is a current employee of the company; salary expectations; availability of

reliable transportation; record of felony convictions; shift availability; high school diploma; and previous

company experience. (See Appendix Table A3.)

        I did not use the information in the interview booklets to construct controls for the regression

analyses for three reasons. First, there are very few booklets. I was able to match booklets to only about

13% of paper applications. Second, there is a lot of missing information in the booklets. For example,

the boxes for interview scores, both the total score and the individual components, are missing for 66% of

booklets. Likewise, boxes for the assessment results are missing for 26.2% of booklets. Third, it appears

that the booklets for applicants who were given a job offer were provided by the company at a much

higher rate than the booklets for applicants who were not given a job offer. The majority of booklets,

51%, are coded as receiving a job offer, with 49% not coded as receiving a job offer. 18 However, I do

capture job offers from the booklets, when the information is available.

        Given that the interview booklets had job offer information, I had to match the interview booklets

to the paper applications, again using names and location. The fuzzy matching algorithm described above

was used. I coded an applicant as receiving a job offer in any of the following cases: if there was a date

of offer recorded; if the rate of pay was recorded; if the position was accepted; if there was a start date

given; or if there was an orientation date given. Job offers were also coded as having been given if the


18
  In contrast, the percentage of paper applicants hired, for the restaurants for which I use paper applications,
ranges from 4.60% to 17.07%.



                                                      15
name on the application appeared in the employee roster at the same location, using the same matching

procedure as for the electronic applications.

        If the same applicant (same first name, middle name, and last name) submitted more than one

paper application to the same location, only one paper application was kept. Unlike for the electronic

applications, there is no way to select the application that went farthest, so I simply randomly select one

of the applications.

        For the electronic applications, there is a much more-detailed set of control variables available.

These are listed in Appendix Table A3, and include things such as: willingness to be trained in different

jobs, to stay late, to work multiple shifts; prior job experience; availability of transportation; past felony

conviction; and assessment results based on the on-line applications (indicated in Appendix Table A3

under both "three-category ranking" and "numerical score").

Data used in study

        Table 1 lists, for each restaurant location, information on applications, job offers, and other

features of the data, as well as an indication of how I analyze the data from each location (i.e., which type

of analysis). To begin, columns (2) and (3) list the number of electronic and paper applications. Most

locations have exclusively one kind of application process, although in a few cases there is a mix, because

restaurants switched from the paper system to the electronic system during the hiring period for that

location's opening.

        Columns (4)-(9) provide additional information on hires and applicants. In particular, they focus

on two issues. First, do I have application data for individuals that are actually hired? I answer this by

asking whether there are applications for all or almost all people who are listed on the employee roster as

a hire during the relevant time period and at a relevant location. As column (5) shows, the percentage

(share) of hires not represented among the applications is typically in the 6-30% range, although it is

much higher in a few cases, such as Location 7 and Location 15, which have 59.35% and 66.47% hires

missing from applicant data, respectively. Overall, there is application data for 82.51% of the individuals

hired. This is not necessarily a problem, as I can still garner information on job offers for the applicants,



                                                       16
and as long as there is not systematic difference in the ages of those hired for whom there is or is not

application data, no bias is introduced.

        Second, is the set of applications I have potentially biased, or does it provide a reliable sample of

the applicant pool? Columns (7) and (8) point to more problematic issues for a few restaurants. Here, I

report the share of applicants that are hired, and the share of paper applicants that are hired. In general,

the share of applicants that are hired ranges between around 3% and 17%. However, for three locations ­

Location 2, Location 3, and Location 5 ­ this share is much higher, between 41% and 68% (column (8)).

Thus, it appears that for these stores I am missing data on a very large share of applicants who were not

hired. Moreover, for Location 12, although the share of applicants hired overall is not high (8.28%), the

share of paper applicants hired is very high (84.92%). This reflects that I have almost no paper

applications that did not result in a hire; based on the share of applicants that are hired in other locations

(around 2 to 17 percent), I am missing paper applications from many people who were not hired. This

type of missing data is more problematic, because it can arise from the company not retaining

applications from a large share of applicants who were not offered jobs. Given that the company could

have discarded applications from the group it tended not hire, this type of missing data would more

plausibly create bias in estimated age differences if they existed in the hypothetical complete data.

        Table 1 then shows, in columns (9) and (10), the data I use for each location, if I do, and why.

First, all of the restaurants with only electronic applications are included in the analysis of electronic

applications. In addition, for restaurants with both electronic applications and paper applications, I

include the electronic applications from those restaurants in the analysis of electronic applications.

Restaurants for which electronic applications are included in the analysis of electronic applications are

indicated in column (10) with either "EA" or "EA and PA."

        Second, among the restaurants with only paper applications, those that do not have an

inordinately high share of applicants hired (column (9)) are included in the analysis of paper applications.

In addition, for restaurants with a sizable number of paper applications, even if there are also electronic

applications, I include the paper applications from those restaurants in the analysis of paper applications



                                                      17
(with one exception noted below). Restaurants for which all or some applications are included in the

analysis of paper applications are indicated in column (10) with either "PA" or "EA and PA."

        There are some restaurant locations I will explain in more detail. One location is Location 12,

where although the share of applicants hired overall is not high (8.28%), the share of paper applicants

hired is very high (84.92%). I cannot rely on the paper applications for reasons explained above, but I

have no reason to believe the electronic applications are unreliable; hence, as indicated in column (9),

only the electronic applications are used. For location 15, although the share of hires missing from the

applicant data is very high (66.47%), I can study the electronic applicant data that does not have a high

share of hires; hence, column (9) indicates "EA." Finally, for Location 7, although the share of hires

missing from applicant data is very high (59.35%), the share of the applicant pool that are hires (column

(7)) and the share of paper applicant pool that are hires (column (8)) are very low; hence, I use both types

of applications.

VII. Results

Overall job offer rates

        I first report the results for overall job offer rates, for both the paper applications and the

electronic applications. For the paper applications, this is all I can do, because there is only one step in

the hiring process. Afterwards, I delve into the richer and more compelling analyses available for the

electronic applications.

        For the paper applications, recall that the key feature of the hiring process for these application is

that, from the start of the process, the hiring process was not "age-blind." I begin with a specification

(column (1)) that just includes the dummy variable of interest and controls for each restaurant location, to

capture differences in job offer rates across location that could be correlated with age. I then estimate a

specification with richer controls available from the paper applications (column (2)). I use linear

probability models, with standard errors clustered as the restaurant location level.

        As reported in Table 2, for the analysis of applicants who applied using paper applications, in the

specification with restaurant fixed effects only, the estimated difference in the probability that older



                                                       18
applicants receive job offers is -0.091, or 9.1 percentage points lower. The estimated difference in the

probability of job offers for older applicants is strongly statistically significant. Relative to the job offer

rate of 14.1% for younger applicants, the job offer rate to older applicants is lower by 64.6%. When I add

the full set of controls (which is fairly limited for the paper applications), the estimated difference in the

probability that older applicants receive offers is -0.096, or 9.6 percentage points lower, slightly larger

than the estimate without the additional controls. The estimated difference in the probability of job offers

for older applicants is strongly statistically significant. Relative to the job offer rate of 14.1% for younger

applicants, the job offer rate to older applicants is lower by 67.9%.

        The evidence from the paper applications suggests substantial discrimination against older

workers in hiring. One could argue, however, that other qualifications of older vs. younger applicants

explain the age difference in job offer rates ­ and indeed in the paper applications I do not have rich

information on applicant characteristics. In the data on the electronic applications, I have a considerably

richer set of control variables, including metrics from the company's own assessment tool.

        For the analysis of overall job offer rates for the electronic applications, I report results for three

different sets of controls. First, I estimate the age difference in job offer rates controlling only for

restaurant location (with restaurant fixed effects), in column (3). Second, I use the detailed data available

to control for applicants' qualifications, schedule availability, and other factors (column (4)); as noted

earlier (and in the table notes) there are many more controls than for the paper applications. Finally, there

are also direct measures of applicant assessments computed as part of the on-line application process (the

three-category rankings and numerical scores). Given that these are intended to be summary measures of

the evaluation of on-line applications, and the company chooses to employ them, I also estimate

specifications dropping the other controls (except the restaurant fixed effects) and retaining only these

evaluation scores (column (5)).

        For the overall analysis of applicants who applied using on-line, in the specification with

restaurant fixed effects only, the estimated difference in the probability that older applicants receive job

offers is -0.019, or 1.9 percentage points lower. This estimated is statistically significant, although



                                                       19
smaller than the difference in job offer rates for the paper applications. Relative to the job offer rate of

10.0% for younger applicants, the job offer rate to older applicants is lower by 18.7%.

        When I add the full set of controls, the estimated difference in the probability that older

applicants receive job offers becomes larger negative ­ a statistically significant estimate of -0.055, or

5.5 percentage points lower. It is noteworthy that this estimated age difference is larger than the estimate

without controls. This is consistent with older applicants being more qualified than younger applicants, a

result that comes out more strongly when I present evidence on the two stages of the hiring process for

the electronic applications. This same result ­ a negative differential for older applicants ­ is confirmed

in the last column of Table 2. Here I use the company's metrics for evaluating the electronic applications.

The estimated difference in the probability that older applicants receive offers is -0.046, or 4.6

percentage points lower. This estimated is statistically significant, although smaller than the difference in

job offer rates for the paper applications, and again much larger than the estimate without individual-level

controls in the first column. Relative to the job offer rate of 10.0% for younger applicants, the job offer

rate to older applicants is lower by 45.8%.

        The estimated differences in overall job offer rates in columns (2), (4), and (5) of Table 2 ­ the

models with controls, for paper and electronic applications ­ are qualitatively similar. In all cases, the

evidence indicates statistically significantly lower job offer rates to older applicants, conditional on their

qualifications and characteristics. However, for the electronic applications we have the additional

information, implied by the difference in results including and excluding the individual controls, that

older applicants are more qualified, which is why the estimated age difference becomes larger when the

control variables are added. I next turn to the evidence from the two steps of the hiring process for the

electronic applications, which provides additional evidence on this latter point from the first, age-blind

step of the hiring process, and provides more compelling evidence that the overall differences in job offer

rates reflect age discrimination.

Evidence on the two steps of the hiring process for electronic applications

        I now turn to separate analyses of the two steps of the hiring process for the electronic



                                                      20
applications: selection for interviews in the age-blind first step; and job offers after the interview in the

non-age-blind second step. As discussed above, the differences in results for these two stages can provide

more rigorous evidence on age discrimination.

        In Table 3, for the model with restaurant fixed effects only, in the first, age-blind step older

applicants are 0.058 or 5.8 percentage points more likely to be selected for interview. This difference is

statistically significant. In contrast, in the second step, which is not age-blind, older applicants (in this

case, among those selected for interviews), are disfavored. The estimated probability that a job offer is

made to an older interviewed applicant is lower by 0.081, or 8.1 percentage points, which is strongly

statistically significant. Column (2) shows that relative to the selection rate of 30.0% for younger

applicants, the selection rate for older applicants is lower by 27.0%.

        Thus, the implication from columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 is that based on the on-line application

and assessment, older workers are seen as more qualified for the job, on average. Only at the interview

stage, when age is revealed, does the job offer rate shift against older job applicants. This conclusion is

reinforced in the remaining columns that add the alternative sets of control variables.

        Whether I include the full controls or just the assessment measures, the estimates in columns (3)

and (5) indicate that, in the first, age-blind step of the hiring process in which applicants are selected for

interviews, there is no substantive difference in the treatment of older vs. younger applicants. The

estimated age gap is small (-0.004 or 0.011, or minus 0.4 to 1.1 percentage points) and statistically

insignificant.

        In contrast, as we might anticipated given older workers' better qualifications and assessments, in

the models with controls ­ columns (4) and (6) ­ there is now even stronger evidence pointing to age

discrimination in the second, non-age-blind step of the hiring process. In column (4), the estimated

probability that a job offer is made to an older interviewed applicant is lower by 0.128, or 12.8 percentage

points, which is strongly statistically significant. Relative to the job offer rate of 30.0% for younger

applicants, the job offer rate for older applicants is lower by 42.8%. And in column (6), using the

company's assessment scores, the corresponding estimates are very similar, with a job offer rate for older



                                                       21
applicants lower by a strongly statistically significant 11.9 percentage points, or 39.5%.

        The evidence can be summarized as follows. First, older applicants are more qualified in terms of

applicant characteristics and evaluations used by the company in their on-line application system.

Second, older applicants are not under-selected for interviews at the first, age-blind step of the hiring

process for electronic applications, conditional on these characteristics and evaluations. Third, at the

second, non-age-blind step of this process when applicants are interviewed, the largely neutral selection

of older applicants turns into a far lower job offer rate to older applicants. Fourth, in the one-step process

for paper applications, where age is revealed early, there is a similar far lower job-offer rate for older

applicants.

        This set of results is strongly consistent with age discrimination. The only tenable alternative

explanation is that something is revealed at the interviews that marks older applicants as less qualified.

But given that in the on-line system the company is relying on its metrics for evaluating candidates based

on detailed information, it is difficult to imagine what information related to qualifications for the job

could be revealed in the interviews but not the assessments, and hence the far more plausible

interpretation is that age, per se, is the driving factor in reducing job offer rates to older applicants. We

next turn to some potentially corroborating evidence that the evidence reflects age discrimination.

Customer discrimination?

        A standard hypothesis for why employers discriminate against a particular group of workers is

that employers believe that their customers have discriminatory tastes that are prejudicial to that group, so

that hiring from that group would make the business less profitable (Becker, 1971). Jobs at the restaurant

company studied in this paper can be divided into "front-of-house" jobs (hosts, bartenders, and servers)

and "back-of-house" jobs (line cooks, prep cooks, and stewards), with the front-of-house jobs being those

that entail customer interaction and providing services to guests.

        I therefore repeat versions of the analyses reported above, but for front-of-house and back-of-

house jobs separately. The evidence indicates that the age gaps in the job offer rate are larger for front-of-

house than for back-of-house jobs, which is consistent with customer discrimination as at least a partial



                                                      22
source of the evidence reported above. Moreover, this evidence of customer discrimination is in contrast

to the alternative hypothesis that something is revealed in the job interviews that provides a non-

discriminatory explanation of the lower job offer rate to older applicants, as it is not clear why this

unobservable would differ between front-of-house and back-of-house jobs.

        The evidence is reported in Table 4. Results are reported for the last set of specifications for the

paper and electronic applications (using the full controls for the former and the assessment controls for

the latter), but the results are the same using the full controls for the electronic applications. Columns (1)

and (2) provide results for the overall job offer rate for the paper applications ­ the one-step process that

is not age-blind. In this case, the estimated differential for older applicants is -0.101 or 10.1 percentage

points for front-of-house jobs, compared with -0.068 or 6.8 percentage points for back-of-house jobs.

Both estimated differences are statistically significant. The offer rate for older applicants is 75.5% lower

for front-of-house jobs, and 52.3% lower for back-of-house jobs, consistent with customer discrimination

partly driving the age difference in job offer rates.

          Columns (3)-(5) present the evidence for electronic applications for front-of-house jobs. The

estimated age difference in the overall hiring rate is -0.048 (statistically significant). At the first, age-

blind stage of selection for interviews, there is no evidence of lower selection rates for older applicants;

the estimates is positive (0.008), very small, and insignificant. However, there is a large and significant

difference in the direction of discrimination against older applicants in the second, non-age-blind job-

offer stage, with a statistically significant estimate of -0.123.

        For back-of-house jobs, the point estimates reported in columns (6)-(8) are not that different from

the front-of-house estimates. The estimated age difference in the overall hiring rate is -0.041

(statistically significant). At the first, age-blind stage of selection for interviews, there is no evidence of

lower selection rates for older applicants; the estimates is positive (0.020), small, and insignificant. There

is a large and significant difference in the direction of discrimination against older applicants in the

second, non-age-blind job-offer stage, with a statistically significant estimate of -0.112.

        However, while the point estimates for front-of-house and back-of-house jobs are fairly similar,



                                                        23
the relative differences are much larger. For overall job offer rates, the offer rate for older applicants is

55.3% lower for front-of-house jobs, but only 27.7% lower for back-of-house jobs, because the baseline

job offer rate is lower for front-of-house jobs. And the relative difference is also more pronounced for job

offers conditional on selection for interview, again because the baseline (conditional) job offer rate is

lower for front-of-house jobs. The job offer rate for older applicants conditional on selection for

interview is 45.7% lower for front-of-house jobs, but only 28% lower for back-of-house jobs. Thus, the

evidence is consistent with customer age discrimination playing a role in generating the age

discrimination documented in these data.

VIII. Conclusions

        In this paper, I study age discrimination in hiring using non-experimental data, exploiting a

difference in hiring procedures that alters when those responsible for hiring become aware of the age of

applicants. Because hiring managers can of course not act on a worker's age until they become aware of

it, I use the difference in hiring procedures to identify age discrimination. Under the first hiring

procedure, age is revealed at the same time as all other information about the applicant (because

everything is done in-person). Under the second hiring procedure, selections for interview are made on-

line, and are age-blind. Subsequently, those selected are interviewed ­ which is of course not age-blind.

        I find evidence strongly consistent with age discrimination. Under either hiring procedure,

overall job offer rates to older applicants are much lower than to younger applicants. However, under the

hiring procedure with a first age-blind step and a second step that is not age-blind, we learn the following.

First, older applicants are more qualified in terms of applicant characteristics and evaluations used by the

company in their on-line application system. Second, older applicants are not under-selected for

interviews at the first, age-blind step of the hiring process for electronic applications. Third, at the

second, non-age-blind step of this process, when applicants are interviewed in person, the neutral

selection of older applicants turns into a far lower job offer rate to older applicants. Fourth, in the one-

step process for paper applications, where is not age-blind, there is a similar far lower job-offer rate for

older applicants. The most plausible interpretation is that age, per se, is the driving factor in reducing job



                                                      24
offer rates to older applicants.

        There is some corroborating evidence that age discrimination explains the findings. In particular,

the age differences in job offer rates that I estimate are larger for front-of-house jobs that involve

customer service and interaction than for back-of-house jobs that do not. This evidence suggests the

customer discrimination (or at least the company's perception of customers' preferences) at least partly

underlies the evidence of age discrimination that I find.

        Finally, there may be a more general conclusion we can draw from this evidence regarding hiring

procedures that can reduce discrimination. The evidence can be interpreted as showing that hiring

procedures that elicit detailed information on job applicants without revealing membership in groups that

may experience discrimination can in fact eliminate discriminatory outcomes. It may not be realistic to

expect employers to forego interviews completely, relying on hiring procedures that are completely blind

to demographic or other characteristics of workers. But for some, perhaps lower-skilled jobs this might

be more realistic. (And it might be possible in unusual cases, such as the orchestra auditions studied by

Goldin and Rouse (2000).) More generally, it is certainly possible to push hiring procedures blind to age,

race, sex, etc., further along in the hiring process ­ as illustrated by the studies by Krause et al. (2012),

Åslund and Nordströum Skans (2012), Behaghel et al. (2015), and Agan and Starr (2018). The evidence I

find of discrimination that surfaces at the stage of face-to-face interviews should motivate the

development of hiring procedures that downweight the importance of these interviews, or that make

interviews more neutral in their evaluations of job candidates.

        On the other hand, in some of these studies (Krause et al., 2012; Behaghel et al., 2015), women or

minorities fared worse when applications were anonymized. One explanation for this kind of evidence is

that anonymization impeded affirmative action efforts to hire more women or minorities. Conversely, the

Goldin and Rouse (2000) study may have found that anonymization helped women because orchestras

were not engaged in affirmative action. I suspect that anonymization helps older applicants in the data

studied in the present paper, and would more generally, because employers do not engage in affirmative

action with respect to older workers. Indeed, Executive Order 11246 (amended), which is generally



                                                       25
viewed as providing the legal basis for affirmative action in employment in the United States, refers to

"race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or national origin" 19 ­ but not to age.




19
     See https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/regs/statutes/eo11246.htm.



                                                       26
                                              References

Agan, Amanda, and Sonja Starr. 2018. "Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination: A
Field Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, pp. 191-235.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. "Race and Gender in the Labor Market." In Ashenfelter
and Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Part C, pp. 3143-259. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Åslund, Olof, and Oskar Nordströum Skans. 2012. "Do Anonymous Job Application Procedures Level the
Playing Field?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 65, pp. 82-107.
Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, Second Edition. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Behaghel, Luc, Bruno Crépon, and Thomas Le Barbanchon. 2015. "Unintended Effects of Anonymous
Resumes." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 7, pp. 1-27.
Cahuc, Pierre, Stéphane Carcillo, Andreea Minea, and Marie-Anne Valfort. 2019. "When Correspondence
Studies Fail to Detect Hiring Discrimination." IZA Discussion Paper No. 12653.
Fix, Michael, and Raymond Struyk. 1993. Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of
Discrimination in America. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse. 2000. "Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of "Blind" Auditions on
Female Musicians." American Economic Review, Vol. 90, pp. 715-41.
Heckman, James, and Peter Siegelman. 1993. "The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their Methods and
Findings." In Fix and Struyk, eds., Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in
America, pp. 187-258. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
Holzer, Harry J. 1998. "Why Do Small Establishments Hire Fewer Blacks Than Large Ones?" Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 33, pp. 896-914.
Krause, Annabelle, Ulf Rinne, and Klaus F. Zimmermann. 2012. "Anonymous Job Applications of Fresh
Ph.D. Economists." Economics Letters, Vol. 117, pp. 441-4.
Neumark, David. 2018. "Experimental Research on Labor Market Discrimination." Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 56, pp. 799-866
Neumark, David. 2012. "Detecting Evidence of Discrimination in Audit and Correspondence Studies."
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 47, pp. 1128-57.
Neumark, David. 1996. "Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 111, pp. 915-41.
Neumark, David, and Judith Rich. 2019. "Do Field Experiments on Labor and Housing Markets
Overstate Discrimination? A Re-Examination of the Evidence." ILR Review, Vol. 72, pp. 223-52.
Oaxaca, Roland. 1973. "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets." International
Economic Review, Vol. 13, pp. 693-709.
Riach, Peter A., and Judith Rich. 2002. "Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market Place." The
Economic Journal, Vol. 112, pp. F480-518.
                         Table 1: Treatment of Restaurants Locations and Paper and Electronic Applications from Restaurants in Analysis
                                                   Share of hires                    Share of         Share of paper       Analysis:
                Electronic      Paper      Total    missing from    Share paper    applicant pool   applicant pool that   hiring out of
 Location       applicants    applicants   hires   applicant data   applications   that are hires        are hires         applicants                      Comments
   (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)                (8)                (9)                           (10)
    1              392          1179        184        9.78%          75.05%          10.57%              13.31%           EA and PA
    2               0            329        189       29.10%          100.00%         40.73%              40.73%                          High % of paper applicants hired, suggests many
                                                                                                                                                    paper applications missing
     3              0            212       177        18.08%         100.00%          68.40%             68.40%                           High % of paper applicants hired, suggests many
                                                                                                                                                    paper applications missing
     4              0           2531       151        5.96%          100.00%          5.61%              5.61%                PA
     5              0           314        177        22.60%         100.00%          43.63%             43.63%                           High % of paper applicants hired, suggests many
                                                                                                                                                    paper applications missing
     6            386           1071       190        22.63%         73.51%           10.09%             11.48%           EA and PA
     7            849           891        214        59.35%         51.21%           5.00%              4.60%            EA and PA
     8            157           854        156        19.87%         84.47%           12.36%             13.93%           EA and PA
     9             0            2763       174        13.22%         100.00%          5.47%              5.47%               PA
     10            0            943        194        17.01%         100.00%          17.07%             17.07%              PA
     11           1290          1337       191        28.80%         50.89%           5.18%              5.83%            EA and PA
     12           1564          126        167        16.17%          7.46%           8.28%              84.92%              EA           High % of paper applicants hired, suggests many
                                                                                                                                                    paper applications missing
     13           3376            0        166        6.02%            0.00%           4.62%               N/A                EA
     14           3409            0        154        13.07%           0.00%           3.93%               N/A                EA
     15           1158            8        170        66.47%           0.69%           4.89%             100.00%              EA          High % of paper applicants hired, suggests many
                                                                                                                                                    paper applications missing

                                                                                                                                            EA only, excluding the 8 paper applications
      16          4385            6         181       7.73%           0.14%           3.80%              16.67%               EA            EA only, excluding the 6 paper applications
      17          2641            0         237       7.59%           0.00%           8.29%                N/A                EA
      18          2345            1         231       12.99%          0.04%           8.57%              100.00%              EA            EA only, excluding the 1 paper applications
      19          3327            0         189       12.17%          0.00%           4.99%                N/A                EA
      20          3597            3         204       13.73%          0.08%           4.89%               0.00%               EA            EA only, excluding the 3 paper applications
      21          4839            0         265       8.30%           0.00%           5.02%                N/A                EA
      22          1642            0         250       20.00%          0.00%           12.18%               N/A                EA
      23          3240            0         207       13.53%          0.00%           5.52%                N/A                EA
      24          1346            0         183       13.66%          0.00%           11.74%               N/A                EA
      25          3352            0         201       6.47%           0.00%           5.61%                N/A                EA
      26         10387            0         182       7.73%           0.00%           1.62%                N/A                EA
      27          4740            0         216       7.41%           0.00%           4.22%                N/A                EA
      28          5258            0         163       16.56%          0.00%           2.59%                N/A                EA
      29          1064            0         213       28.64%          0.00%           14.29%               N/A                EA
      30          1985            0         181       23.76%          0.00%           6.95%                N/A                EA
      31          5896            0         202       10.89%          0.00%           3.05%                N/A                EA
      32          1382            0         194       17.53%          0.00%           11.58%               N/A                EA
      33          2985            0         198       13.13%          0.00%           5.76%                N/A                EA
      34          1620            10        198       14.65%          0.61%           10.37%             50.00%               EA           EA only, excluding the 10 paper applications
      35          1193            0         177       9.60%           0.00%           13.41%               N/A                EA
All locations    79,805         12,578     6,726      17.49%          13.62%          6.01%              12.00%
Table 2: Estimated Differences in Probabilities of Job Offers to Applicants Aged 40 and Over, Paper and Electronic Applications, Linear
                                                            Probability Models
                                      Paper applications                                    Electronic applications
                                                                                                                      Assessment
                             Restaurant                                                                              categories and
                              controls              Full controls       Restaurant controls      Full controls           scores
                                  (1)                     (2)                    (3)                   (4)                  (5)
Age 40 or over                  -.091                   -.096                  -.019                 -.055                -.046
                                (.020)                  (.017)                 (.007)               (.007)               (.007)

  Baseline job offer rate             14.1%                     14.1%                    10.0%                     10.0%                     10.0%
  for those under age 40
  Percent difference                 -64.6%                    -67.9%                   -18.7%                    -55.4%                    -45.8%
  relative to baseline rate
  for under age 40, age
  40 or over
  Sample size                         8,485                     8,485                   47,667                    47,667                    47,667
  % of sample size age                22.1%                     22.1%                    13.4%                     13.4%                     13.4%
  40 and over
Estimates are from linear probability models. Of the 12,578 total paper applications, only one application per applicant per location is kept. After
removing duplicate applications, the number of paper application is 11,377. I also excluded applications from locations not used in the analyses of
paper applications. I further restrict the sample to only applications where I have information on date of birth. Of the total 79,805 electronic
applications, only one application per applicant is kept per location. This reduces the number of applications to 51,800. From the 51,800
applications, only applicants where I have information on date of birth are used. The first row of table reports the estimated coefficient, and below
it the standard error of the coefficient estimate, clustered at the restaurant level. The table also reports the baseline job offer (or selection) rate and
the implied percent difference associated with age 40 or over. All models include dummy variables for restaurants and an intercept. For the paper
applications, models in the "Full Controls" column also include the following control variables: felony; high school diploma; legal right to work;
whether age is over 18; previous company experience; and dummy variables for missing data. For the electronic applications, models in the "Full
Controls" column also include the following control variables: assessment; the assessment categories (dummy variables) and scores (1-100); legal
right to work; transportation; age over 21 (separately for bartender and non-bartender applicants); felony; educational degree level and type; type
and amount of restaurant experience; training information (willingness to trained as trainer); whether seeking full-time or part-time work; shift
availability; previous company experience; and dummy variables for missing data. Among the potential control variables, only those missing for
fewer than 25% of observations are used in the analysis. See Appendix Table A3 for details of the controls used.
     Table 3: Estimated Differences in Probabilities of Selection for Interviews and Job Offers in Two Steps of Hiring Process for
                            Applicants Aged 40 and Over, Electronic Applications, Linear Probability Models
                                                                                                         Assessment categories and
                                         Restaurant controls                    Full controls                      scores
                                                     Job offers for                     Job offers for                  Job offers for
                                 Selection for those selected for     Selection for     those selected Selection for    those selected
                                   interview           interview       interview        for interview   interview       for interview
                                       (1)                   (2)            (3)                 (4)         (5)                (6)
Age 40 or over                        .058                 -.081          -.004               -.128        .011              -.119
                                     (.013)               (.016)         (.010)              (.014)       (.011)            (.014)
Baseline job offer/selection         33.4%                30.0%          33.4%               30.0%        33.4%             30.0%
rate for those under age 40
Percent difference relative to       17.3%               -27.0%          -1.2%              -42.8%         3.2%            -39.5%
baseline rate for under age
40, age 40 or over
Sample size                          47,667              16,322          47,667             16,322        47,667           16,322
% of sample size age 40 and          13.4%                15.5%          13.4%               15.5%        13.4%             15.5%
over
Notes to Table 2 (in reference to the electronic applications) apply.
         Table 4: Estimated Differences in Probabilities of Job Offers and Selections for Interviews for Applicants Aged 40 and Over, Paper and
                       Electronic Applications, Front-of-House and Back-of-House Jobs, Linear Probability Models, Full Controls
                       Paper Applications,
                         Full Controls                                 Electronic Applications, Assessment Categories and Score Controls
                            Overall                                Front-of-house                                              Back-of-house
                                                Overall job     Selection for     Job offers for those    Overall job      Selection for     Job offers for those
                       Front-of-   Back-of-       offers,        interview,      selected for interview,    offers,         interview,     selected for interview,
                        house       house     front-of-house   front-of-house        front-of-house      back-of-house back-of-house           back-of-house
                           (1)        (2)            (3)             (4)                     (5)                (6)             (7)                    (8)
Age 40 or over           -.101      -.068          -.048            .008                   -.123              -.041            .020                  -.112
                        (.025)      (.010)        (.007)           (.014)                 (.017)             (.009)           (.011)                (.017)

Baseline job            13.4%       13.0%         8.7%             32.3%                26.9%                14.9%            37.5%                 39.8%
offer/selection rate
for those under age
40
Percent difference      -75.5%     -52.3%        -55.3%            2.6%                 -45.7%              -27.7%             5.2%                -28.0%
relative to baseline
rate for under age
40, age 40 or over
Sample size             6,289       3,069        36,162           36,162                11,894               11,505           11,505                4,428
% of sample size        18.9%       28.4%        10.6%            10.6%                 12.3%                22.0%            22.0%                 24.0%
age 40 and over
Notes to Table 2 apply. All models include dummy variables for restaurants and an intercept.
               Appendix Table A1: Success Rate of Accurint Finding Ages of Applicants
                                         Electronic applications               Paper applications
  Total applications                             51,800                              10,388
                                                 [100%]                              [100%]
  Number of applications                         45,043                               8,424
  Accurint found date of birth                  [86.96%]                            [81.09%]
  Number of applications
                                                  6,757                               1,963
  Accurint did not find date of
                                                [13.04%]                            [18.90%]
  birth
Note: Accurint was credited with finding an age if they reported the year of birth for an applicant. The
first number in each cell is the number of applicants. The share of total applications is reported below.



                   Appendix Table A2: Source of Age Data by Application Type
                                                     Number of             Share of
    a. Electronic applications                      applications         applications
    Total number of electronic applications           51,800              100.00%

    Number of applications where age was found                47,667                 92.02%
       Age found using employee roster
       (primary)                                               4,111
       Age found using Accurint (secondary)                   41,508
       Age found using year of HS graduation
       (tertiary)                                             2,048
    Number of applications where age was not
    found                                                     4,133                   7.98%

                                                            Number of                Share of
    b. Paper applications                                  applications            applications
    Total number of paper applications for
    restaurants included in the analysis                      10,388                 100.00%

    Number of applications where age was found                 8,485                   90.56%
        Age found using employee roster
        (primary)                                               981
        Age found using Accurint (secondary)                   7,504
    Number of applications where age was not
    found                                                      1,903                    9.44%
   Note: If an application could be matched to the employee, the age was determined using the
   reported date of birth in the employee roster. If the applicant did not appear in the employee
   roster, the date of birth reported by Accurint was used to determine the age. For electronic
   applicants who reported a high school year of graduation and whose age was not identified
   using the employee roster or Accurint, the year of high school graduation was used to estimate
   the age. All ages are determined on the date the applicant applied. Applications with no
   recorded date of application are excluded.
                             Appendix Table A3: List of Controls in Regression Analyses
                                                                      Control in the paper    Control in electronic
                      Variable                          Coding         application analysis   application analysis
Are you over the age of 18?                             Yes/No                 Yes                     No
Are you seeking part time or full time work?          Categorical                                     Yes
Are you willing to be cross-trained?                    Yes/No                                        Yes
Are you willing to stay late in an emergency?           Yes/No                                        Yes
Are you willing to work both a lunch and dinner         Yes/No                                        Yes
shift in the same day?
Are you willing to work both part time and full         Yes/No                                        Yes
time?
"Pre-screen" assessment percentile                      Numeric                                       Yes
"Pre-screen" assessment categories                   Red, Yellow,                                     Yes
                                                         Green
Do you have a high school diploma?                      Yes/No                 Yes                    Yes
Do you have experience as a certified trainer?          Yes/No                                        Yes
Do you have legal right to work                         Yes/No                 Yes                    Yes
Do you have previous full service restaurant            Yes/No                                        Yes
experience as a cook/chef?
Do you have previous full service restaurant            Yes/No                                        Yes
experience as a food-server/bartender?
Do you have previous full service restaurant            Yes/No                                        Yes
experience as a host/service assistant?
Do you have previous full service restaurant            Yes/No                                        Yes
experience in other kitchen functions?
Do you have previous full service restaurant            Yes/No                                        Yes
experience serving wine/beer/alcohol?
Do you have reliable transportation?                    Yes/No                                        Yes
Have you ever been convicted of a felony?               Yes/No                 Yes                    Yes
Have you ever been employed at a company                Yes/No                 Yes                    Yes
restaurant?
How many years if experience do you have in full      Categorical                                     Yes
service restaurant?
If applying for server or bartender are you legal to    Yes/No                                        Yes
serve alcohol?
Is your schedule flexible so you can attend             Yes/No                                        Yes
training?
Location                                              Categorical              Yes                    Yes
Position applying for                                 Categorical              Yes                    Yes
Talent assessment score                                 Numeric                                       Yes
What is your highest level of education               Categorical                                     Yes
What is your highest level of restaurant              Categorical                                     Yes
experience?
What shifts can you work Friday?                      Categorical                                     Yes
What shifts can you work Monday?                      Categorical                                     Yes
What shifts can you work Saturday?                    Categorical                                     Yes
What shifts can you work Sunday?                      Categorical                                     Yes
What shifts can you work Thursday?                    Categorical                                     Yes
What shifts can you work Tuesday?                     Categorical                                     Yes
What shifts can you work Wednesday?                   Categorical                                     Yes
Willing to work holidays?                               Yes/No                                        Yes
   Appendix Figure A1: Distribution of Employee Age on Employee Roster by
                 Whether Accurint Returned a Date of Birth




Note: There are 6,726 employees on the employee roster. For the 5,100 employees for
whom I am able to match to an application in the sample of applications used in the
analyses, I calculate the age of employees rounded to the nearest year.
