                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         PRECAUTIONARY SAVING IN A FINANCIALLY-CONSTRAINED FIRM

                                       Andrew B. Abel
                                       Stavros Panageas

                                     Working Paper 26628
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26628


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We are grateful to Neng Wang for helpful discussions and to seminar and conference participants
at London Business School, Michigan Ross, NBER Summer Institute 2018, Penn Macro Lunch,
Swiss Finance Institute-EPFL, UCLA. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andrew B. Abel and Stavros Panageas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Precautionary Saving in a Financially-Constrained Firm
Andrew B. Abel and Stavros Panageas
NBER Working Paper No. 26628
January 2020
JEL No. E2,E21,G3,G35

                                           ABSTRACT

For a firm that cannot raise external funds, cash on hand serves as precautionary saving. We
derive a closed-form expression for the target level of cash on hand in the presence of persistent
cash flows. Contrary to conventional wisdom, a mean-preserving increase in the volatility of cash
flow can decrease this target. Over the set of admissible parameter values the average impact of
volatility on the target is zero. Endogenous selection, reflecting termination of firms that run out
of cash, leads to a positive average impact of volatility on the target level of cash, consistent with
empirical findings.


Andrew B. Abel
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2315 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
abel@wharton.upenn.edu

Stavros Panageas
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
stavros.panageas@anderson.ucla.edu
       How much cash should a financially-constrained firm hold to enable it to survive a period
of negative cash flows? How does that level of cash depend on the variability of net cash
flows from operations? These questions were first addressed by Miller and Orr (1966) who
analyzed the cash management problem of a firm that faces stochastic cash flows.1                     This
classic contribution derived a simple closed-form expression that shows that the optimal
average level of cash holdings is an increasing function of the variability of exogenous cash
flows from operations. In the half century since Miller and Orr, models of the precautionary
demand for cash by firms have become more sophisticated, and are often solved numerically
rather than analytically.       Most analyses support the original Miller-Orr finding that an
increase in the volatility of exogenous cash flows will increase optimal cash holdings.                  In
their review of the dynamic corporate finance literature, Strebulaev and Whited (2011)
explain "The central intuition behind the results in this figure is that any model feature that
raises the probability of needing external finance in the future also raises the shadow value
of cash and thus optimal cash levels....Both variance and highly serially correlated shocks
increase the probability of needing external funds for investment, so average cash balances
are increasing in both of these parameters." (pp. 105-107)
       The conventional finding that precautionary cash holding is an increasing function of the
volatility of cash flow was initially derived in a model in which exogenous cash flows from
operations are serially uncorrelated. However, as we show in this paper, if exogenous cash
flows are positively serially correlated, the optimal level of cash holding can be a decreasing
function of the volatility of exogenous cash flows from operations.                To demonstrate this
result, we model cash flows from operations as a two-state Markov process in continuous
time, with regimes of positive cash flows (Regime H ) alternating with regimes of negative
cash flows (Regime L) at random times governed by Poisson arrivals. Negative cash flows
could arise from wage payments, costs of materials, or fixed costs of operation, that together
exceed revenues in Regime L.
       Our focus in this paper is on a financially-constrained firm for which it is costly to raise
external funds.      To put the financial constraint in its starkest form, we assume that it is
prohibitively costly to raise external funds so cash flow from operations and any interest
on cash held by the firm are the only sources of cash.             The role of cash is to function as
precautionary saving that enables the firm to make payments required when it is in Regime
   1
    Miller and Orr did not focus on avoiding termination during a period of negative cash flow. They
focussed on minimizing costly transactions between cash and other assets offering a higher rate of return in
the face of stochastic inflows and outflows of cash.



                                                     1
L facing negative cash flow. If the firm holds zero cash at any time when it is in Regime
L, it is forced to terminate because it cannot make the payments required in Regime L.
The cost of termination is that the shareholders lose the continuation value of the firm
associated with future cash flows.2 Termination resulting from complete depletion of cash
holdings while in Regime L is the costly stochastic event that motivates the firm to hold
cash. However, shareholders do not accumulate cash in the firm without bound because their
rate of time preference exceeds the rate of return on cash, which provides an incentive for
the firm to pay dividends to shareholders. The optimal payout policy­equivalently optimal
cash management­reflects the tension between the incentive to retain cash in the firm as a
precaution to avoid termination and the incentive to pay out cash as dividends to impatient
shareholders.
       Our specification of the firm and its decision problem is parsimonious. It consists only
of an exogenous two-state Markov process for cash flow, the rate of time preference of
shareholders, and the rate of return on cash, which is set to zero beginning in Section 4.
The only decision that the firm makes is the payout decision, specifically, how much cash to
pay out as dividends and how much to retain within the firm as cash on hand. The optimal
payout policy is to pay zero dividends whenever cash flow is negative or whenever cash flow
is positive and cash on hand is less than an optimally determined value X  . Thus, in Regime
L, the firm draws down its cash on hand to make required payments, and in Regime H , the
firm accumulates cash until cash on hand reaches X  . When the stock of accumulated cash
in Regime H reaches X  , the firm begins to pay dividends at a rate equal to its net cash
flow from operations, thereby maintaining cash on hand constant and equal to X  .3 The
decision problem of the firm is simply to determine the optimal value of the target level X  .
       The parsimony of the model is designed to focus on the precautionary motive for holding
cash and to facilitate derivation of a closed-form solution for X  .                 After deriving that
                                                      
solution, we use it analyze the impact on X of various parameters of the model.                       Most
notable is the analysis of the impact of cash flow volatility on X  . In particular, we analyze
a mean-preserving increase in the variance of the unconditional distribution of the Markov
process for cash flow by increasing the absolute values of the cash flows in both regimes;
that is, we increase the value of cash flow when it is positive (Regime H ) and decrease its
value when it is negative (Regime L). Unlike conventional wisdom, which is that a mean-
   2
     For simplicity, we assume that the firm has zero salvage value when it terminates.
   3
     If the firm earns interest at rate r on cash, then its total cash flow and optimal dividends in Regime H
will be rX  + cash f low f rom operations when X = X  . If r = 0, total cash flow is simply cash flow from
operations.


                                                     2
preserving spread increases the level of precautionary cash holdings, we find that the optimal
level of cash holding is not monotonic in volatility. Moreover, we find that there is a critical
value of volatility such that optimal X  is positive for volatility below the critical value and
is zero for volatility above the critical value.         That is, contrary to conventional wisdom,
comparing volatilities on either side of the critical value, the higher values of volatility are
associated with lower values of X  .
       A mean-preserving spread of the distribution of exogenous cash flows hastens the time
when a firm with a given amount of current cash on hand will run out of cash if it remains
in Regime L. The hastening of termination would seem to increase the optimal level of X  .
However, the mean-preserving spread on cash flow makes each dollar of cash less effective at
avoiding termination and thus can reduce the optimal value of X  . Cash on hand allows the
firm to "buy time" in Regime L while waiting for a Poisson arrival of Regime H . Each dollar
                 1
of cash buys    |L |
                       units of time, where L < 0 is the cash flow in Regime L, so L is the rate
at which cash is depleted in Regime L. By increasing L , a mean-preserving spread on the
distribution of cash flow reduces the efficacy of each dollar of cash as a precaution against
termination. As we show analytically, this reduction in the efficacy of cash as a precaution
can outweigh the hastening of termination; in that case, a mean-preserving spread in the
distribution of cash flow will reduce X  .
       In our framework with persistent cash flows, the arrival of Regime L means that cash
flows in the immediate future will be negative and will remain negative until the next arrival
of Regime H . A mean-preserving spread that reduces L , equivalently, increases L , not
only reduces cash flow at the instant when Regime L arrives, but it reduces the expected
cash flow as long as the firm remains in Regime L. It is this reduction in expected future
cash flow, which is a consequence of the persistence of regimes, that reduces the efficacy of
cash as a precaution against termination.
       The main focus of this paper is on the optimal value of X  , but in the process of deriving
the optimal value of X  , we develop an expression for the value of the firm when its level of
cash on hand equals the target level X  . In the absence of financial constraints, the value
of the firm for risk-neutral shareholders would simply be the value of cash on hand plus the
conditional expected present value of the stream of cash flows over the infinite future.4 But
with the financial constraints that we impose, the firm will eventually encounter a sufficiently
   4
    We specify the stochastic process for exogenous cash flow so that the conditional expected present value
of the stream of cash flows over the infinite future is always positive, even in Regime L, so the firm would
never choose to terminate.



                                                     3
long Regime L that it runs out of cash and is forced to terminate. The value of the firm
excludes all cash flows after the stochastic termination date. Nevertheless, the value of the
firm can be calculated as the expected present value of "distorted" cash flows over the infinite
future, where the distortion takes a simple form in this two-state world. The distorted cash
flows are simply equal to the actual cash flows multiplied by the marginal value of cash on
hand evaluated with cash on hand equal to X  . We show that the marginal value of cash
on hand equals one in Regime H and equals a simple ratio of parameters, greater than one,
in Regime L.    Therefore, the expected present value of the stream of distorted cash flow
places a greater weight on negative cash flows than on positive cash flows, and this change in
weighting appropriately reduces the expected present value of the cash flows by just enough
to account for the inevitable termination of the firm.
   We derive an expression for X  that holds globally in the admissible region of parameter
space. Analyzing this expression in the neighborhood of parameter space where the marginal
value of cash on hand is close to one reveals some helpful insights. We show that in this
neighborhood, the optimal value of X  is approximately equal to the expected present value
of the value of the firm holding cash X  when the next Regime L arrives. By choosing to
hold cash X  , the shareholders forego current dividends of X  to preserve the option for the
firm to continue operation when the next Regime L arrives. As we show, a mean-preserving
spread on the unconditional distribution of exogenous cash flows reduces the value of the firm
in Regime L, and hence reduces the optimal value of X  . Thus, in this neighborhood, the
greater volatility unambiguously reduces X  , which is contrary to the conventional result.
   The optimal target level of cash, X  , is a non-monotonic function of mean-preserving
increases in the volatility of cash flow. The only reason for the firm to hold cash, rather than
pay dividends to impatient shareholders, is to allow the firm to survive for at least a while
during an episode of negative cash flow in Regime L. There are two distinct cases in which
this incentive to hold cash is so small that X  is close to zero. In one case, which holds
for sufficiently small volatility, the cash flow in Regime L is close enough to the positive
mean that it is almost zero. In this case, even a tiny amount of cash will allow the firm to
survive for an arbitrarily long period of time, so X  is close to zero. In the other case, which
holds for sufficiently large volatility, the cash flow in Regime L is so far below the positive
unconditional mean that in Regime L the conditional expected present value of cash flows
from operations over the firm's remaining lifetime, plus the value of X  , is negative. In this
case, the firm will want to terminate as soon as Regime L arrives, so there is no incentive to
hold cash, and X  = 0. For intermediate values of volatility of cash flow between these two

                                               4
distinct cases, the optimal target level of cash is positive. Thus, as volatility increases in
a mean-preserving way from low values, to intermediate values, to high values, the optimal
target level of cash starts at zero, increases to positive values, and then falls to zero. That
is, X  is a non-monotonic function of the unconditional variance for a given unconditional
mean of cash flows. The (local) impact of a mean-preserving increase in the volatility of
                              
cash flows can be written as X , which is the partial derivative of X  with respect to the
unconditional coefficient of variation , holding constant the unconditional mean of cash flow.
The non-monotonicity of X  in the volatility  implies that X
                                                             is positive for some values of
 and negative for some values of . Remarkably, however, since X  is zero both for very low
                                                                                   B    
values of , say   A , and for very high values of , say   B , the integral         A
                                                                                       X d = 0.
Thus, the average (local) impact of  on X  is zero, if  is uniformly distributed across firms
for a given unconditional mean of cash flows.
   Endogenous terminations reduce the population of high-volatility firms more rapidly than
the population of low-volatilty firms of the same age. Thus, if  is uniformly distributed across
firms at the time of birth in Regime H with zero cash on hand, heterogeneous endogenous
                                                                         
terminations tilt the population toward low-volatility firms, for which X > 0. Thus, the
                                  
cross-sectional average value of X is positive, consistent with empirical findings. This ex-
planation suggests caution in interpreting a positive coefficient on volatility in regressions of
cash on volatility. Even though our model can be consistent with such a positive coefficient,
as just described, our comparative statics results show that for any given firm, a sufficiently
large increase in volatility will reduce, rather than increase, the optimal target level of cash.
   Throughout this paper, we focus on the level of precautionary saving measured in dollars.
Specifically, X  is measured in dollars. However, precautionary saving can alternatively be
measured in units of time. Specifically, how long will a precautionary holding of X  dollars
of cash enable a firm to survive a continuous episode in Regime L, when cash flows out
                                                                   X
of the firm at rate -L > 0 ? The answer to this question is        -L
                                                                      .   Remarkably, we show
that this alternative measure of precautionary saving is, in our numerical illustration, a
monotonically decreasing function of the coefficent of variation, . This finding is notable
                                                             X
for two reasons. First, the monotonic relationship between   -L
                                                                  and  stands in sharp contrast
                               
to the relationship between X and , which is necessarily non-monotonic over the range from
                                                                            X
A to B . Second, the finding that precautionary saving measured by          -L
                                                                                 is a decreasing
function of  is the opposite of the conventional wisdom that precautionary saving is an
increasing function of volatility.



                                                5
   Brief review of the literature
   The original analysis of business precautionary demand for cash by Miller and Orr (1966)
was conducted in a model in which cash flows are serially independent. The serial indepen-
dence facilitated the derivation of a simple closed-form solution for the optimal target level
of cash, X  , in our notation.       In addition, the serial independence allowed for the unam-
                        
biguous finding that X is an increasing function of the volatility of cash flows. Since that
original contribution, the literature has introduced various additional features of the firm's
problem, such as taxation, capital investment, opportunities for the costly issuance of debt
and equity, and serial correlation of cash flows.      Bolton et al. (2011) examine investment
and cash holdings in a firm facing serially uncorrelated shocks.       Their brief discussion of
a mean-preserving spread is limited to describing the concavity of the value function and
does not address the impact on the optimal level of cash holdings. Also in the framework
of serially uncorrelated shocks, Hugonnier et al. (2014) examine optimal cash holdings and
the bottom figure in Panel B of their Figure 6 shows that the payout thresholds of cash (the
analogues of our X  ) are monotonically increasing in volatility.
   Some existing studies in the literature include serial correlation. With a notable excep-
tion discussed in the next paragraph, these papers conclude that optimal cash holdings are
an increasing function of cash flow volatility. For instance, the review of dynamic corporate
finance by Strebulaev and Whited cited above allows for positive serial correlation of cash
flow and concludes that optimal cash holding is an increasing function of volatility.      The
analysis in that review is a slightly simplified form of the model in Riddick and Whited
(2009), which also finds a positive association of optimal cash holding and cash flow volatil-
ity in a framework with positively serially correlated cash flow. The upper right panel of
Figure 2 in Riddick and Whited shows that the ratio of the stock of cash to assets is an
increasing function of volatility.
   D´
    ecamps et al. (2016) models cash flow shocks as the sum of temporary and permanent
shocks, unlike our model, which features a persistent but stationary cash flow process. Their
paper shows that an increase in the volatility of the temporary component increases the op-
timal cash balance. An increase in the volatility of the permanent component also increases
optimal cash holding if the permanent and temporary components are negatively correlated.
Both of these findings are consistent with the literature discussed above. However, D´
                                                                                     ecamps
et al. (2016) observes that if the temporary and permanent shocks are sufficiently positively
correlated, then optimal cash holdings could fall when the volatility of the permanent shock



                                                  6
increases. This observation is based on numerical calculations.5
       A key feature of our model is that the target level of cash on hand is a non-monotonic
function of the volatility of cash flow. Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019) also find that the target
level of cash on hand is non-monotonic in volatility (see Figure 1 in that paper). However, this
non-monotonicity is a consequence of the agency costs in a dynamic contracting framework.
When these agency costs are arbitrarily small, the target level of cash is monotonically
increasing in volatility, as in conventional result.
       Opler et al. (1999) find empirically that firms in industries with higher volalitilty of cash
flow tend to hold larger amounts of cash. However, Han and Qiu (2007) refine this empiri-
cal finding by emphasizing the distinction between firms that are financially constrained and
firms that not financially constrained.         They present a model in which firms with higher
volatility of cash flow hold higher amounts of cash if and only if they are financially con-
strained; for firms that are not financially constrained, there is no relationship between
cash flow volatility and holdings of cash. Their empirical analysis confirms these different
relationships for constrained and unconstrained firms. These findings suggest that the find-
ing of a positive relationship between volatility and cash on hand is evidence of financial
constraints. However, our analysis of precautionary cash holdings in the presence of a hard
financial constraint shows that the higher cash flow volatility can lead to either a higher or
lower optimal level of cash on hand. Indeed the relationship between cash flow volatility
and cash on hand is non-monotonic.
       Relative to the literature described above, our paper makes three major contributions.
First, we derive a closed-form solution for optimal cash holdings, which, to our knowledge,
is the first such closed-form solution in the presence of persistent shocks to cash flow. This
closed-form solution facilitates the analytic description and interpretation of the behavior of
optimal cash holding. Second, we show analytically that an increase in cash flow volatility
can lead to a decrease in optimal cash holdings.             This finding is counter to the conven-
tional result. Our analytic result provides an intuitive explanation. Third, we show that
endogenous selection arising from heterogeneous survival probabilities of firms can rational-
ize a positive cross-sectional average impact of volatility on optimal cash holdings, consistent
with empirical findings. To our knowledge, this selection mechanism does not appear in the
   5
     The formal mathematical analysis in D´  ecamps et al. (2016) merely concludes that the sign of the re-
lationship between cash flow volatility and optimal cash holdings is necessarily positive if the permanent
and temporary components of cash flow are negatively correlated; D´ ecamps et al. (2016) concludes that the
sign could be positive or negative if the permanent and temporary components of cash flow are positively
correlated.


                                                    7
existing literature.


1          The Firm's Decision Problem
Consider a firm that operates in continuous time and has an exogenous stochastic stream of
net cash flow from operations t at time t. The cash flow t evolves according to a two-state
Markov regime-switching process. Specifically, in Regime H , cash flow is t = H > 0, and
in Regime L, cash flow is t = L < 0. The negative cash flows in Regime L can arise from
unavoidable costs, such as the costs of maintaining a fixed capital stock, paying wages, or
making purchases from suppliers, that exceed revenues.
         The transitions between Regimes H and L are Poisson events with possibly different
arrival intensities. When t = H , cash flow remains equal to H until the regime switches
(from H to L) and  changes to L . The instantaneous probability of switching to Regime
L from Regime H is µL > 0, and the instantaneous probability of switching to Regime H
from Regime L is µH > 0.
         Shareholders discount future cash flows at rate  > 0.

                                                                    µH  µL
Definition 1 Define the roundtrip discount factor                   +µH +µL
                                                                              < 1.

         The roundtrip discount factor  is the expected present value, discounted at rate , of
one dollar at future time t , which is the first time that the firm returns to its current regime
after leaving the current regime.6

Definition 2 Define the myopic value of a regime as the expected present value of operating
profit t over the remaining duration of the current regime. The myopic value of Regime H
          H                                                   L
is H  +    µL
              > 0 and the myopic value of Regime L is L  +     µH
                                                                  < 0.7

         Even though shareholders have rational expectations that extend indefinitely far into the
future, these myopic values have an important role in characterizing many features of the
firm's decision problem. For now, the myopic values and the roundtrip discount factor help
provide simple expressions for the conditional expectations of the present value of potential
     6
    Suppose that Regime j prevails at time 0, continues to prevail until t1 > 0, when the other
                                                                                          
regime (-j ) arrives;  the next arrival of Regime j is at t > t1 .         Then   E e-t      =
   (-j ) -(+µ(-j ) )t1  (j ) -(+µ(j ) )(t -t1 )        µ(j ) µ(-j )   µH µL
 0
    µ   e               µ e
                         t1
                                               dt dt =
                                                 1                  =
                                                         +µ(j ) +µ(-j )
                                                                            .
                                                                          +µH +µL
     7
   The myopic value of the firm in a Regime H that prevails from time 0 to a random date t1 > 0 is H
      t                         -t1                 µL         H                     L
= E 0 1 H e-t dt = H E 1-e            = H    1
                                               1 - + µL
                                                           = +  µL
                                                                   . Similarly, L = + µH
                                                                                          .


                                                     8
operating profits over the infinite future, ignoring the fact that the firm will eventually be
forced to terminate in some Regime L when it runs out of cash. Specifically,8
                   
                                                 1              µH
           E          s e-(s-t) ds|t = L      =             L +      H                                  (1a)
               t                                1-              + µH
                   
                                                 1              µL
           E          s e-(s-t) ds|t = H      =             H
                                                             +     L
                                                                     L .                                (1b)
               t                                1-             +µ

       To ensure the expected present value of cash flows is always positive, even conditioning
on t = L < 0 as in equation (1a), we assume that
                      µH
           -L <          H
                           H < H ,                                                                       (2)
                      +µ
which implies that the myopic value of the losses in a Regime L is smaller than the myopic
value of positive cash flow in a Regime H .9              This condition implies that, in the absence
of any financial constraints, the continuation value of the firm would always be positive.
Therefore, the firm would never choose to terminate unless it is forced to do so.
       The only decision facing the firm is the payout decision, that is, how much cash to retain
and how much to distribute to shareholders as dividends. The firm holds a stock of cash
on hand, Xt  0, and earns an interest rate 0  r <  on this cash.10 Cash on hand enables
the firm to pay cash outflows, -L > 0, required in Regime L. To sharpen the financial
constraint, we assume that the shareholders of the firm cannot inject any new funds into
the firm to make these required payments. Therefore, any required cash payments must be
paid from Xt .         If Xt = 0 and t < 0, then the firm fails to make required payments and
hence immediately and permanently terminates with zero salvage value.
       The shareholders of the firm are risk neutral. Their objective is to maximize the expected
present value of dividends received from the firm, discounted at rate .                     The assumption
that shareholders cannot inject any additional funds into the firm implies that dividends
cannot be negative. In principle, dividends can be paid as a finite flow per unit of time or
                                                  H                         H                      L
   8
       E   t
             s e-(s-t) ds|t   = L =   t
                                           L e-(+µ )(s-t) ds +   t
                                                                    µH e-(+µ )tH dtH   tH
                                                                                            H e-(+µ )(s-t) ds
                                                  H                
                                                 µ
+ E        t
             s e-(s-t) ds|t    = L = L + +         µH
                                                      H + E      t
                                                                    s e-(s-t) ds|t =   L
                                                                                       , which is the con-
ditional expectation in equation (1a). A similar derivation leads to the conditional expectation in equation
(1b).
   9
     The first inequality in equation (2) can be expressed in terms of L and H as  + µL L + µH H > 0.
  10
     One rationale for  > r is that the firm is subject to an exogenous catastrophic shock that terminates
the firm. If this shock is a Poisson shock with arrival intensity  > 0, then the effective discount rate of
shareholders is  =  +  , where  is the pure rate of time preference. In this case, if r is a riskless rate
equal to the pure rate of time preference,  , then  exceeds r. An alternative rationale given by Bolton,
Chen, and Wang (2011) is based on agency costs associated with free cash flow.

                                                      9
as lump sums at discretely-spaced points of time. However, a firm that has been in Regime
H at some point in the past, and has followed an optimal payout policy since that time, will
never find it optimal to pay a lump-sum dividend at the current time. We will call such a
firm an "ongoing firm" and confine attention to ongoing firms in this paper.11
       The equality of sources and uses of funds for an ongoing firm is given by

          t + Dt = rXt + t ,
         X                                                                                              (3)

where the sources of funds are the interest receipts on cash, rXt , and the net cash flow from
operations, t ; the uses of funds are to accumulate cash at rate X   t and to pay dividends at
rate Dt  0.
       Let
                         
         V t  Et            Ds e-(s-t) ds                                                               (4)
                     t

be the conditional expected present value of the flow of dividends from time t until the
endogenous time   t when the firm runs out of cash while facing a negative cash flow from
operations. Thus,  is the time at which the firm is forced to terminate because it cannot
make required payments when t < 0. Formally,

           min {s  t : Xs = 0 and s < 0} .                                                              (5)

Because the firm cannot borrow, nor raise additional funds by issuing equity or paying
negative dividends, it must terminate at time  .
       Let V H (Xt ) and V L (Xt ) be the maximized expected present values, in Regimes H and
L, respectively, of the flows of dividends from time t until the termination time  .                   The
Hamilton-Jacoby-Bellman (HJB) equation during Regime H is

         V H = D + rX + H - D VX
                               H
                                 + µL V L - V H ,                                                       (6)

which along with the complementary slackness condition
              H
             VX - 1 D = 0,                                                                              (7)

implies

         V H = rX + H VX
                       H
                         + µL V L - V H .                                                               (8)
  11
    A firm that does not have a history of optimal payout (and thus is not an ongoing firm, as defined here)
may find itself in a position in which it has so much cash on hand that it is optimal to pay an immediate
one-time lump-sum dividend.

                                                    10
Similarly, during Regime L, the HJB equation is
                    L
      V L = rX + L VX + µH V H - V L .                                                    (9)

The term on the left hand side of equation (8) is the required return on V H per unit of
time and the two terms on the right hand side of this equation comprise the expected return
                                                                                  H
per unit of time. The first term on the right hand side of equation (8), rXt + H VX , is
the product of the net inflow of cash before dividends and the marginal valuation of cash on
       H
hand, VX . The second term on the right hand side of equation (8) is the change in the firm's
value if the regime switches to L from H , multiplied by µL , the instantaneous probability
of such a switch. The interpretation of the HJB equation in Regime L in equation (9) is
symmetric.
   The ODEs in equations (8) and (9) must satisfy the following boundary conditions

      V L (0) = 0                                                                       (10)


       H
      VX (X  ) = 1, if X  > 0                                                          (11a)
        H
       VX (0)  1, if X  = 0                                                            (11b)

and
       H
      VXX (X  ) = 0,                                                                    (12)

where X  is the optimal value of cash on hand, X , that triggers the payment of dividends
in Regime H . The boundary condition in equation (10) states that if t = L < 0 and the
firm has zero cash on hand, then the value of the firm is zero, because it must terminate
immediately.
   The boundary condition in equation (11a) states that in Regime H if X = X  > 0, then
an extra dollar of cash on hand is worth a dollar to shareholders. That is, shareholders are
indifferent about whether to retain an additional dollar of cash within the firm or to pay
out that dollar as a current dividend.   If X = X  > 0 in Regime H , then the firm pays
out dividends at rate rX  + H to keep X equal to X  > 0. Alternatively, if X  = 0, then
 H
VX (0)  1 (equation 11b) and the firm always pays dividends in Regime H because a dollar
is worth at least as much in the hands of shareholders as it is worth as cash on hand within
the firm.



                                             11
                                                     H
    The marginal valuation of cash within the firm, VX (X ), attains its minimum, which is
one, when X = X  . The boundary condition in equation (12) is the first-order condition
for this minimization.
    We will use the ODEs in equations (8) and (9) and the boundary conditions in equations
(10) - (12) to derive the value functions in Regimes H and L and the optimal target level of
cash on hand, X  .     Before proceeding to a more complete analysis, we present V H (X ) for
the case in which X  = 0.

Proposition 1 If X  = 0, then for all X  0, V H (X ) = H + X , so VX
                                                                   H
                                                                     (X ) = 1 and
                          H
 H                  H
VXX (X ) = 0, where   +µL is the myopic value of Regime H .

    When X  = 0, an optimal dividend policy is to pay out any cash on hand, X > 0,
immediately as dividends and then pay dividends at a rate equal to the cash flow H >
0 for the remainder of the current Regime H .        When Regime L arrives, the firm has
no cash on hand and terminates immediately.         Thus, the expected present value of the
immediate dividend X and the expected future dividends during the current Regime H , H ,
is V H (X ) = H + X .      That is, the value function V H (X ) is a linear function of X  0
with slope equal to one. The intercept of this function is the myopic value of Regime H ,
       H
H      +µL
           .


2     Marginal Value of Cash on Hand
The marginal value of cash on hand when X = 0 is a key determinant of whether the level of
cash, X  , that triggers dividends is positive or zero. The firm will not pay dividends when
the marginal value of cash on hand exceeds one, that is, when an additional dollar of cash
inside the firm is worth more to shareholders than an additional dollar of dividends.     To
compute the marginal value of a dollar of cash on hand in Regime L, differentiate equation
(8) with respect to X and rearrange to obtain

       L        1
      VX =                      H
                     - r + µ L VX           H
                                  - rX + H VXX .                                        (13)
               µL
    Evaluate equation (13) at X = X  and use the boundary conditions in equations (11a)
and (12) to obtain
                       -r
       L
      VX (X  ) = 1 +     L
                           > 1, if X  > 0.                                              (14)
                       µ


                                              12
An ongoing firm that has been pursuing optimal payout policy will always have X  X 
because it will not accumulate additional X beyond X  in Regime H .                    When Regime L
                                      
arrives, the firm will have X  X , and since profits from operations,  , are negative and12
                                                                                  L

rX   -L , the source of funds in equation (3), rX  + L , is less than or equal to zero; hence
X cannot increase in Regime L. The concavity13 of V L (X ), together with equation (14),
              L
implies that VX        L
                (X )  VX (X  ) > 1 for all X  X  , so an ongoing firm with X  > 0 prefers
to retain earnings rather than pay dividends whenever it is in Regime L. The argument in
this paragraph proves the following proposition.14

                                                -r
Proposition 2 If X  > 0, then VX  L
                                    (X  ) = 1 + µL > 1, which implies that an ongoing firm

never pays dividends in Regime L.

       The optimal target value of cash on hand in Regime H , X  , can be either positive or
zero, depending on the configuration of values of the fundamental parameters , r, H , L ,
µH , and µL . The following definition provides a function of these fundamental parameters
that determines whether X  is zero or positive.

                                                             H µH    µL
Definition 3 Define    , r, H , L , µH , µL                  +µL -L -r+µL
                                                                          .

Proposition 3 X  > 0  VXX
                       H
                          (0) < 0   > 1.

       Proposition 3 states that if  > 1, then X  > 0 so that when an ongoing firm is in Regime
H , it accumulates cash until X = X  . If   1, then X  = 0 and the firm never accumulates
cash; it always pays dividends H in Regime H and then terminates when Regime L arrives.
The locus of parameter values for which  = 1 is the border between the region of parameter
space where X  = 0 and the region where X  > 0. The following corollary states that the
                                 H
marginal value of cash on hand, VX (0), equals  on this border.

Corollary 1 If  = 1, then X  = 0 and VX
                                      H
                                        (0) = .
  12
     If rX  were greater than -L > 0, then rX  + t would always be positive and once the firm reaches
Xt = X  , it would be able to (1) pay positive dividends at every point in time, even if Regime L persists
forever, and (2) still maintain a cushion of cash on hand forever. Since the discount rate of shareholders,
, exceeds the riskless interest rate, r, shareholders would prefer to have the superfluous cushion of cash,
X - X  , paid out as dividends.
  13
     Appendix C proves that V H (X ) and V L (X ) are both concave.
  14
     Proposition 2 does not address VX L
                                          (X  ) in the case in which X  = 0 because an ongoing firm would
terminate immediately upon entering Regime L if X  = 0.




                                                    13
                          H
       To understand why VX (0) = , suppose that  = 1 so that X  = 0, which means that
the optimal value of cash on hand is zero. Consider the following small deviation from this
optimal policy. Suppose that the firm chooses a target level of cash equal to an infinitesimal
 > 0. Therefore, when Regime H prevails, the firm retains profits until X = , and then
pays dividends at rate H for the remainder of the current Regime H , which we label H1 .
Regime H1 is followed by Regime L1 , during which the firm's cash on hand shrinks at rate
-L > 0. The firm will be forced to terminate during Regime L1 unless Regime L1 turns
                                                                
out to last for a period of time less than      -L
                                                   .   Since   -L
                                                                    is arbitrarily small, the probability
                                                                                          
that Regime L1 lasts for a period of time less than            -L
                                                                     is approximately µH - L. In this
unlikely event, the firm will transition to Regime H2 holding an amount of cash on hand less
than , and can expect to receive profits with present value H during that regime.15 When
Regime H2 ends, it is followed by Regime L2 . The conditional probability that the firm will
                                                             
survive to the end of Regime L2 is less than or equal to µH - L. The joint probability that
the firm survives both Regimes L1 and L2 is negligible (of order 2 ), so we can ignore any
profits received after Regime H2 . Therefore, the marginal value of cash on hand in Regime
     H                                                 µL
H , VX (0), is the product of three terms: (1)         +µL
                                                             is the expected present value, as of time
                                                                                  µH
0, of a dollar at time t1 > 0 when the current Regime H ends; (2)                 -L
                                                                                      is    the probability
                                                                                     H       H
of surviving until Regime H2 once the firm enters Regime L1 ; and (3)                        +µL
                                                                                                 ,   which is
the myopic value of Regime H2 . As  approaches zero, this product approaches , so the
marginal value of cash on hand, , is .


3        Local Comparative Statics
This section presents local comparative statics concerning the effects of changes in the prim-
itive parameters , r, H , L , µH , and µL on the optimal target level of cash X  .                       The
comparative statics are local in the sense that we confine attention to combinations of pa-
rameter values for which  - 1 is in a positive neighborhood of zero. Recall from Corollary
1 that when  - 1 = 0, the optimal target level of cash on hand, X  , equals zero.

Proposition 4 Starting from a parameter configuration for which    , r, H , L , µH , µL =
1, and hence X  = 0, the following changes in parameters increase X  to a positive value:

    1. a decrease in 
  15
    During Regime H2 , the firm will use some of this profits to rebuild its cash on hand to , but this amount
of profits will be less than , which is infinitesimal.

                                                     14
  2. an increase in r

  3. an increase in µH
                                           r
  4. an increase in µL if µL <  1 -        


                                       r
  5. a decrease in µL if µL >  1 -     


  6. an increase in H

  7. an increase in L .

                                                                   H
   Starting from a parameter configuration for which  = 1 so that VX (0) = 1 and X  = 0,
                                          H
any change that increases  will increase VX (0) to a value greater than one, and hence will
                                                                                          µL
increase X  to a positive value.                             H
                                   A decrease in  increases VX (0), both by increasing    +µL
                                                                                              ,
the expected present value of a dollar at the time when the next Regime L arrives, and by
                                                     H
increasing the myopic value of Regime H , H          +µL
                                                         .   Therefore, a decrease in  increases
X  (Statement 1 of Proposition 4). An increase in r, which is the rate of return earned on
cash on hand, X , leads to a positive optimal target level of cash on hand, X  (Statement
                                                    µH
2). An increase in µH increases the probability     -L
                                                          that a firm that enters Regime L with
X =  will emerge from Regime L with cash on hand and hence can continue to operate in
the next Regime H . Therefore, an increase in µH increases X  (Statement 3).
   An increase in µL has two opposing effects on the marginal valuation of cash. On the one
hand, an increase in µL reduces the expected time until the arrival of the next Regime L and
hence the next Regime H , thereby increasing the marginal valuation of cash and increasing
                                                                                       H
X  . On the other hand, an increase in µL reduces the myopic valuation H               +µL
                                                                                             and
thus reduces X  .   If µL <  1 - r
                                   , then the first effect dominates (Statement 4), but if
          r
µL >  1 -   , then the second effect dominates (Statement 5).
   An increase in H increases the dividend that will be paid per unit of time during Regime
H when X = X  and thus increases the value of being able to emerge from Regime L with
cash on hand to enter the next Regime H .           Therefore, an increase in H increases the
marginal valuation of a unit of cash and increases X  (Statement 6).         An increase in L ,
that is, a reduction in L reduces the rate at which cash on hand is depleted during Regime
                                         
L and thus increases the probability µH - L that the firm emerges from the next Regime L

with cash on hand to enter the next Regime H . Therefore, the marginal valuation of a unit
of cash increases and hence X  increases (Statement 7).

                                               15
3.1       Mean-Preserving Change in Variance
The only motivation for the firm to hold cash in this model is that cash on hand is a form
of precautionary saving that mitigates the chance that the firm will be forced to terminate
by running out of cash while in Regime L. Typically, in models of corporate precautionary
saving, a mean-preserving spread of the distribution of a stochastic variable leads to an
increase in precautionary saving. However, in the model presented here, a mean-preserving
spread of the unconditional distribution of cash flow, t , can lead to a decrease in X  ,
which is the optimal target level of precautionary saving in Regime H .               Indeed, in the
local comparative statics in this section, a mean-preserving spread in  necessarily decreases
precautionary saving.16 This finding differs from the typical finding because t is positively
serially correlated in the current model but is serially uncorrelated in typical models.

Proposition 5 Starting from a parameter configuration for which  = 1 and hence X  = 0,
a mean-preserving change in H > 0 and L < 0 that decreases the unconditional variance
of  increases X  to a positive value.

       A mean-preserving decrease in the variance of the unconditional distribution of  in-
creases L and decreases H while keeping µL L + µH H unchanged for given values of µL
and µH . The increase in L , which decreases -L > 0, slows the depletion of cash during
Regime L and thus lengthens the window of time that the firm can survive in Regime L
before exhausting a given amount of cash balances. Thus an increase in L increases the
probability that the firm will emerge from Regime L to a subsequent Regime H , which in-
         H
creases VX (0) and X  (Statement 7 of Proposition 4). Working in the opposite direction,
                                                                          H
a decrease in H decreases the myopic value of Regime H , H                +µL
                                                                              ,   which decreases the
value of emerging from Regime L.         Therefore, a decrease in H decreases VX
                                                                               H
                                                                                 (0) and X 
(Statement 6 of Proposition 4). To see which of these opposing effects is dominant, observe
from Definition 3 that  can be written as
              µL       µL         µ H H
         =                               ,                                                        (15)
              + µ L  - r + µ L µ H H - M
where 0 < M  µL L + µH H < µH H is unchanged by a mean-preserving change in H and
L for given values of µL and µH . Starting from an initial parameter configuration in which
  16
    Formally, Proposition 5 analyzes a mean-preserving decrease in variance, which increases  and hence
increases X  . A mean-preserving spread, that is, a mean-preserving increase in variance, would reduce 
and hence X  would remain unchanged and equal to zero.



                                                  16
                                                                        µH H
 = 1, a mean-preserving decrease in H increases the ratio              µH H -M
                                                                                 and hence increases 
                                                         
to a value greater than one, thereby increasing X to a positive number.
       Precautionary saving in the current framework is induced by the desire to avoid termina-
tion with its consequent loss of future dividends. A reduction in the variance of  increases
L < 0, which reduces the speed at which cash is depleted during Regime L, and thus in-
creases the probability that a firm that enters Regime L with a given amount of cash on
hand will avoid running out of cash before the next Regime H arrives. This effect dominates
the opposing effect associated with a decrease in H , and thus a mean-preserving decrease
in variance increases the marginal value of a unit of cash on hand and increases X  . Here
is where the serial correlation becomes important: Once the firm enters Regime L, it will
remain in Regime L for a period of time until the next Poisson arrival of a regime change.
While the firm remains in Regime L, it persistently loses cash on hand at the rate -L until
it runs out of cash or the next Regime H arrives, whichever comes first. As shown above,
                                                                                
a firm that enters Regime L with small  > 0 of cash on hand has probability µH - L of

surviving until the next Regime H with some cash on hand. A reduction in the loss -L > 0
increases this probability and thus increases the marginal valuation of cash on hand. This
calculation depends on the fact that t is serially correlated so that a change in L has a
substantive effect on the probability of reaching the next Regime H .


4        Zero interest earned on cash held by the firm: a
         closed-form solution
For the remainder of this paper, assume that the interest rate earned on cash held by the
firm, r, equals zero.      This assumption allows derivation of a closed-form solution to the
system of ODEs in equations (8) and (9) and boundary conditions in equations (10) - (12).17
Setting r = 0 in the ODEs in equations (8) and (9) yields a system of first-order linear
constant-coefficient homogeneous ordinary differential equations
            H
           VX           VH
            L
                  =A                                                                                  (16)
           VX            VL
  17
    If  > r > 0, the valuation functions V H (X ) and V L (X ) that solve the ODEs in equations (8) and (9)
are linear combinations of confluent hypergeometric functions.




                                                    17
where
                                µ   L
                    1                1
                  H
                              - + µL H
         A        µH   1           1
                                                .                                                              (17)
                - + µH L           L


    It is straightforward to solve the system of ODEs in equation (16). The details of the
solution procedure are presented in Appendix A, which shows that the general solution of
the system of ODEs is

           V H (X )                      1                       )                   1                      
                      = c1     +µL                    e1 (X -X       + c2   +µL                    e2 (X -X ) (18)
           V L (X )            µL
                                        1 - 1   H                           µL
                                                                                   1 - 2   H

       where 1 < 0 < 2 are the eigenvalues18 of A and the undetermined constants c1 , c2 , and
X  are pinned down by the boundary conditions (10), (11a), and (12) as shown in Appendix
A. That appendix also shows that V H (X ) and V L (X ) both have positive third derivatives
with respect to X for 0  X  X  .                      The literature (Leland (1968), Sandmo (1970),
Zeldes (1989), Kimball (1990), Carroll and Kimball (1996)) on household precautionary
saving emphasizes that a positive third derivative of the utility function implies that a
mean-preserving spread of household income increases precautionary saving. However, in
the problem of the firm we analyze in this paper, a mean-preserving spread in cash flow can
decrease precautionary saving despite the fact that the third derivative of the value function
with respect to X is positive.19

                                    L +H
Definition 4 Define               1--(L +H )2
                                              .

       As we will show, the parameter  facilitates a simple expression for X  . It is also a key
determinant of whether X  is positive or zero, and it provides an upper bound on X  when
it is positive.

Lemma 1 1 -  - L + H i = -i
                          2
                            1 - j H H L > 0, for i = j .

       Lemma 1 implies that the denominator of  is positive, which implies that the sign of 
is the same as the sign of the numerator, L + H .

Lemma 2 If r = 0, then sign () = sign H + L = sign ( - 1).
  18
    Lemma 4 in Appendix B presents four useful properties of the eigenvalues.
  19
    In the context of a household saving problem, Huggett and Vidon (2002) points out that optimal saving
can fall in response to an increase in earnings risk, even with a positive third derivative of the utility function.


                                                        18
   The optimal value of X  is given by the following proposition.

Proposition 6 Assume that r = 0.

  1. If H + L  0, then X                1
                                      2 -1
                                                 ln (1 + (2 - 1 ) )  0.

  2. If H + L  0,then X   0.

   The following corollary provides an upper bound on X  . In Proposition 10 we show that
this upper bound becomes very tight when H + L > 0 is close to zero.

Corollary 2 X   max {0, } .

   The only reason for the firm to hold cash is to be able to continue operation when
Regime L arrives.       Of course, for the firm to want to continue operation in Regime L,
the conditional expected present value of t over the infinite future must be non-negative
even when the current regime is L. The assumption in equation (2), which we rewrite as
      µH                                      
L +   +µH
          H     > 0, ensures that E          t
                                                 s e-(s-t) ds|t = L   > 0.   However, even with
equation (2), the benefit from continuing operation may not be sufficiently strong to induce
the firm to want to accumulate cash on hand when it is in Regime H . Lemma 2 provides
the stronger condition, L + H > 0, that induces the firm to accumulate cash on hand,
that is, to have X  > 0. This stronger condition can be interpreted in terms of the expected
present value of flows over an infinite future, but in this case, it is the expected present value
of a "distorted" cash flow process t , where
                 H if t = H
      t         +µL L
                                     .                                                        (19)
                µL
                        if t = L
                                                                                        +µL
The distorted process magnifies the negative cash flows in Regime L by the factor       µL
                                                                                              > 1,
              L
which equals VX (X  ) when L + H  0 (see Proposition 2 and set r = 0).
   It is straightforward to show that
            
                                             L + H
      E         s e-(s-t) ds|t = H       =         ,                                          (20)
           t1                                 1-
                                                    L +H
where t1 = min s > t : s = L . That is,              1-
                                                           equals the expected value, conditional
on being in Regime H , of the present value of the distorted process t over the infinite future
beginning at time t1 when the next Regime L arrives.
   The following proposition uses the distorted process t to evaluate the value function at
X = X  in both regimes.

                                                   19
Proposition 7 If r = 0 and L + H  0, then
                                          
    1. V H (X  ) =    1
                     1-
                          H +  L = E     t
                                             s e-(s-t) ds|t = H

                     +µL 1                      
    2. V L (X  ) =   µL 1-
                              L + H = E        t
                                                    s e-(s-t) ds|t = L .

    Since t  t , for all t, with strict inequality when t = L , the valuation V H (X  )
is less than the expected present value of the (non-distorted) cash flows conditional on
currently being in Regime H shown in equation (1b). Similarly, V L (X  ) is less than the
expected present value of the (non-distorted) cash flows over the infinite future conditional
on currently being in Regime L shown in equation (1a). In effect, the magnification factor
+µL
µL
      appropriately magnifies the negative cash flows in Regime L to reduce the expected
present value of cash flows over the infinite future to account for the eventuality that the
firm will terminate.


5      The Effect of Volatility on the Target Level of Cash
       on Hand
In this section we analyze the impact on X  of a mean-preserving increase in the volatility of
profitability. It will be convenient to use the coefficient of variation to summarize the mean
                                                                                      
and standard deviation of the unconditional distribution of cash flows. Define        m
                                                                                          as the
coefficient of variation where m and  are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of
the unconditional distribution of cash flows. A mean-preserving spread, which is an increase
in  holding m fixed, can be represented as an increase in  holding m fixed.

Definition 5 Define three special values of , the coefficient of variation of the unconditional
distribution of cash flows

               µL
    1. A       µH

                     µH +µL   µL
    2. C  1 +                 µH

                                                    -1
                                                
    3. B  (1 - ) A + C , where   2 +           µL
                                                         <1
                                                          2
                                                            .

    The following lemma describes the importance of A and C .


                                              20
Lemma 3

   1. L < 0 if and only if  > A
                 µH
   2. L +        +µH
                     H   > 0 if and only if  < C

       Admissible values of the coefficient of variation satisfy both the restriction L < 0 (State-
ment 1 of Lemma 3) and the restriction in equation (2) that the conditional expected present
value of the infinite stream of potential future cash flows is positive (Statement 2 of Lemma
3). Therefore, the admissible values of the coefficient of variation satisfy

               µL                         µH + µL         µL
                   A <  < C          1+                      .                                          (21)
               µH                                         µH

       Lemma 2 leads to the following proposition.

Proposition 8 Assume that r = 0. Then for admissible values of the coefficient of variation
, A <  < C ,

   1. X  > 0 if  < B

   2. X  = 0 if   B .

Remarkably, the bounds on the coefficient of variation, A and C , in equation (21), as well
                                                                                                            µH
as the critical value of the coefficient of variation, B , in Proposition 8 depend only on                   
        µL
and      
           .
       We interpret Proposition 8 in the context of an example illustrated in Figure 1, which
shows the coefficient of variation         m
                                            
                                               on the horizontal axis and X  on the vertical axis, for
the case in which r = 0,  = 0.05, µ = 0.10, µH = 0.40 and the mean of the unconditional
                                          L

                                                                                                     µL
distribution of  is 1. At point A in Figure 1, the coefficient of variation is A                     µH
                                                                                                        ,   so
          L
that  = 0. The neighborhood located immediately to the right of point A will be called
                                                                                            µH +µL       µL
Neighborhood A.20 At point C, the coefficient of variation equals C  1 +                                 µH
                                                                                                            ,
which is the upper bound on its admissible values in equation (21).21 Point B is located at
the critical value of the coefficient of variation B  (1 - )A + C identified in Proposition
  20
      For points along the dashed line to the left of point A, L > 0. For these (inadmissible) points, cash
flow is never negative, and hence there is no reason for the firm to hold cash, so X  = 0.
   21
      For (inadmissible) points along the dashed line to the right of Point C, the conditional expectation of
                  
cash flows, E t s e-(s-t) ds|t = L , is negative and the firm would want to terminate in Regime L,
even if it could pay negative dividends. Therefore, there is no incentive to hold cash and hence X  = 0.


                                                     21
           5


          4.5


           4


          3.5


           3


          2.5


           2


          1.5


           1


          0.5


           0
                0       1            2               3          4           5          6




Figure 1: Optimal target level of cash X  as a function of the coefficient of variation of cash
flows.

8. The neighborhood immediately to the left of point B will be called Neighborhood B. For
values of the coefficient of variation less than B , that is, to the left of Point B, X  > 0; for
values of the coefficient of variation greater than B , that is, to the right of Point B, X  = 0.
                                               -1
                                           
Point B is located a fraction   2 +       µL
                                                     < 0.5 of the distance between Points A and
                                               0.05 -1
C. In this particular example,  = 2 +          0.10
                                                         = 0.4, so point B is located 40% of the
distance from point A toward point C. Thus, for 60% of the interval of admissible values of
the coefficient of variation in equation (21), the optimal holding of cash is zero. As we have
pointed out, X  is not monotonic in the coefficient of variation in the interval from point A
to point B. X  is increasing in the coefficient of variation in Neighborhood A, and X  is
decreasing in the coefficient of variation in Neighborhood B. For admissible values of the
coefficient of variation, the highest values, to the right of point B, are associated with the
lowest, namely zero, X  .


                                                22
5.1       Neighborhoods of Parameter Space Where X  Is Small
Proposition 6 provides a closed-form expression for X  that holds globally for all admissible
parameter configurations.      This subsection analyzes X  > 0 in two neighborhoods of pa-
rameter space where X  is close to zero. To see why X  is close to zero in Neighborhood
A, suppose that the firm has cash on hand equal to  > 0 when Regime L arrives. While
Regime L continues to prevail, the firm loses cash at rate -L > 0 so the firm will be able
                                                                                           
to survive, without running out of cash, in Regime L for a period of time as long as      -L
                                                                                             .      In
                      L
Neighborhood A,  is arbitarily close to zero so the firm could avoid running out of cash
for an arbitrarily long period of time, even if the cash on hand at the beginning of Regime
L, , is arbitrarily small. As Proposition 9 below states, X  goes to zero as L goes to zero,
                                                                         X
but X  goes to zero more slowly than L goes to zero, so the ratio        -L
                                                                              becomes arbitrarily
large.
                                                                            X
       X  measures precautionary saving in terms of dollars. The ratio      -L
                                                                                 is an alternative
measure of precautionary saving expressed in units of time rather than dollars. Specifically,
X
-L
        is the length of time that the firm can spend continuously in Regime L before it runs
                                                                                               X
out of cash.     In contrast to X  , which is non-monotonic in  (Figure 1), the ratio          -L
                                                                                                    is
                                               X
monotonic in . As illustrated in Figure 2,     -L
                                                  ,   is a monotonically decreasing function of .
This monotonicity is in the opposite direction of the conventional result. That is, a mean-
preserving spread reduces, rather than increases, this alternative measure of precautionary
                                          X
saving. Although we do not prove that     -L
                                               is downward sloping over the entire domain of the
coefficient of variation, we prove that it is monotonically decreasing in both Neighborhood
A and Neighborhood B. This ratio is also of interest because, as we show in Proposition 13
in Section 6, it is a key determinant of life expectancy of the firm.

Proposition 9 (Neighborhood A) Assume that r = 0, L +H > 0 and that limL                   0   H >
                                                              X
0 is finite.22 For given µL and µH , limL 0 X  = 0 and limL 0 - L
                                                                  = .

       Now consider Neighborhood B, which is the set of parameter configurations for which
 - 1 > 0 is arbitrarily small. We have already examined (in Section 3) the behavior of X 
in Neighborhood B. Lemma 2 implies that when r = 0, this neighborhood can equivalently
be described as the neighborhood where L + H > 0 is arbitrarily small.

  22
    In particular, this proposition applies when H > 0 remains fixed when L changes, and when H > 0
                                                  L L
                                                      +µH H
changes to maintain the unconditional mean m  µ    µL +µH
                                                            > 0 unchanged when L changes.



                                                23
          30




          25




          20




          15




          10




           5




           0
               0        1           2              3            4           5          6




Figure 2: Ratio of optimal target level of cash, X  , to the flow of losses, |L |, as a function
of the coefficient of variation of cash flows.

Proposition 10 Assume that r = 0. Consider any L < 0 and H > 0 bounded away
from zero for which L + H > 0 is arbitrarily close to zero (Neighborhood B). Then
            L +H    µL
X   1         -
                  = + µL
                         V L (X  ).

   Proposition 10 implies that for a parameter configuration in Neighborhood B the value
                                   µL
of X  is approximately equal to    +µL
                                       VL   (X  ), which is the expected present value of the
continuation value of the firm at the time that the next Regime L arrives.          By foregoing
dividends for a while in Regime H to allow cash on hand to reach X  , shareholders incur
an investment cost of X  to enable the firm to enter the next Regime L with cash on hand
equal to X  . When the firm enters Regime L with cash on hand X  , the value of the firm
                                                       µL
will be V L (X  ), which has expected present value    +µL
                                                           VL   (X  ). Proposition 10 states that
this expected present value is approximately equal to the investment cost X  that reflects
foregone dividends in Regime H .

                                              24
                                                            µL
       The approximate equality of X  and                   +µL
                                                                VL         (X  ), which was derived from the closed-
form solution for X  , holds when r = 0. It is straightforward to show that if r is positive and
                                       µL
less than , then X                   -r+µL
                                           VL      (X  ) . This more general approximation follows directly
                         L (X )
                      XVX                                                                                         -r+µL
from limX 0             L
                      V (X )
                                     23
                                  = 1,                                             L
                                             and Proposition 2, which states that VX (X  ) =                       µL
                                                                                                                        .


5.2         A Mean-Preserving Spread of the Unconditional Distribution
            of Cash Flows
In this subsection we analyze the impact of a mean-preserving spread of the unconditional
distribution of cash flows for given values of the transition intensities µH and µL .                                                In
particular, we focus on increases in H and decreases in L , for given values of µH and µL ,
                                                                µH H +µL L
that do not change the unconditional mean                         µL +µH
                                                                           .        For such mean-preserving spreads,24

         dL           µH  + µL
            |     = -                                 -1 as µH             µL ,                                                (22)
         dH M P S     µL ( + µH )
                              dL
where the notation            dH
                                     |M P S indicates the change in L in response to a change in H that
maintains the unconditional mean of  unchanged. Equation (22) and Proposition 7 imply
the following proposition.

Proposition 11 If r = 0 and L + H  0, then
                                                                2
         dV L (X  )                 1 µH               +µL
   1.      dH
                      |M P S =     1- +µH
                                                 1-    µL
                                                                     < 0.

         dV H (X  )                 1                      µH
   2.      dH
                       |M P S =    1-        +µH
                                                      1-   µL
                                                                         0 as µH       µL .
  23
    Evaluate the HJB in equation (9) at X = 0 and use the boundary condition V L (0) = 0 to obtain VX
                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                      (0) =
   H
  µ   H                            H
- L V (0), which is finite, since V (0) is finite. Differentiate the HJB in equation (9) with respect to X
                                                                                                                     H
                                                                              r        L                   µ
and evaluate the resulting equation at X = 0 to obtain 1 -                   +µH
                                                                                      VX (0) = L VXX
                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                     (0) + +   V H (0). To
                                                                                                             µH X
           L                                           H
show that VXX (0) is finite, it suffices to show that VX (0) is finite. Evaluate the HJB in equation (8) at X = 0
and use the boundary condition V (0) = 0 to obtain V H (0) = H VX
                                       L                                     H          H
                                                                               (0), so VX (0) is finite and hence
                                                                                      L                    L                L
 L                               L          L                                      XVX  (X )       limX 0 VX (X )+limX 0 XVXX (X )
VXX (0) is finite.        Since VX (0) and VXX (0) are finite limX 0               V L (X )
                                                                                               =           limX 0 VX L (X )          =
        L
limX 0 VX (X )
        L (X )
limX 0 VX
                 = 1.
   24      H
       Use       =  + µL H and L =                      + µH L , so that the unconditional mean of cash flow
        H                                L
is µLµ+µH
           + µL H + µLµ    +µH
                                + µH L .  Totally differentiate this expression for the uncondi-
                             H      L
tional mean with respect to  and  , while keeping the unconditional mean unchanged, to obtain
µH  + µL dH + µL  + µH dL = 0, which immediately implies equation (22) in the text.




                                                                    25
       A mean-preserving spread reduces L and increases H .                    If the firm is currently in
Regime L, the reduction in L , which leads to a magnified reduction in the distorted flow
         +µL L
L        µL
             ,   hits the firm immediately and dominates the impact of the increase in H that
is received later.      Therefore, a mean-preserving spread reduces V L (X  ) (Statement 1 of
Proposition 11).25 This statement facilitates an alternative interpretation of the impact on
X  of a mean-preserving spread for parameter values in Neighborhood B. In that neighbor-
                                                                                               µL
hood, the optimal target level of cash on hand, X  , is approximately equal to                 +µL
                                                                                                   VL    (X  ).
Statement 1 of Proposition 11 is that a mean-preserving spread of the distribution of cash
flow reduces V L (X  ). Therefore, in Neighborhood B, a mean-preserving spread of the un-
conditional distribution of cash flows reduces X  . This result is a special case of the local
result in subsection 3.1 with r = 0 and does not apply for all admissible combinations of the
parameters , L , H , µL , and µH .
       In Neighborhood A, which is the negative neighborhood of L = 0, a mean-preserving
spread of the distribution cash flows increases X  . Proposition 9 implies that in Neighbor-
hood A, a mean-preserving increase in L < 0 accompanied by a decrease in H reduces X 
                 X
and increases    -L
                    .   Such mean-preserving changes move L and H closer together and thus
reduce the variance of the unconditional distribution. Therefore, a mean-preserving spread,
which increases the variance of the unconditional distribution, has the opposite effect. That
                                                                                             X
is, in Neighborhood A, a mean-preserving spread increases X  and reduces                     -L
                                                                                                .
       To summarize, a mean-preserving spread increases X  in Neighborhood A but reduces
X  in Neighborhood B.
       A mean-preserving spread of the unconditional distribution of cash flow for given values
of µH and µL is an increase in  holding m fixed.                   We express this impact formally as
  
X ().        The conventional finding, as summarized by Strebulaev and Whited (2011), for
example, is X  () > 0. However, we have shown that X  () is negative in Neighborhood
B. Moreover, this counter-conventional finding is not limited to that neighborhood. The
following proposition illustrates that X  () < 0 is pervasive enough in parameter space that
the average value of X  () is zero.
                                                                     B -
Proposition 12 For r = 0 and  > 0, lim0                     1
                                                         B -A -2     A +
                                                                           X  () d = 0.
  25
     However, if the firm is currently in Regime H , the valuation V H (X  ) will decrease or increase depending
on whether µH is larger or smaller than µL . On one hand, the increase in H increases the cash flows in the
immediate future before the reduction in L reduces future cash flows. This effect would tend to increase
                                                                                        µL
V H (X  ). On the other hand, the reduction in L is magnified by the factor +          µL
                                                                                            > 1, which tends to
                                                                         
reduce V (X ). If µ < µ , the first effect dominates, and V (X ) increases; if µH > µL , the second
         H              H      L                                    H

effect dominates, and V H (X  ) decreases (Statement 2 of Proposition 11).

                                                      26
    Proposition 12 implies that averaging over the interval (A , B ), the average impact of
volatility on X  () is zero. For the remaining admissible values of the coefficient of variation,
that is, for   [B , C ), X  ()  0, so trivially, X  ()  0.


6     Endogenous Cross-Section of Surviving Firms
The empirical literature typically finds that increased volatility increases X  . We interpret
this finding as a positive value of the cross-sectional average impact of  on X  , that is, for
>0
            B -
      lim         X  () dG () > 0,
      0     A +


where G () is the cross-sectional distribution of  across firms. Our model provides an en-
dogenous mechanism that reconciles the zero value of average X  () in Proposition 12 and
the positive value of average X  () found empirically. This endogenous mechanism oper-
ates through differential survival probabilities of firms with different volatilities. Specifically,
firms with highly volatile cash flows tend to run out of cash, and thus are forced to termi-
nate, sooner than firms with less volatile cash flows. As time proceeds, the cross-sectional
distribution of volatility among the survivors in a given cohort of firms shifts toward low-
volatility firms, which are the firms for which X  () > 0.           This endogenous shifting of
the distribution toward firms with X  () > 0 increases the cross-sectional average impact,
X  (), to a positive number, consistent with empirical findings.
    The life expectancy of a firm born at, say, time 0 in Regime H with zero cash on hand
is E { }, the expectation of the termination date  defined in equation (5). The following
proposition provides a closed-form expression for life expectancy.

Proposition 13 Assume that r = 0. The life expectancy of a firm with zero cash on hand
                                                 X
                                H   -(µL +µH ) m
in Regime H is E { } = µ1L 1 + m
                                  e           H L - 1  .

    For parameter configurations in Neighborhood B, which is the positive neighborhood of
L + H = 0, the following corollary provides a simple expression for the life expectancy
E { }.

Corollary 3 Assume that r = 0. In Neighborhood B, which is the positive neighborhood of
                                 H
                                    X
L + H = 0, E { } µ1L + 1 + µ    µL  -L
                                       .

                                                27
   The expression for E { } in Corollary 3 can be viewed as the sum of three components.
                              1
The first component,         µL
                                ,   is the expected time until the current Regime H ends and the
next Regime L arrives. Since X  is in a neighborhood of zero, the firm will, with very high
probability, accumulate cash equal to X  in the current Regime H and arrive in Regime L
                                                                        X
with cash on hand equal to X  . The second component,                   -L
                                                                           ,   is the length of uninterrupted
                                                                  
time in Regime L needed to completely exhaust X and thus force the firm to terminate.
If Regime L were to last indefinitely, for instance, because of a zero value for µH , the
                                                                                                 1         X
life expectancy, E { }, would simply be the sum of the first two components,                    µL
                                                                                                     and   -L
                                                                                                              .
However, with µH > 0, there is a chance that a new Regime H arrives before X is completely
exhausted in Regime L. In that case, life expectancy would exceed the sum of the first two
                      µH X 
components by         µL -L
                            ,    which is an extension of life expectancy reflecting the possibility of
escaping from Regime L before exhausting cash on hand.
                                 X
   In Neighborhood A,            -L
                                      is arbitrarily large (Proposition 9) so the life expectancy, E { },
in Proposition 13 is also arbitrarily large. To illustrate why this life expectancy is arbitrarily
large, consider a firm with a parameter configuration in Neighborhood A that starts at time
0 in Regime H with zero cash on hand. The firm follows the optimal payout policy so it
retains all operating profits as cash on hand until its cash on hand reaches X = X  . Let
t1 be the time at which the first Regime L after time 0 arrives.                      Use the identity E { }
                 X                      X                     X                      X
= Pr t1 <        H
                       × E  |t1 <       H
                                                + Pr t1       H
                                                                     × E  |t1        H
                                                                                          and the facts that
            X                               X
Pr t1 <     H
                  0 and E  |t1 <            H
                                                  0 to obtain

                                 X                   X                         X         X   X
       E { }  Pr t1                    × E  |t1                exp -µL               ×     +          .    (23)
                                 H                   H                         H         H   -L


   The second inequality in equation (23) uses the fact that the distribution of the arrival
                                            X               X                                        X
time t1 is exponential so Pr t1             H
                                                  = exp -µL  H          and the fact that if t1      H
                                                                                                       ,   then
                                            
the firm will have cash on hand X when Regime L arrives at time t1 , and this amount of
                                                                                                     X
cash on hand guarantees that the firm will continue to survive for a period of time                  -L
                                                                                                           after
      X                                             X                                       
t1    H
        .   Since limL       0   X  = 0, limL     0 -L   = , and limL          0   exp -µL X
                                                                                            H   = 1, we have
                              X
limL   0   E { } =     limL 0 - L
                                       = .
   Figure 3 illustrates the impact of endogenous survival on the cross-sectional distribution
of volatility.       Underlying this figure is the assumption that at each point in time, a mass
of firms (normalized to one) is born in Regime H , each with zero cash on hand.                           These
newborn firms have identical values of shareholders' rate of time preference, , and transition

                                                         28
            1

         0.9

         0.8

         0.7

         0.6

         0.5

         0.4

         0.3

         0.2

         0.1

            0
             0.4   0.6     0.8    1     1.2    1.4    1.6    1.8     2      2.2      2.4




Figure 3: Cumulative distribution function of entering firms and stationary distribution
function.

intensities, µH and µL .   They have heterogeneous unconditional coefficients of variation of
cash flows, , distributed uniformly on the open set of admissible values (A , C ), where A
and C are the coefficients of variation at points A and C, respectively, in Figure 1. Let's
confine attention to firms for which X  > 0 so they don't terminate immediately when the
first Regime L arrives. Therefore, we confine attention to firms for which   (A , B ), where
B  (1 - )A + C is the critical value of the coefficient of variation in Proposition 8 and
at point B in Figure 1. For each value of   (A , B ), there is a continuum of firms that
face idiosyncratic regime changes over the spans of their lives until they terminate. As time
passes, the endogenous termination of firms that run out of cash in Regime L eliminates
more firms with high  than with low .
   Figure 3 shows the c.d.f G () of the cross-sectional distribution of .         Since G () is
strictly concave in Figure 3, the density function, g ()  G (), is decreasing in , that is,
g () < 0.


                                              29
Proposition 14 Assume that r = 0, g () < 0, and X  () > 0 is concave in  for  
                      B -
(A , B ). Then lim>00 A +
                           X  () g () d > 0.

    This example, in which the cross-sectional density function g () is decreasing and the
function X  () is concave, illustrates the need for caution in interpreting regression findings
of an average positive impact of volatility on cash holdings. The positive impact need not
imply that a high-volatility firm will have a higher X  than an otherwise-identical firm with
lower volatility.   The positive average impact of volatility on X  could simply reflect the
endogenous selection effect resulting from the faster termination of high-volatility firms.


7     Conclusion
Firms undertake precautionary saving to protect themselves against unfavorable events that
can arise randomly. The conventional result is that an increase in the variance of random
events will lead to an increase in the optimal amount of precautionary saving. We have
re-examined that conventional result in a simple model of a firm that faces positively serially
correlated cash flows. Our analysis has at least three contributions. First, we provide a
closed-form solution for the optimal target level of cash, X  , held by a risk-neutral firm in
an environment with serially correlated cash flows. We use this closed-form solution for X 
to provide an interpretation of the magnitude of X  . Second, and most substantively, we
show that a mean-preserving increase in the variance of cash flows can actually reduce X  --
the opposite of the conventional result. We provide an analytical, yet intuitive, explanation
the role of serial correlation in the counter-conventional result. Third, we show that cross-
sectional heterogeneity in the coefficient of variation, , leads to cross-sectional variation in
life expectancy of firms, which tilts the cross-sectional distribution of  in a sample surviving
firms toward firms with with low . This endogenous selection effect can cause the average
impact of volatility on X  in a cross section of surviving firms to be positive, consistent with
empirical findings.
    To focus on precautionary saving in a tractable framework, we assume that the firm has
no access to external funds, either from borrowing or from issuing of equity. We consider a
stochastic process for cash flow that has only two possible realizations. One possible real-
ization of cash flow is positive and the other possible realization is negative. The transitions
between these realizations are governed by Poisson processes. When cash flow is positive,
the firm accumulates cash until its cash on hand reaches an optimally-chosen level X  ; any


                                              30
positive cash flows received when the stock of cash on hand equals X  are then paid out
as dividends. When cash flow is negative, the firm draws down its cash and is forced to
terminate if cash flow remains negative when the stock of cash on hand is zero.
   In order for the firm to want to accumulate any cash, it is necessary that even when the
current cash flow is negative, the conditional expected present value of the infinite stream
of cash flows is positive. Otherwise the firm would choose to terminate when cash flow
is negative even without being forced to do so. However, this necessary condition is not
sufficient for X  to be positive. The stronger condition that is sufficient for X  to be positive
is that the expected present value of "distorted" cash flows is positive, where the distorted
cash flows magnify the negative cash flows but do not magnify positive cash flows.
   Our model has six parameters: the two possible realizations of cash flow, two transition
probabilities between these values, shareholders' rate of time preference, and the rate of
return on cash. We first show that X  is positive if and only if a particular function of these
parameters exceeds zero. To derive a closed-form solution for X  , we then confine attention
to the focal case in which the rate of return on cash equals zero. The closed-form solution
holds for all admissible parameter values. We then show that in a particular neighborhood
of parameter space (Neighborhood B), the optimal target level of cash when cash flow is
positive, X  , is approximately equal to the expected present value of V L (X  ), the value of
the firm when it enters Regime L with cash on hand equal to X  . In this case, the optimal
level of cash on hand reflects the equality of the marginal cost of accumulating cash (foregone
dividends) and the marginal benefit of accumulating cash (the value of sustaining the firm
when cash flows turn negative).
   The major substantive contribution of this paper is the deconstruction of the conventional
result that a mean-preserving spread of stochastic flows increases X  . We focus on the
coefficient of variation of the unconditional distribution of cash flows, recognizing that a
mean-preserving spread on this distribution can be viewed as an increase in the coefficient
of variation holding the mean constant. In this context, the conventional result is that
X  is an increasing function of the coefficient of variation of cash flows. We demonstrate
analytically that X  is not monotonic in the coefficient of variation. Moreover, there is a
critical value of the coefficient of variation (B ) such that X  is positive for values of the
coefficient of variation below the critical value, but X  is zero for values of the coefficient of
variation above the critical value. That is, the higher values of the coefficient of variation
are associated with lower X  --the opposite of the conventional result. In addition, we show
that the marginal impact on X  of an increase in volatility averages to zero over the entire

                                               31
parameter space. We then show that if the population of firms consists of the surviving firms
from all previously-born cohorts of firms, the population will be weighted more towards firms
for which the impact of volatility on X* is positive. This selection mechanism can reconcile
the results of this paper with the findings of the empirical literature.
   The counter-conventional result is so striking that it demands an explanation. For values
of the coefficient of variation slightly below the critical value described above, the marginal
value of the first dollar of cash on hand is greater than one, so it is optimal retain that
dollar inside the firm. That is, X  is positive. A mean-preserving spread that increases the
coefficient of variation to its critical value reduces the marginal value of the first dollar of
cash on hand to one, and the firm might as well pay that dollar as dividends; the optimal
value of X  is zero. To see why an increase in the coefficient of variation reduces the marginal
value of the first dollar of cash on hand, observe that a mean-preserving increase in variance
increases the positive level of cash flow and reduces the negative value of cash flow. The
reduction in the negative value of cash flow increases the rate at which the firm draws down
its cash when facing a persistent negative cash flow. This more rapid draw-down of cash
reduces the window of time that a given dollar of cash will allow the firm to survive when
facing a persistent episode of negative cash flow. Therefore, the marginal benefit of holding
a dollar of cash to stave off termination is reduced, making a dollar of cash less effective
as a precaution against termination, thereby reducing X  . Though the formal analysis was
conducted with a parsimonious parametric model, the underlying intuition about the reduced
efficacy of a dollar of cash in staving off termination is quite general.




                                               32
References
Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2011). A unified theory of tobin's q, corporate investment,
  financing, and risk management. The Journal of Finance 66 (5), 1545­1578.

Carroll, C. D. and M. S. Kimball (1996). On the concavity of the consumption function.
  Econometrica 64 (4), 981­992.

D´
 ecamps, J.-P., S. Gryglewicz, E. Morellec, and S. Villeneuve (2016). Corporate policies
  with permanent and transitory shocks. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (1), 162­210.

Han, S. and J. Qiu (2007). Corporate precautionary cash holdings. Journal of Corporate
  Finance 13, 43­57.

Hartman-Glaser, B., S. Mayer, and K. Milbradt (2019). Corporate liquidity management
  under moral hazard. working paper.

Huggett, M. and E. Vidon (2002). Precautionary wealth accumulation: a positive third
  derivative is not enough. Economics Letters 76 (3), 323­329.

Hugonnier, J., S. Malamud, and E. Morellec (2014). Capital supply uncertainty, cash hold-
  ings, and investment. The Review of Financial Studies 28 (2), 391­445.

Kimball, M. S. (1990). Precautionary saving in the small and in the large. Economet-
  rica 58 (1), 53­73.

Leland, H. E. (1968). Saving and uncertainty: The precautionary demand for saving. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (3), 465­473.

Miller, M. H. and D. Orr (1966). A model of the demand for money by firms. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 80 (3), 413­435.

Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. H. Stulz, and R. Williamson (1999). The determinants and
  implications of corporate cash holdings. Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3­46.

Riddick, L. A. and T. M. Whited (2009). The corporate propensity to save. The Journal of
  Finance 64 (4), 1729­1766.

                                             33
Sandmo, A. (1970). The effect of uncertainty on saving decisions. The Review of Economic
  Studies 37 (3), 353­360.

Strebulaev, I. A. and T. M. Whited (2011). Dynamic models and structural estimation in
  corporate finance. In Foundations and Trends in Finance, Volume 6, pp. 1­163. Now
  Publishers.

Zeldes, S. P. (1989). Optimal consumption with stochastic income: Deviations from certainty
  equivalence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (2), 275­298.




                                            34
                                                      Appendix

A            Solution of the System of ODEs in Equation (16)
The solution to the system of ODEs in equation (16) can be expressed in terms of the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the 2 × 2 matrix A defined in equation (17). The eigenvalues,
1 and 2 are the roots of the following characteristic equation

         q ( )   2 - (trA)  + det A = 0.                                                                      (A.1)
                       1       1                      1 1
where trA =            H
                           +   L
                                   and det A =        H L
                                                              (1 - ).         It is straightforward to verify that26
         +µL
  1      µL
              1 - i H        is an eigenvector of A with eigenvalue i , i = 1, 2.
       The general solution to a two-equation system of constant-coefficient homogeneous first-
order linear ODEs is a linear combination of the product of ei X and the eigenvector corre-
sponding to the eigenvalue i , i = 1, 2, so

             V H (X )                         1                                             1                   

               L
                           = c1        +µL                H
                                                               e1 (X -X ) +c2        +µL           H
                                                                                                        e2 (X -X ) (A.2)
             V (X )                    µL
                                             1 - 1                                   µL
                                                                                           1 - 2 

       Differentiate the expression for V H (X ) in equation (A.2) twice with respect to X , eval-
      H
uate VX           H
        (X ) and VXX (X ) at X = X  , and use the boundary conditions in equations (11a)
and (12) to obtain
          H
         VX (X  ) = c1 1 + c2 2 = 1                                                                           (A.3)

       and
          H
         VXX (X  ) = c1 1
                        2       2
                          + c 2 2 = 0.                                                                        (A.4)

       Equations (A.3) and (A.4) are two linear equations in the constants c1 and c2 . Equation
(A.4) implies
             2       2
         c 1 1 = -c2 2 ,                                                                                      (A.5)
                                                                          L
  26                                   +µL                         1     µ    1   +µL
       The first element of A      1   µL
                                             1 - i H          is   H
                                                                       - + µL H   µL
                                                                                        1 - i H = i . The second el-
                                                      H             L
           +µL                                  µ             1 +µ                  µL
ement of A   µL
                  1 - i  H
                   1            is            - + µH
                                                        1
                                                        L
                                                            +  L µL
                                                                      1 - i H = +  µL
                                                                                       -   1    1
                                                                                            L + L  1 - i H
     L                                                    L                                 L
  +µ                                                  +µ
        H   1 1
= µL  - L H + L H - i1   1
                                                  =    µL
                                                            H (1 - )    1 1     1
                                                                         L H - L i    = + µ
                                                                                         µL
                                                                                              H det A -  1
                                                                                                          L i

     µL H                                                   L                              L
= + µL
        -i 2
             + (trA) i -   1
                            L i               =        +µ     H
                                                      i µL  -i + trA - L      1         +µ    H
                                                                                  = i µL  -i + H       1
                                                                                                            =
 +µL
i µL 1 - i H .

                                                              35
which, along with equation (A.3), implies
               1    2
      c1 =            <0                                                       (A.6)
             2 -  1 1
and
               1    1
      c2 =            > 0.                                                     (A.7)
             1 -  2 2
   Evaluate V L (X ) in equation (A.2) at X = 0, and then use the boundary condition
V L (0) = 0 from equation (10) to obtain

                      + µL            -1 X         + µL              
      V L (0) = c1      L
                           1 -  1 H
                                    e       + c 2    L
                                                        1 - 2 H e-2 X = 0.     (A.8)
                      µ                            µ
                                  2       2
Rearrange equation (A.8) using c1 1 = -c2 2 from equation (A.5) to obtain
                      2
       (2 -1 )X      1  1 - 2  H
      e            =Z 2          >0                                            (A.9)
                      2 1 - 1  H
which implies
                       1
      X  = max             ln Z, 0 .                                          (A.10)
                     2 - 1
The fact that Z > 0 in equation (A.9) follows from Statement 1 of Lemma 4. Use Lemma
1, which implies

      2                   -1
      1 1 - 2 H =         H  L
                               1 -  - L + H 1
                           

and

      2                   -1
      2 1 - 1 H =             1 -  - L + H 2 ,
                          H L

to rewrite the definition of Z in equation (A.9) as

             1 -  - L + H 1
      Z                        .                                              (A.11)
             1 -  - (L + H ) 2

   Add and substract L + H 2 in the numerator of Z in equation (A.11) and rearrange
to obtain
                     L + H
      Z =1+                       (2 - 1 ) .                                  (A.12)
                1 -  - (L + H ) 2

                                             36
Equations (A.10) and (A.12) together imply Proposition 6.
    Repeated differentiation of equation (A.2) with respect to X leads to the following expres-
sions for V(H              L
            j ) (X ) and V(j ) (X ), which are the j -th order derivatives of V
                                                                                H
                                                                                  (X ) and V L (X ),
respectively, with respect to X.

        V(H
          j ) (X )          j               1                               j            1                   
                      = c1  1     +µL
                                                             e1 (X -X ) +c2 2   +µL
                                                                                                   e2 (X -X ) .(A.13)
        V(L
          j ) (X )                µL
                                          1 - 1 H                               µL
                                                                                       1 - 2 H
                                                                                1
Since c1 < 0, c2 > 0 (equations A.6 and A.7) and 1 < 0 < 2 <                    H
                                                                                    (Statement 1 of Lemma
4), it follows that   V(H
                        j)   (X ) > 0   and V(L
                                              j)   (X ) > 0 for j = 1, 3, 5, .... In particular, the third
                                           H
derivatives of the value functions V            (X ) and V L (X ) both positive.
           H
    Since VXXX                            H
               (X ) > 0, it follows that VXX         H
                                             (X ) < VXX (X  ) = 0 for 0  X < X  .
Therefore, V H (X ) is strictly concave for 0  X < X  . Use the two rows of equation (A.13)
to obtain
                      + µL                    j 1 (X -X  )          j 2 (X -X  )
      V(L
        j ) (X ) =      L
                           V(H            H
                             j ) (X ) - 1  c1 1 e          - 2 H c2 2 e          .                 (A.14)
                      µ
Evaluate equation (A.14) for j = 2 at X = X  , and use VXX
                                                        H
                                                           (X  ) = 0 to obtain
                               + µL 3
       L
      VXX (X  ) = -H                        3
                                    1 c 1 + 2 c2 < 0.                                              (A.15)
                               µL
           L
    Since VXXX                    L
               (X ) > 0, we have VXX         L
                                     (X ) < VXX (X  ) < 0 for 0  X  X  . Therefore,
V L (X ) is strictly concave for 0  X  X  .


B      Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.            If X  = 0, the firm maintains a zero balance of cash on hand.
If, for some reason, the firm is holding cash, X > 0, it immediately pays this entire amount
to its shareholders as dividends and then, for the remainder of the current Regime H , pays
all net inflows of cash from operations, H > 0, as dividends as soon as they arrive. When
the current Regime H ends and the next Regime L arrives, the firm terminates. Therefore,
the expected present value of dividends is X plus the expected present value of cash flows
from operations over the duration of Regime H . That is, V H (X ) equals X plus the myopic
                                                     H
value of Regime H in Definition 2, H                 +µL
                                                         .    Therefore,

      V H (X ) = H + X ,                                                                            (B.1)
               H               H
which implies VX (X ) = 1 and VXX (X ) = 0.

                                                       37
Proof of Proposition 2.           See paragraph immediately preceding Proposition 2 in the
main text.
Proof of Proposition 3.                  H
                                  Since VXX (X  ) = 0, it follows that if VXX
                                                                           H
                                                                              (0) < 0, then
X  = 0, so X  > 0. Also, if X  > 0, then VXX
                                          H
                                             (X ) < 0 for 0  X < X  , so VXX
                                                                          H
                                                                             (0) < 0.
Now evaluate the ODEs in equations (8) and (9) at X = 0 and use V L (0) = 0 from
                         H            +µL H                           -L L
equation (10) to obtain VX (0) =      H
                                         V     (0) and V H (0) =        V
                                                                      µH X
                                                                                (0), respectively, so
                    µL -L L
that   H
      VX (0) = +  µH H X
                           V (0). Evaluate equation (13) at X = 0 to obtain VX            L
                                                                                            (0) =
 1            L     H        H H
µL
      - r + µ VX (0) -  VXX (0) , which can be substituted into the previous equation
                        µL -L 1
           H
to obtain VX (0) = +  µ H H µ L
                                   - r + µL V X  H
                                                   (0) - H VXXH
                                                                 (0) . Rearrange the equation
            H µH        µL         H             H
                                                       H                           H
to obtain +µL -L -r+µL - 1 VX        (0) = - -r+µL VXX    (0). Therefore, since VX   (0) > 0 and
     H                                                           H    H    L
- - r+µL
                                H
         < 0, it follows that VXX  (0) < 0 if and only if   +       µ     µ
                                                                 µL -L -r+µL
                                                                                > 1.
                                                                       H µH     µL
Proof of Corollary 1.          Proposition 3 implies that if   +µL -L -r+µL = 1, then
X  = 0. Since X  = 0, Proposition 1 implies that VX     H
                                                          (0) = 1 = .
                                                                            H µH       µL
Proof of Proposition 4. Starting from  , r,  , L , µH , µL  +
                                                        H
                                                                             µ - -r+µL
                                                                              L    L          = 1,
                                                              
any change in a parameter that increases  will increase X to a positive value. Inspection
of the definition of  , r, H , L , µH , µL immediately reveals that the following changes
individually increase  and hence increase X  to a positive value: a decrease in  (Statement
1); an increase in r (Statement 2); an increase in µH (Statement 3); an increase in H
(Statement 6); an increase in L since L is negative (Statement 7).
     To determine the impact of a small change in µL , differentiate  , r, H , L , µH , µL 
 H µ H     µL                                                                                
+µL -L -r+µL
                    with respect to µL to obtain         µL
                                                                = - + µL
                                                                         +        µL
                                                                                       -   -r+µL
                                                                                                   =
                                                                                                    
µL (+µL )(-r+µL )
                    -µL  - r + µL +  + µL           -r+µ   L
                                                                - µL  + µL . Since          µL (+µL )(-r+µL )
                                                                                                                >
           
0, sign    µL
                = sign µL r +  + µL       - r + µL - 2µL  + µL           = sign -r +  - µL               + µL
                            2                            2
= sign -r + 2 - µL              = sign ( - r)  - µL          = sign      ( - r)  - µL =
                     r                                                   
     sign       1-   
                         - µL . Therefore, if µL <     ( - r) , then     µL
                                                                              > 0 so an increase in
µL increases X  to a positive value (Statement 4). Alternatively, if µL >              ( - r) , then

µL
     < 0 and a decrease in µL increases X  to a positive value (Statement 5).
                                           H µH    µL                                  µL   µL   µH H
Proof of Proposition 5. Rewrite            +µL -L -r+µL
                                                             in Definition 3 as  =     +µL -r+µL -µL L
                                                                                                          =
µL   µL    µ H H                           L L    H H
+µL -r+µL µH H -M
                  ,      where 0 < M  µ  + µ                 < µH H is unchanged by a mean-
preserving change in H and L , for given µH and µL . Starting from an initial parameter
configuration in which  = 1, a mean-preserving decrease in H and increase in L decreases
                                                                       µH H
µH H while maintaining M unchanged which increases the ratio          µH H -M
                                                                                and hence increases


                                               38
 to a value greater than one. Therefore, X  increases to a positive number.
Proof of Lemma 1.              Use the characteristic equation q ( ) =  2 - (trA)  + det A = 0
          2
to obtain i = (trA) i - det A, where i , i = 1, 2 is a root of the characteristic equa-
                      2
tion.      Therefore, i 1 - j H = i
                                  2   2
                                    - i j H = (trA) i - det A - i H det A, which
                                                   1       1       1 1
                    2
can be rewritten as i 1 - j H =                    H
                                                       +   L
                                                                i -H L
                                                                       (1 - ) -         i H 1 1
                                                                                            H L (1 - ) =
1 1                                                              1 1
H L
            H + L i - (1 - ) - i H (1 - ) =                      H L
                                                                       L + H             i - (1 - ) . Mul-
                                               H   L                    L     H
tiply both sides of this equation by -  to obtain 1--  +                                 i = -H L i
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                    1 - j H >
                                                                                        1
0, where the inequality follows from H > 0, L < 0, and 1 < 2 <                          H
                                                                                          .
                                                                                          L +H
Proof of Lemma 2. Lemma 1 implies that the denominator of                               1--(L +H )2
                                                                                                       is pos-
                                  L        H
itive, so sign () = sign  +                    . To prove the final equality in this lemma, use the def-
                                 H      µH   µL     L                 +µH          µ    µH    L         +µH
inition of  to obtain  - 1 = +    µL +µH +µL
                                                 + + µH               -L
                                                                               = H + µH +µL
                                                                                            + L         -L
                                                                                                            .
                              µH    µ L                                                 +µH
Then use the definition of   +  µH +µL
                                          to obtain -1                = H  + L          -L
                                                                                              so sign ( - 1) =
                         +µ H
        H      L
sign   +  since -L > 0.
Proof of Proposition 6. See Appendix A.
Proof of Corollary 2.              First consider the case in which  > 0.               Lemma 2 and State-
ment 1 of Proposition 6 together imply that X  -  =                       1
                                                                ln (1 + (2 - 1 ) ) -  =
                                                                        2 -1
  1                                        1
2 -1
    [ln (1 + (2 - 1 ) ) - (2 - 1 ) ] = 2 -1 h (z ), where h (z )  ln (1 + z ) - z and z 
                                                   -z
(2 - 1 )  > 0. Observe that h (0) = 0 and h (z ) = 1+ z
                                                        < 0 for z > 0. Therefore, h (z ) < 0
                                       
for z > 0, so X -  < 0. Therefore, X <  = max {0, }. Now consider   0, which
implies H + L  0. Statement 2 of Proposition 6 implies that X  = 0  max {0, }.

Lemma 4 The eigenvalues 1 and 2 have the following properties

        1
   1.   L
            < 1 < 0 < (1 - ) 1
                             H < 2 <
                                                   1
                                                   H

                              1       1
   2. 1 + 2 = trA =           H
                                  +   L
                                          <0
                             1 1
   3. 1 2 = det A =          H L
                                   (1 - ) < 0
        1       1        1
   4.   1
            +   2
                    =   1-
                             H + L > 0.

Proof of Lemma 4.              The characteristic equation associated with the matrix A in equa-
                                                                       1       1
tion (17) is q ( )   2 - (trA)  + det A, where trA =                   H
                                                                           +   L
                                                                                   < 0, where the inequality
follows    from equation (2), and det A = 1    1
                                             H L (1 -           ) < 0. Since q ( ) = 2 > 0, the charac-
                                                 1               1 2
teristic   polynomial q ( ) is convex. Since q    L =            L
                                                                     - 1
                                                                       H       +   1
                                                                                   L
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        L
                                                                                          + 1   1
                                                                                             H L (1 -   ) =
                                                                                        1 2
- 1 1
  H L        > 0, q (1 ) = 0, q (0) = det A < 0, q (1 -            1
                                                                 ) H =         (1 - )   H
                                                                                            - 1H + L
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                         (1 - ) 1
                                                                                                                H+




                                                           39
1   1                                   1 2                             1        1 2       1     1    1
H   L
        (1 - ) = - (1 - )               H
                                              < 0, q (2 ) = 0, and q    H
                                                                             =   H
                                                                                     -    H
                                                                                              +   L  H
                                                                                                          +
1   1
H   L
        (1 - ) =       - 1 1
                         H L           > 0, it follows that    1
                                                               L
                                                                   < 1 < 0 < 2 <         1
                                                                                         H
                                                                                             (Statement   1).
The sum of the roots of q ( ) = 0 is the negative of the coefficient on the linear term in
                                              1       1
.     Therefore, 1 + 2 = trA =                H
                                                  +   L
                                                          < 0 (Statement 2).     The product of the roots
                                                               1 1
is the constant term in q ( ), which is det A =                H L
                                                                     (1 - ) < 0 (Statement 3). Finally,
1       1       1 +2        trA        H +L
1
    +   2
            =   1 2
                       =   det A
                                   =   1-
                                              (Statement 4).
Proof of Proposition 7. Assume that L + H  0. Evaluate the first row of equation
(18) at X = X  to obtain V H (X  ) = c1 + c2 .                     Use the expressions for c1 and c2 from
                                                                                                    2 - 2
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                    2       1
equations (A.6) and (A.7), respectively, to obtain V H (X  ) =                 1
                                                                             2 -1   1
                                                                                        -   2
                                                                                                =      1  1
                                                                                                    2 -1 1 2
    1 +2      1       1                                     1    1      1
=   1 2
            = 1
                 +     2
                         . Use Statement 4 of Lemma 4,       1
                                                               +  2
                                                                    = 1-  
                                                                              H + VL  H
                                                                                         > 0, to
obtain V H (X  ) = 1-     1
                            
                             H + V LH
                                       . Rewrite the ODE in equation (8), setting r = 0, as
  + µ V (X ) =  VX (X ) + µ V (X ). Evaluate this ODE at X = X  , use the bound-
       L    H             H H         L L

ary condition VX   H
                     (X  ) = 1, and divide both sides of the equation by  + µL using the defi-
                                      H                                µL
nition of the myopic value H  +        µL
                                           to obtain V H (X  ) = H + +  µL
                                                                            V L (X  ). Therefore,
                µL                         µL                              µL 1
V L (X  ) = + µL
                     V H (X  ) - H = +    µL
                                                1
                                               1-
                                                    H + L - H = +         µL 1-
                                                                                   H + L =
       µH             µL L
 1
1- +µH
           H + +     µL
                           < 1-  1
                                   
                                     H + L = V H (X  ).
Proof of Proposition 9. The eigenvalues 1 and 2 satisfy

         2 - T  + det (A) = 0                                                                          (B.2)

where
                           1    1
        T  tr (A) =         L
                              + H <0                                                                   (B.3)
                               
and
                       1 1
        det (A) =          (1 - ) < 0.                                                                 (B.4)
                       L H
Observe that

        lim T = -                                                                                      (B.5)
        L   0

and

        lim L T = 1.
        L   0


The eigenvalues are the roots of the characteristic equation (B.2)
                1
        i =       T±         T 2 - 4 det (A) ,                                                         (B.6)
                2
                                                          40
which can be rewritten as
         1                        1 det (A)
      i = T        1     1-4                      .                                 (B.7)
         2                        T T

Define
                          1
           T             L
                            + 1H                 1
      Y          =      1 1                 =      H + L > 0.                       (B.8)
         det (A)        L H
                            (1 -        )       1-
Equation (B.8) implies that
                     1
         lim Y =        lim H > 0                                                   (B.9)
      L    0       1 -  L 0
is finite. Substitute equation (B.8) into equation (B.7) to obtain

         1                        1 1
      i = T        1     1-4                                                       (B.10)
         2                        TY
so
                               1 1
      2 - 1 = -T         1-4                                                       (B.11)
                               TY
and
               1                      1
      2 =        [(1 + 2 ) + 2 - 1 ] = [T + (2 - 1 )] .                            (B.12)
               2                      2
Observe that
                      1 1
         lim    1-4       = 1.                                                     (B.13)
      L    0          TY

Therefore,

                                                  1 1
         lim (2 - 1 ) = lim -T              1-4       = - lim T =                  (B.14)
      L    0              L   0                   TY     L 0



and
                                                        1 1
         lim -L (2 - 1 ) = lim L T                1-4       = lim L T = 1.         (B.15)
      L    0                      L     0               TY   L 0

Recall the characteristic equation q ( )   2 - T  + det (A) = 0, which can be rewritten as
                         1    1                 1 1
      q ( )   2 -         L
                            + H             +       (1 - ) = 0.                    (B.16)
                                                L H

                                                      41
Multiply both sides of equation (B.16) by L H to obtain

      L H  2 -  H + L + 1 -  = 0.                                                         (B.17)

Consider the limit as L           0. In this limit, the characteristic equation is - H +1 -  = 0,
so
                       1-
      lim 2 =                >0                                                           (B.18)
      L   0         limL 0 H
is finite. Use equation (B.18) and the definition of  to obtain

                                 L + H                  limL 0 H
      lim  =            lim                   =                                  1-
                                                                                          (B.19)
      L   0          L    0 1 -  - (L + H ) 2   1 -  -  limL 0 H lim
                                                                                L   0
                                                                                      H

                       
                  =       2 lim  H > 0,
                    (1 - )   L 0



which is finite. Recall that
                1
      X =           ln (1 +  (2 - 1 )) .                                                  (B.20)
              2 - 1
Since limL    0    is finite,  is finite for all L in a negative neighborhood of zero, so   ,
where  is finite, for all L in a negative neighborhood of zero. Therefore,
                1
      X              ln 1 +  (2 - 1 ) .                                                   (B.21)
              2 -  1
                                       1
Since limL    0   (2 - 1 ) =  and limz z ln (1 + az ) = 0 for a > 0, we have

      lim X  = 0.                                                                         (B.22)
      L   0

Now consider the ratio of X  to the operating loss in Regime L, -L ,
      X         X                      1
         =                =                         ln (1 +  (2 - 1 )) .                  (B.23)
      -L   ( + µH ) (-L )   ( + µH ) (-L ) (2 - 1 )
                                                        
Since limL    0   -L (2 - 1 ) = 1, limL                               H
                                                 0  = (1-)2 limL 0  > 0, and limL 0 (2 - 1 )        =
                                                X
, equation (B.23) implies that limL           0 -L = .
                                                L +H
Proof of Proposition 10.              1. (        1-
                                                      ) Consider a sequence of parameters such
that in the limit L and H are bounded away from zero and  +           L      H
                                                                                 > 0 is arbitrar-
                              L        H
ily close to 0.     Since  and             (as well as  < 1) are bounded away from zero, the
eigenvalues 1 and 2 are bounded above and below.              In particular, since 2 is bounded
          L         H                                 1-
above,  +                2 approaches zero, so    1--(L +H )2
                                                                  approaches 1, and hence  

                                                  42
  L +H                        L +H     1-                                           L +H
1--(L +H )2
                        =      1-  1--(L +H )2
                                                                       approaches      1-
                                                                                              > 0, which is arbitrarily small.
                                                                                         L +H
    
2. (X          ) Since 2 - 1 > 0 is bounded                                from above,  1  -
                                                                                               (2 - 1 ) approaches 0, and
                                                                                            1
hence from part 1, (2 - 1 )  approaches                                    zero so X = 2 -1 ln (1 + (2 - 1 ) ) . 3.
  L +H            µL
(   1-            +µL
                      VL          (X  )) This statement is simply equation (20).
                                                                                             +µL 1
Proof of Proposition 11. Differentiate V L (X  ) =                                           µL 1-
                                                                                                              L + H in Statement 2 of
                                        dV L (X  )                    +µL 1          dL
Proposition 7 to obtain                   dH
                                                         |M P S =     µL 1-          dH
                                                                                              |M P S +  and then use equation (22)
                                                                µH (+µL )                                                                       2
               dV L (X  )                 +µL 1                                      µH  µL                    1 µH                   +µL
to obtain        dH
                            |M P S =      µL 1-
                                                               - µL (+µH ) +         +µH +µL
                                                                                                         =    1- +µH
                                                                                                                           1-         µL
                                                                                                                                                     (State-
ment 1). Differentiate V H (X  ) = 1-1
                                       
                                         H + L in Statement 1 of Proposition 7 to obtain
dV H (X  )                 µH (+µL )                  H

  d   H    |M P S =  1
                    1-
                       1 - µL (+µH )
                                          1
                                       = 1-  +µH
                                                 1- µ
                                                    µL
                                                        (Statement 2).
Proof of Lemma 3.                           Express H and L in terms of the mean of the unconditional
                              µH H +µL L
distribution, m                 µH +µL
                                         ,           and the standard deviation of the unconditional distribution,
          µH (H -m)2 +µL (L -m)2                                               µL                                µH
                       µH +µL
                                               , as H = m +                    µH
                                                                                    and L = m -                  µL
                                                                                                                    .     Statement 1 follows
                                                                                                                                      µH
immediately from the expression for L that L < 0 if and only if m <                                                                   µL
                                                                                                                                         ,    which is
                                          µL                                                µ                                         H
                              
equivalent to  =              m
                                  >       µH
                                                 A . To prove statement 2, observe that L + + µH
                                                                                                 H > 0 if
                  L             µH  H                                                             µH       µH                    µL
and only if       +µH
                            +     H
                                +µ +µL
                                                   > 0 if and only if m -                         µL
                                                                                                       +   +µL
                                                                                                                     m+          µH
                                                                                                                                          > 0 if and
          +µL +µH                         µH             µH           µL                     µL            µH                    µH
only if     +µL
                        m >               µL
                                                -        +µL
                                                                      µH
                                                                           =        1-   +µL
                                                                                                           µL
                                                                                                                =    +µL
                                                                                                                                 µL
                                                                                                                                       if and only
                 µL +µH            µL          
C  1 +                             µH
                                         >     m
                                                 .
Proof of Proposition 8.                              First consider values of the coefficient of variation less than
                       µL                                      µL                                                    µH
or equal to            µH
                          ,   so that   m                      µH
                                                                  ,   which implies L = m -                          µL
                                                                                                                           0. In this case,
the cash flow from operations is always non-negative, so there is no need for the firm to
                                                                                                                                                     µL
hold any cash; that is, X  = 0 if the coefficient of variation is less than or equal to                                                              µH
                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                     µL
Now consider admissible values of the coefficent of variation greater than or equal to                                                               µH
                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                       
Lemma 2 states that the sign of  is the same as the sign of H + L .                                                              Therefore X ,
                                                                                                                 H           L
which has the same sign as , will be positive if and only if                                                         > - , which can be
                   µL  µH               H                  L                                                                              2
written as         +µL +µH              +µL
                                                   >     - + µH
                                                                      and simplified to µL µH H > -  + µL                                     L .    Use
                       µL                                      µH                                                                      µL       µH
H = m +                µH
                            and L = m -                        µL
                                                                    to rewrite this condition as µL µH m +  µH                                  µL
                                                                                                                                                       >
           2                        µH
  + µL           -m +               µL
                                           .       Divide both sides of this expression by m > 0 and rearrange
                                               2                           2             2             µH
to obtain µL µH +  + µL                              >         + µL            - µL           m        µL
                                                                                                          ,   which implies µL µH + 2 +
                   2                                       µH
2µL + µL               > 2 + 2µL                     m     µL
                                                              .       Divide both sides of this condition by 2 to obtain


                                                                               43
                               2
µL µH           L        µL                      L          µH
  
        + 1 + 2 µ +       
                                   > 1 + 2 µ          m
                                                      
                                                            µL
                                                               .      Now divide both sides of the condition by
                         µH    L
                                                                                                               -1
         L                  + µ                      µH                                µH                           µH       µL
 1 + 2 µ     to obtain    
                           
                             +2
                                    +1 >     m
                                             
                                                     µL
                                                          which implies          m
                                                                                 
                                                                                       µL
                                                                                            < 1+ 2 +       
                                                                                                          µL         
                                                                                                                         +    
                                                                                                                                  .
                          µL
                                                                   -1
                                                                          µH         µL       µL
Thus, X  > 0 if and only if         
                                    m
                                        < 1+ 2+             µL             
                                                                                 +            µH
                                                                                                 .
Proof of Proposition 12. Since X  () is differentable with respect to  on the interval
                         B -
(A , B ), lim>00         A +
                               X  () d = lim>00 [X  (B - ) - X  (A + )] = 0, where the
final equality follows from lim>00 X  (A + ) = 0 and lim>00 X  (B - ) = 0.
Proof of Proposition 13.
   The moment-generating function of  is defined as

        f (Xt ; )  Et e-( -t) .

Since e-t f (Xt ; ) is a martingale, the function f (Xt ; ) satisfies the same ODEs as the
value function V (Xt ) with  replaced by . It is subject to the boundary conditions:

         H
        fX (X  ) = 0,                                                                                                    (B.24)
          f L (0) = 1.                                                                                                   (B.25)

The boundary condition (B.24) indicates that X is reflected at X  (so that f H (X  + ) =
f H (X  ) for any  > 0, and accordingly fX
                                         H
                                           (X  ) = 0).The boundary condition evaluated at
Xt = 0 is f L (0; ) = Et e-(t-t) = 1.
                              ()     ()
   Letting H, , L, , 1 , 2                  denote counterparts of H , H , 1 , 2 with  replaced by ,
the general solution to f (X ) is given by

  f H (X )          ()
                                        1                        ()
                                                                      (X -X  )       ()
                                                                                                      1                      ()
                                                                                                                                  (X -X  )
              = c1        +µL             ()                 e1                  +c2        +µL           ()             e2                  ,
    L
  f (X )                  µL
                                    1-    1 H,                                               µL
                                                                                                     1-   2 H,

where X  denotes the target level of cash of the firm.
   Imposing the two boundary conditions (B.24) and (B.25) gives

                    ()
        ()       () 1
        c2 = -c1    ()
                    2




                                                             44
and

      ()                                                                 1
      c1 =                                            ()                     ()                                              ()
                                                                                                                                      .
                 +µL            ()                   -1 X                1         +µL               ()                           X
                  µL
                           1-   1 H,                e                -       ()    µL
                                                                                               1 - 2 H,              e-2
                                                                         2


Accordingly, the moment generating function for a newly born firm, which has zero assets
and finds itself in Regime H is given (after a few simplifications)
                                                                                          ()    ()
                                                             ()               () - 2 -1              X
                   µL                                        2 - 1 e
      f H (0; ) =                                                                                                                         (B.26)
                   + µL          ()             ()                         ()              ()
                                                                                                                    ()
                                                                                                               - 2 -1
                                                                                                                             ()
                                                                                                                                  X
                                 2         1-   1 H,                 -     1        1-     2 H,            e

The life expectancy of a newly born firm, which has zero assets at birth, is therefore
                   df H (0; 0)
      E ( ) = -                .                                                                                                          (B.27)
                       d
   To calculate the right hand side of equation (B.27), define A() as in equation (17), but
with  replacing . Similarly let () be the counterpart of , but with  replacing . We note
                                                                                                           (0)                (0)
that (0) = 1, and accodrdingly det A(0) = 0. Hence, the roots 1 and 2 in equation
(B.26) are given by

       (0)       1    1    L µ L + H µ H   (0)
      1 =           +    =               , 2 = 0.
                 H,0 L,0       L H

The implicit function theorem applied to equation (A.1) gives

                            d det(A(0) )                                          µH µL     1         1
      d2
           (0)
                                               - H,01L,0 d
                                                                     (0)
                                                                                  H L      µH
                                                                                                +    µL
                                 d                        d
         |=0 =                             =        L µL +H µH
                                                                             =         L µL +H µH
       d                    tr (A(0) )
                                                       L H                                L H
                              µH + µL
                       =                  .
                            L µ L + H µ H
Next, define
                                               ()       ()
                           ()     () - 2 -1                  X
      B1 ()  2 - 1 e                                             ,
                                                                                                      ()       ()
                           ()          ()                    ()                   ()            - 2 -1              X
      B2 ()  2                  1 - 1 H, - 1                          1 - 2 H, e                                         ,

so that f H (0; ) can be written more compactly as

       H         µL B1 ()
      f (0; ) =             .
                 + µL B2 ()

                                                                     45
        (0)                                                               (0)      (0)
                                                                                         X
Since 2 = 0, we have that B1 (0) = B2 (0) = -1 e1                                            . Accordingly,
        d                1     1                    dB1 (0) dB2 (0)
          f H (0; 0) = - L +                               -                                 .                          (B.28)
       d                µ    B2 (0)                   d       d
                                                                              ()      ()
                                    ()     ()                         - 2 -1                 X                    (0)
Note that B1 () - B2 () = 2 1 H, 1 - e                                                             so that using 2 = 0 gives

                                    (0)
       dB1 (0) dB2 (0)  d  (0)        (0) 
              -        = 2 1 H,0 1 - e1 X                                                                               (B.29)
         d       d       d
                                          (0)     (0)
                                                        X
Combining B1 (0) = B2 (0) = -1 e1                           with (B.28) and (B.29) leads to
                                                              (0)               (0)
                                            (0)             d2                        X
        d                   1             1 H,0              d
                                                                      1 - e1
          f H (0; 0)    = - L-                              (0)     (0)
       d                   µ                            1 e1              X

                                                        (0)
                            1      d        (0) 
                        = - L - H,0 2 e-1 X - 1
                           µ        d
                                 H
                            1       µH + µL         L L +H µH
                                                   - µ L      X
                        = - L- L L L             e     H        -1 .
                           µ    µ  µ + H µ H

    The equation immediately above, along with equation (B.27), leads to the life expectancy
in Proposition 13.
Proof of Proposition 14.              Let 0 be such that X  ()  0 if  < 0 and X  ()  0
                        B -                                       0                                    B -
if  > 0 .     Then      A +
                              X  () g () d =                      A +
                                                                          X  () g () d +               0
                                                                                                              X  () g () d >
 0                            B -                                                     B -
 A +
       X  () g (0 ) d +       0
                                    X  () g (0 ) d = g (0 )                           A +
                                                                                                 X  () d =
    = g (0 ) [X  (B - ) - X (A + )]. Since lim>00 X (B - ) = 0 = lim>00 X  (A + ),
                                                                                        
                       B -
we have lim>00         A +
                             X  () g () d > 0.]


C      Concavity of the Value Function
In this appendix we prove that the value functions V H (X ) and V L (X ) are strictly concave
for 0  X < X  , where X  is the lowest positive value of X such that VX
                                                                      H
                                                                        (X )  1. We
                                        H                    H
confine attention to the case in which VX (0) > 1, since if VX (0)  1, the target level of
cash on hand in Regime H is zero and the set of X that satisfy 0  X < X  is empty.) The
HJBs in equations (8) and (9) are repeated below for convenience

        H + rX VX
                H
                  + µL V L -  + µL V H = 0 ,                                                                             (C.1)
        L + rX VX
                L
                  + µH V H -  + µH V L = 0 .                                                                             (C.2)

                                                                 46
                         H
   First, we prove that VXX (X ) < 0 for all X such that 0  X < X  . Suppose otherwise.
Then there exists some non-negative X1 < X  such that VXX
                                                       H
                                                          (X1 ) = 0. Differentiating (C.1)
gives

         H + rX VXX
                 H
                    + µ L VX
                           L
                             -  + µL - r V X
                                           H
                                             = 0.                                     (C.3)

Therefore,

         L            + µL - r H           H + rX1 H
        VX (X1 ) =            V X ( X1 ) -        VXX (X1 ) .                         (C.4)
                        µL                   µL
                                           H
Differentiating (C.2) and using (C.4) and VXX (X1 ) = 0 gives after some re-arrangement
        L + rX1 L                     -r            -r           H
               VXX (X1 ) -       1+            1+           - 1 VX (X1 ) = 0.         (C.5)
          µH                          µH            µL
       H
Since VX (X1 ) > 0,  - r > 0, and (using footnote 12) L + rX < L + rX   0, it follows
           L
that that VXX (X1 ) < 0. Differentiating (C.3) gives

         H + rX1 VXXX
                  H
                      (X1 ) + µL VXX
                                  L
                                     (X1 ) -  + µL - 2r VXX
                                                         H
                                                            (X1 ) = 0.                (C.6)
       H
Since VXX (X1 ) = 0, H + rX1  H > 0, and VXX
                                          L
                                             (X1 ) < 0, it follows that

         H             -µL VXX
                            L
                               (X1 )
        VXXX (X1 ) =     H
                                     > 0.                                             (C.7)
                         + rX1
       H                                                                        H
Hence VX (X ) attains a local minimum at X1 . If there were a local maximum of VX (X )
anywhere in [X1 , X  ], then VXX
                              H                          H
                                 (X ) would be zero and VXXX (X ) would be negative at that
                                                H                  H
value of X .    However, we have shown that if VXX (X ) = 0, then VXXX (X ) > 0, so no
                                       H
such local maximum exists. Therefore, VX (X ) is increasing over the interval [X1 , X  ], so
 H
VX         H
   (X1 )  VX (X  )  1, which contradicts fact that X  is (by definition) the smallest value
                H
of X such that VX                       H
                  (X1 )  1. Therefore, VXX (X ) < 0 for all X such that 0  X < X  .
                      L
   Now we prove that VXX (X ) < 0 for all X such that 0  X < X  . Suppose, contrary to
                            L
what is to be proved, that VXX (X2 )  0 at some 0  X2 < X  . Differentiating (C.2) and
rearranging gives

         L              µH      H          L + rX2 L
        VX (X2 ) =            V   ( X2 ) +          V (X2 ) .                         (C.8)
                      + µH - r X            + µH - r XX
In addition, for that level of X2 , differentiating (C.1) gives

         H + rX2 VXX
                  H
                     (X2 ) + µL VX
                                 L
                                   (X2 ) -  + µL - r VX
                                                      H
                                                        (X2 ) = 0.                    (C.9)

                                               47
                               L
Substitute the expression for VX (X2 ) from equation (C.8) into equation (C.9) and multiply
                +µH -r
both sides by   µL µH
                           to obtain
                                                            
              +µH -r        H             H
                            + rX2        VXX   (X2 )       L
               µL µH                                   = -  + rX2 VXX
                                                                   L
                                                                      (X2 )  0,                          (C.10)
                    -r              -r
          -   1+   µH
                             1+     µL
                                              H
                                         - 1 VX (X2 )        µ H



where the inequality follows from L + rX2  0 and VXX
                                                  L                   H
                                                     (X2 )  0. Since VX (X2 ) > 0, and
                      H
as we proved earlier VXX (X ) < 0, it must be the case that
        + µH - r H       H                                  -r                -r               H
          L H
                  + rX2 VXX (X2 )-                     1+                1+               - 1 VX (X2 ) < 0,(C.11)
         µ µ                                                µH                µL
                                               L
which contradicts equation (C.10). Therefore, VXX (X ) < 0 for all X such that 0  X < X  .


D       The stationary distribution of volatility
Let N () denote the steady-state mass of firms with a given coefficient of variation of
cash flows equal to , for A <  < C . Firms have potentially different values of , but
all firms have identical values of µH , µL , , and identical unconditional mean cash flow
       µH H +µL L
m=       µH +µL
                       > 0. At each point of time, a new cohort of firms is born with zero cash
on hand and a given value of . At birth, the mass of entering forms is normalized to one
for each ; therefore, the distribution of  across firms is uniform at birth.
     To calculate the stationary distribution of  across firms, N (), let G (T - s; ) denote
the fraction of firms that were born at time s that are still alive at time T. Assuming that
at each point in time there is a continuum of identical firms born with a given coefficient
of variation, , the law of large numbers along with the assumption that the transitions
between high and low regimes are idiosyncratic implies that
                            
       G (T - s; ) =              g ( ; ) d,
                           T -s


where g ( ; ) is the distribution of the termination time for a firm born with zero as-
                                                                                            T
sets. The steady-state mass of firms in existence is therefore N () =                       -
                                                                                                G (T - s; ) ds =
  
 0
     G (u; ) du, where the second equality used the substitution u = T - s. Since G (u; ) =
-g (u; )
                                                                                       
     N () =            G (u; ) du = -uG (u; ) |0 +                 ug (u; ) du =           g ( ; ) d = E ( ; ) .
                0                                           0                      0


                                                       48
                                                                      N ()
Therefore, the stationary distribution of  across firms is given by   H           .
                                                                      L   N ()d




                                         49
