                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE IMPACT OF DEUNIONIZATION ON THE GROWTH AND DISPERSION OF
                         PRODUCTIVITY AND PAY

                                        Giovanni Dosi
                                      Richard B. Freeman
                                      Marcelo C. Pereira
                                       Andrea Roventini
                                     Maria Enrica Virgillito

                                       Working Paper 26634
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26634


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank for useful comments the participants to the Society for Computation in Economics and
Finance (CEF), Milan (IT), 2018; WEHIA Conference, Tokyo (JP), 2018; International
Schumpeter Society (ISS), Seoul (South Korea), 2018; EAEPE Conference, Nice (FR), 2018;
AISRE Conference, Bolzano (IT), 2018; ANPEC Conference, Rio de Janeiro (BR), 2018; ICC-
Tsinghua Conference, Beijing (CN), 2019. We gratefully acknowledge the support by the
European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No.
822781 GROWINPRO ­ Growth Welfare Innovation Productivity ­ and by Fundação de Amparo
à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), process No. 2015/24341-7. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Giovanni Dosi, Richard B. Freeman, Marcelo C. Pereira, Andrea Roventini, and
Maria Enrica Virgillito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Impact of Deunionization on the Growth and Dispersion of Productivity and Pay
Giovanni Dosi, Richard B. Freeman, Marcelo C. Pereira, Andrea Roventini, and Maria Enrica
Virgillito
NBER Working Paper No. 26634
January 2020
JEL No. C63,E02,E24,J51

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper presents an Agent-Based Model (ABM) that seeks to explain the concordance of
sluggish growth of productivity and of real wages found in macro-economic statistics, and the
increased dispersion of firm productivity and worker earnings found in micro level statistics in
advanced economies at the turn of the 21st century. It shows that a single market process
unleashed by the decline of unionization can account for both the macro and micro economic
phenomena, and that deunionization can be modeled as an endogenous outcome of competition
between high wage firms seeking to raise productive capacity and low productivity firms seeking
to cut wages. The model highlights the antipodal competitive dynamics between a "winner-takes-
all economy" in which corporate strategies focused on cost reductions lead to divergence in
productivity and wages and a "social market economy" in which competition rewards the
accumulation of firm-level capabilities and worker skills with a more egalitarian wage structure.

Giovanni Dosi                                   Andrea Roventini
EmbeDS and Institute of Economics               EmbeDS and Institute of Economics
Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna                      Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna
Piazza Martiri della Liberta', 33               Piazza Martiri della Liberta', 33
56127 Pisa, Italy                               56127 Pisa, Italy
gdosi@santannapisa.it                           and OFCE, Sciences Po,
                                                Sophia-Antipolis, France
Richard B. Freeman                              andrea.roventini@santannapisa.it
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                       Maria Enrica Virgillito
Cambridge, MA 02138                             EmbeDS and Institute of Economics
freeman@nber.org                                Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna
                                                Pisa (Italy)
Marcelo C. Pereira                              m.virgillito@santannapisa.it
University of Campinas
Barao Geraldo, Campinas
São Paulo, 13083-970
Brazil
mcper@unicamp.br
1       Introduction
In the first two decades of the 21st century advanced capitalist economies experienced a
striking set of changes in macro-economic, micro-economic and institutional patterns that
merit explanation. At the macro level, productivity growth slackened even as R&D spend-
ing increased, and real wage growth decoupled from the productivity growth to increase
at far lower rates.1 At the micro level, inequality increased among firms in productiv-
ity and in the average earnings paid to workers. Over the same period, the institutional
structure of labor markets changed, with the proportion of workers covered by unions
shrinking nearly everywhere.2 Empirical studies document these patterns in enough data
sets and countries to establish them as stylized facts for theory and models of how capital-
ism operates in a modern economy.
    What explains the concordance of sluggish macro-economic performance and diver-
gence in micro-economic firm outcomes? What connection, if any, exists between those
patterns and declining unionization?
    This paper presents an Agent Based Model (ABM) of the dynamics of productivity
growth and wage determination in labor markets with and without unions that offers a
unified explanation for all above patterns. The model simulates an economic world in
which firms endowed with heterogeneous productive capacity compete under two appo-
site labor relation systems: one that we label as "non-union" in which firms unilaterally set
wages and hire and fire workers and one that we label as "union" in which firms pay the
same collectively determined wage for similar workers, and follow a collective agreement
in hiring and firing. The non-union system pressures low-productivity firms to cut wages
to survive. The union system pressures firms to invest in productivity-enhancing activities
to survive. The differential pressure makes the mode of wage setting a selection mecha-
nism among firms with heterogeneous strategies of squeezing worker pay vs enhancing
worker and firm competence. The model accounts for the deunionization, sluggish growth
of productivity and real wages and increased dispersion of firm pay and productivity of
advanced countries in terms of micro market behaviors rather than as independent phe-
nomena following their own dynamics.
    ABMs are well-suited to analyze the concordance of micro, macro, and institutional de-
velopments. They differ from stochastic general equilibrium models by being open-ended
simulations driven by heterogeneous agents who follow simple bounded rationality rules
of behavior in disequilibrium situations, rather than being closed-form solutions derived
from linearization around equilibrium conditions. The rules govern the internal growth
or decline of firms over time and the entry and exit of firms that together change micro
productivity and pay, and aggregates to macro and institutional outcomes.
    1
      On the aggregate facts, Syverson (2017) shows that US labor productivity growth fell from 2.8% in 1995-
2004 to 1.3% in 2005-2015 and that 29 out of the 30 advanced countries had similar declines; Hutchinson and
Persyn (2012) and Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) document the falling labor share of income in devel-
oped countries; Schwellnus et al. (2017) show that the fall was accompanied by an increasing ratio of the
mean wage to the median wage income that reflects a widening distribution of wage income. On the micro
facts, Dunne et al. (2004) estimate a sizeable firm contribution to wage dispersion, Barth et al. (2016) show
that increased inter-establishment wage dispersion contributes roughly twice as much to the growth of wage
dispersion in the US as the increase in intra-establishment inequality. Berlingieri et al. (2017) document ris-
ing dispersion in wages and productivity across 16 OECD countries from the mid-1990s to 2012. While the
estimated magnitudes of these effects vary, we know of no empirical evidence that contravenes the stylized
patterns.
    2
      Farber et al. (2018) for US, Ebbinghaus and Visser (1999) for EU.


                                                      2
    A recurrent concern with ABMs is that analysts who focus on explaining a few styl-
ized facts may "overfit" the model with many behavioral rules designed for those facts
but which would not hold generally. Building our analysis on the "Schumpeter meeting
Keynes" (K+S) family of models that robustly accounts for a large ensemble of stylized
facts at micro- and macro-levels (see references to Table 2), we avoid this problem. We
further conduct robustness tests of the simulations to a range of different values of param-
eters.


2       Dispersion of productivity and wages and the dynamics of de-
        unionisation
Our agent-based modeling situates micro behavior in market settings where competition
imposes evolutionary pressure on agents. The main agents are firms whose characteristics
and behavior give them differing market rewards. Those with higher rewards prosper and
expand in the market while those with lower rewards see their share of market outcomes
shrink. The firms are heterogeneous in their productivity but have limited ways to learn
and adjust behavior.
    The assumption of firm heterogeneity is predicated on evidence that documents the
overweening importance of heterogeneity in productivity and wages among firms and
the establishments where they conduct business. The data show:
    · Wide dispersion among firms in productivity and average pay in a given period
      (Dunne et al., 2004) and in changes in productivity and pay even among demograph-
      ically identical workers in narrowly defined industries and occupations (Barth et al.,
      2016).
    · Within firm growth of productivity having a bigger impact than reallocation of
      workers from low- to high-productivity firms on aggregate productivity growth
      (Dosi et al., 2015).3
    · Lower dispersion of productivity in economies with compressed wage structures,
      as the compressed wage structure pushes low productivity companies out of the
      market (Barth et al., 2014).4
    · Lower dispersion of pay within and among unionized compared to non-union es-
      tablishments for workers with similar measured skills and for the same workers who
      change employment over time (Freeman, 1984).
    · An increasing share of "zombie firms" in the US from 2003 to 2013 ­ firms unable to
      pay outstanding interest but failing to exit the market (McGowan et al., 2017). This
      failure in market "cleansing" contributes to sluggish aggregate productivity growth.
    Taken together the failure of market forces to compress the widening distribution of
wages towards central levels even in the US, where union/institutional constraints on
market forces are weakest, suggests the need for a model of labor market adjustment that
goes beyond the assumption that the institution-less non-union market determines a sin-
gle market-clearing wage in the long run, if not in the short or intermediate run.
    Our ABM model links the macro and micro facts to institutional developments by sim-
    3
     The contribution of reallocation seems to further weaken post the Great Recession (Foster et al., 2016),
with the rate of entry of new firms falling while exit rates holding steady (Decker et al., 2016).
   4
     Earlier work by Hibbs Jr and Locking (2000) show that lower within-plant wage standard deviation is
associated with higher productivity levels, with a shift of labour from low- to high-productivity firms.



                                                     3
ulating the interaction of union and non-union wage-setting systems with heterogeneity
in the distribution of productivity among firms. Figure 1 shows the essence of the model.5
The x axis in each panel ranks firms from the most to the least efficient while the y axis
shows how efficiency translates into costs and thus the likely survivability of firms. Panel
A represents an industry with a union-bargained wage that applies to all firms so that the
ranking of firms from the most productive (firm 1) to the least productive (firm n) ranks
them inversely by unit costs. With all firms paying the same wage to equally skilled work-
ers, the more productive firms have lower costs. If the firms compete in a market with a
single price, the dynamics favors them and they expand while less efficient firms shrink.
The single bargained wage prevents firms from squeezing wages and thus pressures them
to compete on productivity and thus for selection on productivity. In panel A union firms
1 through n - 2 remain in the market while union firms n - 1 and n are driven out, which
truncates the distribution of productivity.
    Panel B depicts an industry in the opposite "non-union" situation where firms pay
workers a wage indexed on firm-specific productivity. In this case all firms have the same
unit costs of production and survive irrespective of their efficiency. Competition does not
favor firms 1, 2, 3 with higher relative productivity as their wages are commensurately
higher relative to their productivity. If productivity falls for any reason in a firm, the firm
reduces pay to survive, which allows the inefficient firms n - 2 to n to stay in business.
Dispersion of productivity is bound only by low productivity workers with reservation
wages above the wage that would justify their low productivity.
    Panel C analyzes competition between unionized firms that pay a single wage depen-
dent on the average productivity of the unionized group and non-unionized firms whose
wages depend only on their firm's productivity. As non-union firms enter, their produc-
tion reduces the price of the good and pressures the least efficient union firms. In this case
competition can exert a negative impact upon the dynamics of mean productivity as union
firms with below union-group productivity but higher productivity than non-union firms
go out of business while non-union firms with low productivity and low wages survive.
    Noting the tendency for labor unions to grow rapidly and decline slowly, Freeman
(1997) proposed a spurt model of unionization, which entails a phase transition triggered
after some tipping point that leads many workers and firms to unionize in a sudden sharp
increase. This is followed by competitive exit and entry forces that can favor non-union
firms and gradual reduce union density.6 Interpreting unionization as stemming from
workers and firms, Bryson et al. (2017) argue that deunionization is driven largely by
new cohorts of workers/firms who do not unionize rather than by previously unionized
workers/firms abandoning the institution. New firms experience a "never-member" effect
as workers with no union experience are unlikely to demand this good/service against a
management that prefers to operate non-union. In fact, young workers express greater
desire for unions than older workers (Bryson et al., 2005) but are less likely to be able to
   5
     This representation draws on Salter (1960) analysis of the productivities of different vintages of equip-
ment.
   6
     In this analysis, governments that enact laws favorable to unions, such as the Wagner Act in US, the Blum
government in France, or the PC 1003 in Canada are responding to worker pressures in the spurt. The laws
are not an exogenous determinant of unionism from the top but a pathway created to "tame" worker unrest.




                                                      4
accomplish that desire within the organization and thus less willing to try to overcome
management's strategy to remain non-union.7
    We begin our simulation model with a completely unionized labor market. Then non-
union firms enter. Unionized and non-unionized firms compete in the product market in
terms of relative prices, product quality and quantity (excess or unfilled demand), which
determine the average dispersion of productivity and wages. If the share of employ-
ment/output in non-union companies increases, the mean level of productivity growth
declines while the standard deviation of productivity among firms increases. Competi-
tion shifts from improving productivity to reducing wages and cost. Firms whose com-
parative advantage lies in cutting pay gain at the expense of those whose advantage lies
in high productivity. Cost competition induces a deflationary spiral, and reduces product
quality.
    But a simple strategy of reducing wages may not succeed in driving out higher wage/
more productive firms. To the extent that lower wages reduce the quality of production
or rate of improvement of productivity, the new low wage competitors may fail to survive
over the long run even if they increase their share of production in the short run. We use
the model to explore the nexus between deunionization and the stylized productivity facts
and the factors that determine whether a given labor market will shift its wage-setting
system.


3       The model
Figure 2 gives the bare-bones structure of the model. It extends Dosi et al. (2017, 2018) vari-
ant of the basic K+S artificial economy (Dosi et al., 2010) that included endogenous worker
skill accumulation and variable number of firms in a general disequilibrium, stock-and-
flow consistent, agent-based model, populated by heterogeneous workers/consumers,
capital-good firms, consumption-good firms, and banks, plus the central bank and gov-
ernment.8 Agent behavior follows bounded-rational rules. To apply the model to our
problem we add two differentiated mechanisms of job hiring and firing, search process,
and wage setting to characterize the type of firm.9
    The model highlights the importance of increasing knowledge in the growth of pro-
ductivity by dividing firms between those that produce capital-goods and those that pro-
duce consumption goods. The capital good firms invest in R&D and produce heteroge-
neous goods/services/knowledge that raise the productivity of the consumption-good
firms. This is the locus of endogenous innovation, characterized by imperfect informa-
tion and Schumpeterian competition driven by technological change. Given the increased
proportion of investment in software and in information, communication, and technology
equipment, we view this sector as extending beyond traditional producers of machine
tools/equipment to include those developing new software and information, technology,
and communication goods and services.
    Since creating knowledge depends critically on human activity, we make labor the
only factor of production in the capital-goods producing sector. These firms report the
    7
     For evidence that this may be changing among "millenials" see https://www.rewire.org/work/
younger-workers-labor-unions/.
   8
     Subscript t stands for (discrete) time t = 1, 2, ..., T . Agent-specific variables are denoted by subscript , in
case of workers, i, for capital-good firms, j , for consumption-good firms, and k, for banks.
   9
     The code and a user-friendly interface are accessible at https://github.com/marcov64/lsd.


                                                         5
price and productivity of their machines and services to current customers and a subset
of potential new ones, and invest a fraction of past revenues in R&D aimed at improving
their products. They set prices at a fixed mark-up over labor costs. In a typical model
run, capital-good firm workers represent less than 10% of the employed labor force, so we
focus on labor patterns in the consumption-good sector.
    Consumption-good firms combine vintages of capital bought from capital-goods firms
with labor to produce a single, quality-differentiated good for consumers under constant
returns to scale. Desired production is determined by adaptive demand expectations.
Given inventories, if the current capital stock cannot produce the desired output, firms
order new machines to expand capacity, funded by retained past profits or, up to a limit,
bank loans. They replace old machines according to a payback-period rule. Firms choose
the capital-good supplier based on the price and productivity of machines. As new ma-
chines embed state-of-the-art technologies, the productivity of consumption-good firms
increases over time. Consumption-good firms set prices by a variable mark-up on labor
production costs to balance profit margins and market shares, raising (lowering) mark-ups
and prices when market shares expand (decline). Due to imperfect information their con-
sumers switch gradually to the most competitive producer so that market shares evolve
according to a (quasi) replicator dynamics as more competitive firms expand, while less
competitive firms shrink or close down.
    Exit and entry of firms is endogenous in both sectors. Firms exit when market shares
get close to zero or go bankrupt when net assets turn negative. Conversely, firms enter the
market through a stochastic process that depends on the number of incumbents and finan-
cial conditions. Entry is easier when the sectoral liquidity-to-debt ratio is high. Banks take
deposits and provide interest-paying loans to finance firms' production and investment
plans. They allocate credit to firms seeking credit according to a loan to value ratio rule.
The supply of credit is elastic.
    The labor market is modeled as a decentralized search-and-hire process between work-
ers and firms. Workers search for jobs at a random subset of employers. The unemployed
submit job applications to firms. A proportion of employed workers apply for better posi-
tions. Larger firms have a proportionally higher probability of receiving job applications,
which are organized in firm-specific application queues. Capital-good firms hire workers
according to their demands. Consumption-good firms hire workers depending on adap-
tive demand expectations; while for simplicity, banks, the central bank and the govern-
ment have no workers. The aggregate supply of labour is fixed and available to be hired
in any period.
    The labour market is also characterized by imperfect highly localized information.
Firms observe workers' skills and wage requests on their own queues, while workers
are aware only of the wage offers from firms where they applied for a job. Firms de-
cide whether to hire, fire or keep the current labor force. Each hiring firm makes a unique
wage offer to job applicants, based on economy-wide productivity in the case of union
firms and on the received applications in non-union ones. Workers select the best wage
offer from firms to which they submitted applications, with employed workers quitting
the current job if they receive a better offer.
    We treat one round of interactions between workers and firms per period. The overall
demand for labor depends on the aggregate demand of the economy, which creates the
possibility that the labor market does not clear even absent firing or hiring transaction



                                              6
costs. Firms may fail to fill all open positions, and workers may not find a job even when
there are still unfilled positions. Systematic discrepancies between vacancies and involun-
tary unemployed are likely to be the rule rather than the exception in the aggregate.
    Workers spend their income on the consumption good.10 If the supply of the consumer
good falls short of demand, excess demand is saved in banks for future consumption.
The central bank sets the reserves from the banks and bails out failing banks. The gov-
ernment taxes firm and bank profits, pays unemployment benefits, imposes a minimum
wage, absorbs profits and losses from the central bank and keeps a non-explosive public
debt trajectory in the long run.
    Two other distinctive features of our model deserve attention. First, firms decide how
much to produce extrapolating on their past sales (Dosi et al., 2017). Past equipment is
bygone and remains part of firms' resources if the firm does not scrap it. Conversely
expansionary investment depends on the fixed coefficient associated with a new machine
(and software) offered by the machine-producing sector based on a pay-back rule, which
has little to do with elasticity of substitution (Dosi et al., 2001). This treatment simplified
the demand for labor from the notion of choice along a production function.
    Second, we do not model "strategic" game theoretic interactions among firms. Instead,
we treat organizational traits of behavior as sticky, irrespective of market signals (Dosi
et al., 2001). That is Toyota does not become Foxcom under any circumstance and vice
versa. In our model this is reflected by the absence of any firm-level switching rule driven
by relative performance. Instead, given their organizational types, firms are selected by
competitive forces.
    Appendix A contains the details of the model.

3.1    Competition between unionised and non-unionised firms
Table 1 contrasts the wage-setting and other features of union firms and non-union firms.
Unionized firms pay the same wages to all workers with the same skills and change wages
as aggregate and market productivity change. They fire employees only when profits be-
come negative. Their workers seek alternative jobs less frequently than non-union work-
ers, consistent with the exit-voice trade-off in the labor market (Freeman, 1980). In hiring
and firing, firms try to keep the more skilled workers. Conversely, non-unionised firms
set wages according to worker skills and labor market conditions. Wages are set by an
asymmetric negotiation process where firms have the last say over workers. There are no
hiring/firing protections and unemployed workers adjust downward their "satisficing"
wages.
    Employed workers search for better paid jobs and firms fire excess workforce accord-
ing to planned production. Hiring and firing of workers is based on the skills to (individ-
ual) wage ratio or just the latter, according to the scenario. The market share of unionised
firms is ftu  [0, 1] while that of non-unionised firms is ftn  [0, 1].
    To focus on the decline in unionization, we assume that non-union firms enter and
compete with union incumbent firms in an evolutionary process. From t = 100, the prob-
ability of an entrant being non-union is fixed at 50%. The time window (100  t < 200)
allows non-union entrants to grow and achieve some joint market share. At the end of this
  10
   The macroeconomic results hold as long as the propensity to consume out of wages is higher than out of
profits. Volatility of spending is lowest for consumption, then for GDP, and highest for investment.




                                                   7
period the likelihood of union or non-union firms entering the consumer-good market is
proportionate to their relative populations ftu       n
                                              -1 and ft-1 .
    In the consumer-good sector, firms compete according to their relative cost competi-
tiveness. Firm j market share evolves following a replicator dynamics:
                                                 ¯t
                                          Ej,t - E
                fj,t = fj,t-1 1 +                   ,           ¯t = 1
                                                                E                      Ej,t fj,t-1 ,   (1)
                                              ¯t
                                              E                      Ft2           j

where   R+ is a parameter, Ft2 the current number of firms in the consumer-good mar-
     ¯t the average competitiveness, and the firm relative competitiveness Ej,t is defined
ket, E
by the individual normalized price pj,t , unfilled demand lj,t and product quality qj,t , with
parameters(1 , 2 , 3 )  R3+:

                               Ej,t = -1 pj,t-1 - 2 lj,t-1 - 3 qj,t-1 ,                                (2)

   Firms set consumption-good prices by a variable mark-up µj,t on average unit cost cj,t :

                                          pj,t = (1 + µj,t )cj,t .                                     (3)

Firms' mark-up rule is driven by the evolution of individual market shares with parameter
  R+ :
                                               fj,t-1 - fj,t-2
                           µj,t = µj,t-1 1 +                   ,                      (4)
                                                    fj,t-2
    Unfilled demand lj,t is the difference between actual demand Dj,t firm j gets and its
effective production Qj,t plus existing inventories Nj,t from past periods, if any:

                                 lj,t = max [Dj,t - (Qj,t + Nj,t ), 0] .                               (5)

    The quality of consumer-good produced by firm j is determined by the average (log)
skill level of its workers. This captures the notion that firm-specific accumulated skills are
more complementary to incremental product innovation.

                                            1
                                 qj,t =                        log [s   ,t-1 ] ,                       (6)
                                          Lj,t-1
                                                   {Lj,t-1 }

    The skill of employed workers improves over time while unemployed workers lose
skills:
                                
                                (1 + T )s ,t-1        if employed in t - 1
                     s   ,t   =     1                                                                  (7)
                                       s ,t-1         if unemployed in t - 1,
                                 1 + U
where (T , U )  R2  + are parameters governing the learning rate while the worker is em-
ployed or unemployed. A newly hired worker immediately acquires the minimum skill
level present in the firm ­ the incumbent worker with the lowest skills ­, if above her
present level. Workers have a fixed working life, retiring at a specified point, at which they
are replaced in the labour market by young workers with skills at the current minimum
level among employed workers. At the beginning of each simulation, initial working ages
are randomly drawn in the range 1, 2, ..., Tr (Tr is a parameter) and start from the same
skill level.


                                                     8
   Worker current skills s    ,t   define her individual (potential) productivity:
                                                          s ,t 
                                             A   ,t   =       A ,                         (8)
                                                           ¯t i
                                                           s
being s¯t the average overall skill level of the economy, and Ai the standard productivity
of the specific machinery vintage the worker operates. Thus, the worker's normalized
skill represents her productivity relative to that expected for the machine vintage. This
makes firm-level effective productivity an emergent property resulting from the supplier-
driven introduction of new vintages, evolution of workers' skills, and the demand deci-
sions which guide capital accumulation and vintage mix of machines:
                                               1
                                    Aj,t =                                A ,t ,          (9)
                                             Lj,t-1
                                                              {Lj,t-1 }

where Lj,t is the number of workers at firm j , and {Lj,t }, the size of this set. So, if the
mean wage paid by firm j is wj,t , its average unit cost is given by:
                                                              wj,t
                                              cj,t =               .                     (10)
                                                              Aj,t

    Finally, we allow for other pay setting institutions through a profit-sharing mechanism
which allows firms with above-average profits distribute bonuses. For simplicity, bonuses
are equal for all workers in the firm. Thus, the total bonuses by firm are:

                                      Bj,t = 6 (1 - tr)j,t-1 ,                           (11)

being 6  [0, 1] a sharing parameter, tr  [0, 1] the tax rate parameter, and j,t the firm
gross profit. Therefore, the total income of worker working for firm j in period t is
w ,t + Bj,t /Lj,t .
    Appendix A describes the remaining behavioural rules characterizing agents. Ap-
pendix C gives model's parameters, initial conditions and stock-flow matrix. In each
simulation period the following events take place:

       I NITIATION OF C HANGES
  1.   Workers (employed and unemployed) update their skills;
  2.   Machines ordered in the previous period (if any) are delivered;
  3.   Capital-good firms perform R&D and signal their machines to consumption-good
       firms;
  4.   Consumption-good firms determine their desired production, investment and work-
       force;

       R ESPONSES TO C HANGES
  5.   Firms allocate cash-flows and (if needed) borrow from banks to operate and invest;
  6.   Firms send/receive machine-tool orders for the next period (if applicable);
  7.   Job-seeking workers send job applications to firms;
  8.   Wages are set (collective indexation or individual negotiation) and job vacancies are
       partly or totally filled;
  9.   Firms pay wages/bonuses and government pays unemployment benefits;

       M ARKET O UTCOMES

                                                          9
    10. Consumption-good market opens and market shares are allocated according to the
        relative competitiveness of firms;
    11. Firms and banks compute their profits, pay taxes and repay (part of) their debt;
    12. Exit takes place, near-zero share and bankrupt firms leave the market;
    13. Prospective entrants decide to enter according to market conditions;
    14. Aggregate variables are computed and the cycle restarts.


4        Robustness and interpretative power
As noted, our model builds on earlier variants of the K+S model that generate endogenous
growth and business cycles, and fit stylized facts beyond those on which we focus. The
top panel of Table 2 lists the stylized facts that the model fits at both the macro and the
micro-economic levels while the bottom panel shows the stylized facts fit by the labor-
enhanced version of the model, which explicitly accounts for decentralized firm-worker
interactions.
     Our model adds union and non-union wage setting and competition as described in
Table 1. The simulations produce two key scenarios: (1) successful non-union firms inva-
sion of the previously all union market; and (2) the setting where the union firms overcome
the challenge of new competitors maintaining market dominance.
     The difference between the set-ups depends critically on the worker hiring and fir-
ing rules of entering non-union firms. In the first scenario, non-union firms consider
both worker wage and skills when hiring or firing, which enables them to gain advan-
tage over union firms. In the second scenario, non-union firms just evaluate wages when
hiring/firing and fail to overturn the market by being too "lean and mean". The evidence
of deunionization makes the first scenario the realistic one. Indeed, while we have not
modeled a union spurt, being too lean and mean could potentially lead to such an event.
     The two scenarios yield similar qualitative results for outcomes that were not "built
into" the model and that fit stylized facts for labor markets and versions of K+S models
which did not build in unionism.11
     Figure 3(a) shows that in both scenarios the firm size-rank distributions in the
consumer-good sector (where we apply the analysis) is right skewed with a heavier tail
than a fitted lognormal distribution. Figure 3(b) shows a dynamics reasonably consis-
tent with a Gibrat multiplicative process where growth is independent from initial con-
ditions,12 while Figure 3(c) shows a Laplace process which relaxes the strong form of the
Gibrat's law with i.i.d. growth rates, fitting both scenarios better. While the parameters on
the higher moments differ between the two, both robustly display heavy-tailed properties.
Figure 3(d) depicts the scaling of (log) standard deviation of the growth rate with respect
to firm size. Finally, we also find that productivity is positively autocorrelated in time.13
All these results are in line with the empirical evidence.14
    11
      All figures (except Figure 8) and tables below are from 100 Monte Carlo (MC) runs of the model. MC runs
are required because of the stochastic components in the model. One hundred runs yield narrow confidence
intervals for the mean results.
   12
      Figures 3(b) and 3(d) report results for the no-invasion scenario however the patterns are qualitatively
similar for both.
   13
      AR parameters are approximately equal to 0.9 in both scenarios.
   14
      For discussions on the stylized facts on the dynamics of industries, see Dosi et al. (2017); Bottazzi and
Secchi (2006); Calvino et al. (2018).



                                                      10
     The value added of differentiating non-union and union firms is that it gives us a
way to analyze the conditions under which non-union firms come to dominate the market
with firm-level pay-setting and the impact of that dominance on dispersion of produc-
tivity and wages and on productivity growth. In the deunionization scenario, non-union
firms consider both worker wage and skills when hiring or firing, which enables them to
gain advantage over union firms. In the scenario where unions survive, non-union firms
evaluate wages but do not adjust for worker skills when hiring/firing, failing to dominate
the union firms by being too "lean and mean".
     Figure 4 shows the "organizational ecologies" in the two scenarios. Panel 4(a) gives
the outcome in which the non-union firms dominate, Panel 4(b) shows cases in which
the invasion fails due to the (stochastic) competition process between the two types of
firms, and the path-dependence in the model. The light grey area represents the maximum
and the minimum realizations of the model while the dark grey gives the 95% confidence
interval. What explains the differences between the two scenarios? By changing their
hiring/firing strategy to hiring lower wage workers and firing high wage workers without
taking account of heterogeneity in worker productivity the non-union firms fail to take
over the market.
     What happens to wages? Figure 5(a) presents the distribution of firm average wages.
It is far less dispersed in the scenario where the majority of firms remain union. This
is also true for the distributional width of wage growth rate in Figure 5(b). When union
firms prevail, a much more egalitarian wage dynamics pattern emerges. The distributional
difference is huge ­ more than twice wider in log terms in the case the non-union firms
invasion succeeds, which in turn produces a far more skewed income distribution and
larger Gini coefficient in the economy as a whole, as shown in Table 3.
     What happens to productivity growth? Figure 6(a) compares productivity growth in
the two scenarios. The successful invasion of non-union firms reduces overall productiv-
ity growth median by 0.20 percentage points per period ­ a significant slowdown caused
by deunionization due to the entering non-union firms having lower productivity than the
union firms at the lower tail of the union distribution whose productivity advantage does
not compensate for the union wage premium. Figure 6(b) shows a further result: a fall in
the quality of goods due to the workers shorter tenure and skills, which maps into lower
quality products. In the non-union scenario, non-union firms prevail independently of
product quality as their cheaper and less skilled labor compensate for their inferior qual-
ity. The invasion, together with the productivity slowdown, entails also a deflationary ten-
dency in long-run price consumer index (Figure 6(c)). Finally, Figure 6(d) shows that the
concentration is substantially higher in the invasion case with fewer firms appropriating
a higher fraction of the market. This is consistent with a more heterogeneous sales growth
dynamics when invasion succeeds, with fewer firms experiencing substantial profits and
more facing losses.
     Figure 7 examines the timing of the deceleration and increased dispersion of produc-
tivity growth in some detail. Panel 7(a) shows that the rates of growth of productivity of
the non-union firms is lower when they come to dominate the market than productivity
growth of the union firms in the no-invasion case. It also reveals that the invasion sce-
nario is not symmetric. Whereas a small niche of union firms precariously survive in the
successful non-union invasion, in the latter scenario the non-union invaders eventually
all die. Panel Figure 7(b) shows that the standard deviations of productivity explode in



                                            11
the transient period, irrespective of the long-term outcomes, and in a successful invasion
settles at a level higher than in the pre-invasion period.
    What happens to other outcomes? Table 3 summarizes the performance of the two
scenarios in the model in terms of average values for all substantial outcomes, where for
simplicity we take the invasion configuration as the baseline. All the scenario means (from
100 Monte Carlo runs) are statistically different at 1% significance or less. Long-run GDP
growth is 17.6% higher in the non-invasion case, indicating the relevance of unions to the
potential output. This gap is mostly explained by the gain of 13.8% in the productivity
growth when unionised firms prevail. In terms of distribution, persistent unionization is
associated with a more equal distribution of wages, a smaller discretionary part of wages
themselves (via bonuses) and a lower industry concentration.
    Figure B.1 in the Appendix B shows the temporal dynamics in the performance of
union and non-union firms for selected outcomes. We further probed the model with a
global sensitivity analysis (SA) to see how different parametrizations affect the qualitative
results. Appendix C shows that the model is robust to different parametrizations. The
parameters which influence collective outcomes have only marginal effects on the latter,
which makes the entire model sufficently stable.15


5        Shift-and-share decomposition of productivity growth
To see if within-firm adjustments due to firm-specific learning or reallocation of labor con-
tributed most to the deceleration of productivity growth, we decomposed simulated pro-
ductivity growth in the consumption-good sector into its shift and share components per
Foster et al. (2001):
                        W IT HIN                        BET W EEN                        CROSS

     log At =       fj,t-h  log Aj,t +        fj,t (log Aj,t-h - log At-h ) +           log Aj,t fj,t
                j                         j                                        j

                                                   IN CU M BEN T S
                                                                                                          (12)

                               EN T RY                                 EXIT

                +       fj,t (log Aj,t - log At-h ) -        fj,t-h (log Aj,t-h - log At-h )
                    j                                    j

    where fj,t is the employment share and Aj,t is the labour productivity of firm j , and
log At is the sectoral weighted average (log) productivity in period t. The first term is the
within-firm component of productivity growth measured by the firm level productivity
change weighted by firm's share of labor. The second term is the between-firm component
measured by firm labor share weighted by the firm's relative productivity. The third term
captures the covariance of the firms' productivities and labour allocations. The last two
terms measure the proportional contribution of the entry and exit of firms in the market.
All terms are normalized with the industry average productivity. The decomposition is
computed over a rolling window of fixed length (set at 8 periods), which adds an extra
term for the unexplained difference between the total and the sum of the decomposition
components.
    15
     This addresses the criticism of ABM's concerning the role of "lucky" parameter choices in results. Fagiolo
et al. (2017) discuss validation of agent-based models. Dosi et al. (2018) detail the SA methodology.


                                                        12
    Table 4 represents the overall productivity growth for 200 periods post the initial influx
of non-union firms. Panel B.2(a) of Appendix B presents the decomposition results for the
final part of the transient period [170; 200]. Panel B.2(b) gives results for union firms and
Panel B.2(c) gives the results for non-union firms. The analysis of this period highlights
the drivers of productivity dynamics when a significant number of both firm types still
coexist. The decomposition shows that:
   1. The within component reflecting the accumulation of firm capabilities and worker
      skills accounts for the largest part of productivity growth, though the between com-
      ponent has a non-negligible impact on productivity growth as well.
   2. Entry and exit plays a small net role in the long run. The exit of unionized firms
      reduces productivity growth as deunionization proceeds.
   3. Union firms in the no-invasion scenario exhibit substantially higher productivity
      growth compared to non-union firms in the invasion case. This fits with the slow-
      down of productivity growth from the post World War II "golden age of capitalism"
      to the 1970s/1980s as compared to the 2010s period that accompanies deunioniza-
      tion.
   4. The market selection intensity, measured by the difference between the total produc-
      tivity growth and the within component, is higher in the no-invasion scenario.
    Following Bagger et al. (2014), we regress the average real wage rwj paid by firm j on
firm productivity Aj to analyse the relation between wages and productivity in the period
just after the transition to the largely non-union world (t = 200):

                                    log rwj =  +  log Aj +        j,                                (13)

where j is the error term. We fit the equation for each Monte Carlo (MC) realization
in both scenarios using OLS. The purpose is to evaluate the degree according to which
more productive are also higher-wage firms. Typical outcomes are depicted in Figure 8
for a representative simulation run. For comparison, a non-parametric regression is also
estimated using an Epanechnikov kernel. Table 5 gives the regression results for the full set
of 100 MC runs. The estimated slope parameters are typically significant at the 1% level
for most runs and the mean R2 are quite high.16 The improvement associated to non-
parametric estimation suggests a mildly non-linear relation between the two variables.
    The smaller firm-level elasticities of wages to productivities in the non-invasion sce-
nario than in the invasion scenario means that wages growing in relatively uniform man-
ners in the union regime favor selection among firms driven by relative efficiencies per
Figure 1.A above. Conversely, non-union firm wages track much more closely firm-level
productivities, which tend to shelter less efficient firms from competitive selection (Fig-
ures 1.B, 1.C). Figure 9 presents the chain of feedback mechanisms occurring throughout
the process.


6        Conclusions
The Agent-Based Model in this study endogenously accounts for the deunionization
found in most advanced economies in the past few decades, and shows that it is intrinsi-
cally related to the sluggish growth and widened dispersion among firms in productivity
    16
    The small MC standard errors indicate that most model realizations produce results quite close to the
averages.


                                                   13
and wages. Starting from a fully unionised economy in which firms pay a collectively de-
termined wage related to market productivity and face strong hiring/firing restrictions,
we traced out the impacts on economic outcomes of an invasion of non-union firms that
paid workers wages proportional to their individual productivity.
     The outcome which fits observed phenomena is when the non-union invasion tri-
umphs. This produces an economy with lower GDP, skills and productivity growth,
higher dispersion of wages and productivity among firms and a lower effectiveness of
market competition in weeding out less efficient firms than when unionized firms main-
tain their market presence. While innovative opportunities are the same in the non-union
world and in the scenario where union firms survive the invasion, absence of a collective
mechanism of wage formation in the non-union setting dampens the power of efficiency-
driven market selection of firms and allows the opposite selection process to emerge,
where the low wages paid by the least productive/lowest skill firms drive out the most
productive ones.
     Viewed broadly, our results suggest that an economy in which collective wage-setting
narrows the distribution of wages and institutional rules guide hiring/firing will outper-
form an economy in which low productivity firms can compete through low wages. In
terms of growth and dispersion of pay and productivity there is no equity-efficiency trade-
off. Rather, the simulated model offers an explanation of the concordance of deunioniza-
tion, rising dispersion of firm outcomes, and sluggish productivity growth over the past
several decades. The market forces that we simulated were unable to control inequality
and stagnation much as they (and potentially other market forces outside our simulations)
have failed to do so in the real world. The Invisible Hand seemingly needs some strong
and visible assistance in achieving equitable and efficient outcomes.


References
Bagger, J., B. J. Christensen, and D. T. Mortensen (2014). Wage and labor productivity
  dispersion: The roles of total factor productivity, labor quality, capital intensity, and
  rent sharing. In 2014 Meeting Papers.

Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis, and R. Freeman (2016). It's where you work: Increases in
  the dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the United States.
  Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2), S67­S97.

Barth, E., K. O. Moene, and F. Willumsen (2014). The Scandinavian model--an interpreta-
  tion. Journal of Public Economics 117, 60­72.

Berlingieri, G., P. Blanchenay, and C. Criscuolo (2017). The great divergence (s). Technical
  report, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 39, OECD Publish-
  ing, Paris.

Bottazzi, G. and A. Secchi (2006). Explaining the distribution of firm growth rates. The
  RAND Journal of Economics 37(2), 235­256.

Bryson, A., R. Freeman, R. Gomez, and P. Willman (2017). The twin track model of em-
  ployee voice: An anglo-american perspective on union decline and the rise of alternative
  forms of voice. Technical report, IZA Discussion Paper No. 11223.


                                            14
Bryson, A., R. Gomez, M. Gunderson, and N. Meltz (2005). Youth-adult differences in the
  demand for unionization: Are american, british, and canadian workers all that differ-
  ent? Journal of Labor Research 26(1), 155­167.

Calvino, F., C. Criscuolo, C. Menon, and A. Secchi (2018). Growth volatility and size: a
  firm-level study. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 90, 390­407.

Cioppa, T. M. and T. W. Lucas (2007). Efficient nearly orthogonal and space-filling latin
  hypercubes. Technometrics 49(1), 45­55.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Declining business
 dynamism: What we know and the way forward. American Economic Review 106(5),
 203­07.

Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, M. Napoletano, A. Roventini, and T. Treibich (2015). Fiscal and mon-
 etary policies in complex evolving economies. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
 trol 52, 166­189.

Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, and A. Roventini (2010). Schumpeter meeting Keynes: A policy-
 friendly model of endogenous growth and business cycles. Journal of Economic Dynamics
 and Control 34(9), 1748­1767.

Dosi, G., D. Moschella, E. Pugliese, and F. Tamagni (2015). Productivity, market selec-
 tion, and corporate growth: comparative evidence across us and europe. Small Business
 Economics 45(3), 643­672.

Dosi, G., M. Napoletano, A. Roventini, J. E. Stiglitz, and T. Treibich (2017). Rational heuris-
 tics? expectations and behaviors in evolving economies with heterogeneous interacting
 agents. Expectations and Behaviors in Evolving Economies with Heterogeneous Interacting
 Agents (December 8, 2017).

Dosi, G., R. Nelson, and S. Winter (2001). The nature and dynamics of organizational capabili-
 ties. OUP Oxford.

Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2017). When more Flexibility
 Yields more Fragility: the Microfoundations of Keynesian Aggregate Unemployment.
 Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 81, 162­186.

Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2018). Causes and consequences
 of hysteresis: aggregate demand, productivity, and employment. Industrial and Corporate
 Change 27(6), 1015­1044.

Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, and M. E. Virgillito (2017). The footprint of evolutionary processes
 of learning and selection upon the statistical properties of industrial dynamics. Industrial
 and Corporate Change 26(2), 187­210.

Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, and M. E. Virgillito (2018). On the robustness of the fat-tailed distri-
 bution of firm growth rates: a global sensitivity analysis. Journal of Economic Interaction
 and Coordination 13(1), 173­193.

Dunne, T., L. Foster, J. Haltiwanger, and K. R. Troske (2004). Wage and productivity dis-
 persion in united states manufacturing: The role of computer investment. Journal of
 Labor Economics 22(2), 397­429.

                                               15
Ebbinghaus, B. and J. Visser (1999). When institutions matter: Union growth and decline
  in western europe, 1950­1995. European Sociological Review 15(2), 135­158.

Fagiolo, G., M. Guerini, F. Lamperti, A. Moneta, and A. Roventini (2017). Validation of
  agent-based models in economics and finance. Technical Report 2017/23, Laboratory of
  Economics and Management (LEM), Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.

Farber, H. S., D. Herbst, I. Kuziemko, and S. Naidu (2018). Unions and inequality over the
  twentieth century: New evidence from survey data. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Foster, L., C. Grim, and J. Haltiwanger (2016). Reallocation in the great recession: cleansing
  or not? Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1), S293­S331.

Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001). Aggregate productivity growth:
  Lessons from microeconomic evidence. In New developments in productivity analysis, pp.
  303­372. University of Chicago Press.

Freeman, R. (1980). The exit-voice tradeoff in the labor market: Unionism, job tenure,
  quits, and separations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 94(4), 643­673.

Freeman, R. B. (1984). Longitudinal analyses of the effects of trade unions. Journal of Labor
  Economics 2(1), 1­26.

Freeman, R. B. (1997). Spurts in union growth: Defining moments and social processes.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hibbs Jr, D. A. and H. Locking (2000). Wage dispersion and productive efficiency: Evi-
  dence for Sweden. Journal of Labor Economics 18(4), 755­782.

Hutchinson, J. and D. Persyn (2012, Apr). Globalisation, concentration and footloose
 firms: in search of the main cause of the declining labour share. Review of World Eco-
 nomics 148(1), 17­43.

Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2013). The global decline of the labor share. The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 129(1), 61­103.

McGowan, M. A., D. Andrews, and V. Millot (2017). Insolvency regimes, zombie firms and
 capital reallocation. Technical report, OECD Economics Department Working Papers,
 No. 1399, OECD Publishing, Paris.

Morris, M. D. (1991). Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experiments.
 Technometrics 33(2), 161­174.

Rasmussen, C. and C. Williams (2006). Gaussian processes for machine learning. Cambridge,
  MA: MIT Press.

Salle, I. and M. Yildizoglu (2014). Efficient sampling and meta-modeling for computational
  economic models. Computational Economics 44(4), 507­536.

Saltelli, A., M. Ratto, T. Andres, F. Campolongo, J. Cariboni, D. Gatelli, M. Saisana, and
  S. Tarantola (2008). Global sensitivity analysis: the primer. New York: John Wiley & Sons.



                                             16
Salter, W. (1960). Productivity & Technical Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schwellnus, C., A. Kappeler, and P.-A. Pionnier (2017). Decoupling of wages from pro-
  ductivity. Technical report, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1373,
  OECD Publishing, Paris.

Sobol, I. M. (1993). Sensitivity analysis for non-linear mathematical models. Mathematical
  Modelling and Computational Experiments 1(4), 407­414.

Syverson, C. (2017, May). Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the us produc-
  tivity slowdown. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2), 165­86.




                                           17
Figure 1: Panel A: uniform wage; Panel B: wages proportional to productivity; Panel C: different
wage elasticities to productivity


                Panel A



                   1                                                      p=p
                    , c, p




                             1   2   3                   n­2 n­1   n
                                                                         rank
                Panel B



                  1                                                      p=p
                   , c, p




                             1   2   3                   n­2 n­1   n
                                                                         rank
                Panel C



                   1                                                      p=p
                    , c, p




                             1   2   3                   n­2 n­1   n
                                                                         rank




                                              18
                             Figure 2: The model overall structure.



                        Job                   Production-
                    applications              good firms



                     Government &
  Workers                                        Banks                Machines
                      Central Bank


                                                                                           NON
                        Job                 Consumption-                      UNION
                                                                                          UNION
                    applications             good firms                       FIRMS
                                                                                          FIRMS



                                             Differentiated
                                                 goods

Boxes in bold style represent the model's agents. Dashed boxes represent the two variants of firms
(orange) competing in the product market (yellow).




                                               19
                                                           Figure 3: Matching of stylized facts in industrial dynamics.

                 (a) Distribution      firm
                                   ofsize
                                Pooled          size
                                          (output)        (consumer-good
                                                   distribution ( all experiments ) sector)                                                                                                                                     Gibrat's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b)Gibrat             law
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      law ( No Invasion )
                  10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                          beta = 1.0353                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                          std. err. = 0.0040                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                          p-val. = 0.0000                                                                                                                          q




                                                                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                          adj. R2 = 0.9996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                  1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                      log(normalized size of firms in t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q




                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
Rank

                  100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                               0.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                               -0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                               -1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                          q
                               Invasion                                                                                                                                             q
                          q
                              No Invasion                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Data
                              Log-normal fits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Linear fit
                  1




                                                                                                                                                                      q



                                        1e+02          1e+03              1e+04               1e+05    1e+06                                                                    -1.0                                -0.5                          0.0                          0.5                               1.0

                                                                           Size                                                                                                                                                     log(normalized size of firms in t-1)
                                                               ( Consumption-goods sector )                                                                                                                                           ( Consumption-goods sector )



(c) Distribution of firm size growth rate (consumer-
good sector) Pooled size (output) growth rate distribution ( all experiments )                                                                                                          (d) Scaling     of
                                                                                                                                                                                               Scaling of variance of firm size ( of
                                                                                                                                                                                                              variance                 firm) size
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  No Invasion
                  5.00




                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                               -1.9




                              Invasion                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                    Data
                              No Invasion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Linear fit
                  2.00




                              Laplace fits

                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                               -2.0
                  1.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                      log(standard deviation of growth rate)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q
                  0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                               -2.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
Binned density




                                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                  0.20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                               -2.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                  0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                  0.05




                                                                                                                                                               -2.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                  0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                          beta = -0.1444
                                                                                                                                                               -2.4




                                                                                                                                                                          std. err. = 0.0279
                                                                                                                                                                          p-val. = 0.0000                                                                                                        q
                  0.01




                                                                                                                                                                          adj. R2 = 0.4980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                         q




                                    -0.6        -0.4            -0.2            0.0            0.2    0.4      0.6                                                              -1.0                                    -0.5                         0.0                           0.5                            1.0

                                                                     Size growth rate                                                                                                                                                  log(normalized size of firms)
                                                               ( Consumption-goods sector )                                                                                                                                           ( Consumption-goods sector )




                                                                        Pooled data from 100 MC runs in period [200, 400].




                                                                                                                     20
                                Figure 4: Market share of non-unionised, consumer-good firms.
                                                     Market share of Non-unionized ( Invasion )
                                                                (a) Invasion scenario
               1.0
               0.8
Market share

               0.6
               0.4
               0.2
               0.0




                       0                          100                         200                         300                         400

                                                                              Time
               ( 95% confidence band in gray, min/max values in light gray / vertical dotted line: regime change / Sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )
                                                   Market share of Non-unionized ( No Invasion )
                                                              (b) No-invasion scenario
               0.12
               0.10
               0.08
Market share

               0.06
               0.04
               0.02
               0.00




                       0                          100                         200                         300                         400

                                                                              Time
               ( 95% confidence band in gray, min/max values in light gray / vertical dotted line: regime change / Sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )



Lines: average for 100 MC runs | Dotted lines: regime change. Dark grey bands: MC 95% confi-
dence interval | Light grey band: MC absolute max./min.




                                                                           21
Figure 5: Comparison of wage dynamics between two scenarios (consumer-good sector). Pooled
data from 100 MC runs in period [200, 400].
                                          Pooled average wages distribution ( all experiments )
                                             (a) Log-normalized real wage distribution
                 10.0




                        Invasion
                        No Invasion
                 5.0




                        Normal fits
                 2.0
Binned density

                 1.0
                 0.5
                 0.2
                 0.1




                           -0.4                   -0.2                        0.0                   0.2          0.4

                                                         log(normalized average real wage)
                                                           ( Consumption-goods sector )
                                       Pooled average wage growth distribution ( all experiments )
                                       (b) Log-normalized real wage growth rate distribution

                        Invasion
                 20.0




                        No Invasion
                        Laplace fits
                 10.0
                 5.0
Binned density

                 2.0
                 1.0
                 0.5
                 0.2




                            -0.10               -0.05                  0.00                  0.05         0.10

                                                   Normalized average real wage growth rate
                                                       ( Consumption-goods sector )




                                                                     22
    Figure 6: Performance comparison between unionised and non-unionised firms in two scenarios.

                                                                             (a) Productivity        growth
                                                                                     Productivity growth                                                                                                                                             (b) Consumer-good
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Quality quality index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.80
                                            0.020




                                                                                                                                                                            Weighted average product quality in sector 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.75
                                            0.018
Average productivity growth rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.70
                                            0.016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.65
                                            0.014




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.60
                                            0.012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.55
                                            0.010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.50
                                            0.008




                                                                              Invasion                                              No Invasion                                                                                                                   Invasion                                              No Invasion


                                                     ( bar: median / box: 2nd-3rd quartile / whiskers: max-min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 - 500 )                                                                 ( bar: median / box: 2nd-3rd quartile / whiskers: max-min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 - 500 )


                                                                                                                                                                            (d) Consumer-good market concentration (Herfindahl-
                                                 (c) Inflation (consumer-price
                                                                        Inflation index growth rate)                                                                        Hirschman index)    Market concentration
                                            0.002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.030
                                                                                                                                                                            Stadardized Herfindahl-Hirschman index in sector 2
                                            0.001
Consumer prices index average growth rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                            0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.020
                                            -0.001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                            -0.002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.005
                                            -0.003




                                                                              Invasion                                              No Invasion                                                                                                                   Invasion                                              No Invasion


                                                     ( bar: median / box: 2nd-3rd quartile / whiskers: max-min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 - 500 )                                                                 ( bar: median / box: 2nd-3rd quartile / whiskers: max-min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 - 500 )




Statistics for 100 MC runs in period [200, 400]. Bar: MC median | Box: MC 2nd-3rd quartile |
Whiskers: MC maximum-minimum | Dots: MC outliers.




                                                                                                                                                                           23
Figure 7: Comparison of productivity dynamics by firm types between two scenarios (consumer-
good sector).
                                                                               Productivity by firm type ( all experiments )
                                                                           (a) Log-normalized productivity by firm type
                                         10




                                                      Invasion                                                                                    Unionized
                                                      No Invasion                                                                                 Non-unionized
                                         8
Log productivity

                                         6
                                         4
                                         2
                                         0




                                               0                            100                          200                         300                     400

                                                                                                          Time
                                                                        ( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )
                                                                    Productivity standard deviation by firm type ( all experiments )
                                                            (b) Log-normalized productivity standard deviation by firm type
                                         0.5




                                                      Invasion                                                                                    Unionized
                                                      No Invasion                                                                                 Non-unionized
                                         0.4
Standard deviation of log productivity

                                         0.3
                                         0.2
                                         0.1
                                         0.0




                                               0                            100                          200                         300                     400

                                                                                                          Time
                                                                        ( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )



                                                   Lines: MC average for 100 MC runs | Dotted vertical lines: regime change.




                                                                                                      24
       Figure 8: Correlation between real wage and productivity in two scenarios, representative runs.
                                                             Regression of wage on productivity ( Invasion )
                                                                               (a) Invasion scenario

                                      Non-parametric (R2 = 0.57)
                                      Parametric (R2 = 0.47)
                        5.2
Log real average wage

                        5.0
                        4.8




                                                                                                                              Parametric fit:
                                                                                                                              beta = 0.6365
                        4.6




                                                                                                                              (s.e.) = 0.0423
                                                                                                                             (p-value) = 0.0000



                              4.4                4.6                     4.8              5.0                5.2            5.4                   5.6

                                                                                Log productivity
                                    ( Sample size = 259 firms / MC run = 63 / Bandwidth = 0.13 / CI = 0.95 / Cross-section = 300-304 by 4 )
                                                          Regression of wage on productivity ( No Invasion )
                                                                           (b) No-invasion scenario
                        5.0




                                      Non-parametric (R2 = 0.52)
                                      Parametric (R2 = 0.33)
                        4.8
Log real average wage

                        4.6
                        4.4
                        4.2




                                                                                                                              Parametric fit:
                                                                                                                              beta = 0.1437
                        4.0




                                                                                                                              (s.e.) = 0.0107
                                                                                                                             (p-value) = 0.0000



                                                                   4.0                                 4.5                               5.0

                                                                                Log productivity
                                    ( Sample size = 364 firms / MC run = 62 / Bandwidth = 0.095 / CI = 0.95 / Cross-section = 300-304 by 4 )



Epanechnikov-kernel, non-parametric, and ordinary least squares parametric fits. Single-run data
from period 200. Grey bands: non-parametric fit 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                        25
Figure 9: Dynamic path of the impacts of deunionization on outcomes


                        Invasion of non-
                         unionised firms


              Lower and
            more dispersed              Market con-
             productivity                centration


                                      Higher bonus-
           Cost competition
                                      to-wage ratio


                                       Higher wage
           Reduced quality
                                        dispersion




                                26
                      Table 1: Characteristics of the two types of firms.

                      F IRMS BEHAVIOUR              U NION                            N ON - UNION
                  Differentiated wages                 no                                  yes
    Wage sensitivity to unemployment              low (rigid)                        high (flexible)
Wage indexation to average productivity               full                               partial
              Labour-firing restrictions       under losses only                          none
                     Worker-hiring rule          higher skills                    depends on scenario
                     Worker-firing rule          lower skills                     depends on scenario
       Worker new-job search intensity           low ( = 2)                           high ( = 5)
                             S CENARIOS
                                Invasion    Hire (fire) workers with            Hire (fire) workers with
                                            lower (higher) skill first   lower (higher) wage-to-skill ratio first
                            No-invasion     Hire (fire) workers with            Hire (fire) workers with
                                            lower (higher) skill first         lower (higher) wage first




                                              27
      Table 2: Stylized facts matched by the K+S model at different aggregation levels.

M ICROECONOMIC STYLIZED FACTS                   A GGREGATE - LEVEL STYLIZED FACTS
Skewed firm size distribution                   Endogenous self-sustained growth
                                                with persistent fluctuations
Fat-tailed firm growth rates distribution       Fat-tailed GDP growth rate distribution
Heterogeneous productivity across firms         Endogenous volatility of GDP,
                                                consumption and investment
Persistent productivity differentials           Cross-correlation of macro variables
Lumpy investment rates of firms                 Pro-cyclical aggregate R&D investment
                                                and net entry of firms in the market
Heterogeneous skills distribution               Persistent and counter-cyclical unemployment
Fat-tailed unemployment time distribution       Endogenous volatility of productivity,
Fat-tailed wage growth rates distribution       unemployment, vacancy, separation and
                                                hiring rates
                                                Unemployment and inequality correlation
                                                Pro-cyclical workers skills accumulation
                                                Beveridge curve
                                                Okun curve
                                                Wage curve
                                                Matching function
                                   Source: Dosi et al. (2017).




                                               28
Table 3: Performance comparison between baseline and alternative scenario, selected time series.

                                                    I NVASION    N O I NVASION
                                                      Baseline   Ratio p-value
                              GDP growth              0.014      1.176    0.000
                       Productivity growth            0.014      1.138    0.000
                            Inflation (CPI)           -0.001     0.215    0.009
                             Quality index            1.535      1.118    0.000
                Market concentration (HHI)            0.020      0.350    0.000
                 Wages standard deviation             0.223      0.501    0.000
                       Bonus-to-wage ratio            0.024      0.817    0.000
                                Gini index            0.209      0.447    0.000
Baseline values are averages for 100 MC runs in period [200, 400]. Ratios between baseline and
alternative scenario MC averages. p-values for a two-means t-test among scenarios, H0 : no differ-
ence between scenarios.




                                               29
Table 4: Shift-and-share decomposition of log-normalized labour productivity growth in two sce-
narios.

      I NVASION     T OTAL    W ITHIN    B ETWEEN      C ROSS    E NTRY    E XIT    U NEXPL .
         Overall     21.74      17.69        9.44       -6.33     3.66     -3.78      5.37
                     (0.64)     (0.59)      (0.72)      (0.39)    (1.00)   (1.13)     (0.38)
          Union      -0.55      1.11         2.81       -0.70     1.24     -4.59      2.07
                     (0.84)     (0.27)      (0.57)      (0.17)    (0.22)   (0.60)     (0.54)
     Non-union       22.29      16.58        6.63       -5.62     2.42     0.81       6.50
                     (1.09)     (0.65)      (0.66)      (0.31)    (0.80)   (0.60)     (0.59)
  N O I NVASION     T OTAL    W ITHIN    B ETWEEN      C ROSS    E NTRY    E XIT    U NEXPL .
         Overall     25.08      20.16        8.53       -8.82     0.77     0.74       3.96
                     (0.40)     (0.50)      (0.33)      (0.35)    (0.46)   (0.70)     (0.25)
          Union      29.97      20.12       10.38       -8.78     -0.76    4.50       4.78
                     (0.61)     (0.51)      (0.37)      (0.35)    (0.23)   (0.34)     (0.39)
     Non-union       -4.88      0.04        -1.85       -0.03     1.52     -3.76      0.07
                     (0.45)     (0.02)      (0.18)      (0.01)    (0.25)   (0.40)     (0.06)
Moving averages for 100 MC runs over an 8-period window in period [200, 400]. MC standard
errors in parentheses.




                                              30
                 Table 5: (Log) real wages vs. (log) productivity, two scenarios.

                                              I NVASION      N O I NVASION
                             Intercept ()        1.575            4.308
                                                 (0.120)          (0.098)
                                 Slope ( )       0.634            0.142
                                                 (0.025)          (0.011)
                               p-value ( )       0.006            0.018
                                                 (0.004)          (0.008)
                          R2 (parametric)        0.377            0.239
                                                 (0.016)          (0.018)
                    R2 (non-parametric)          0.487            0.321
                                                 (0.016)          (0.021)
                    Observations (firms)         310.4            339.6
                                                 (4.333)          (5.020)
Ordinary least squares (parametric) and Epanechnikov-kernel (non-parametric) fits. Averages for
100 MC runs in period 200. MC standard errors in parentheses.




                                               31
Appendix A
Model description: Technical change, investment and entry
The technology of capital-good firms is defined as (A           
                                                     i , Bi ). Ai is the labour productivity
of the machine-tool manufactured by firm i for the consumption-good sector, while Bi       

is the labour productivity to produce the machine. Superscript  denotes the technology
vintage being produced/used. Given the monetary average wage wi,t paid by firm i, its
unit cost of production is:
                                              wi,t
                                        ci,t =  .                                       (14)
                                              Bi
Under a fixed mark-up µ1  R+ pricing rule, price pi,t od firm i is defined as:

                                     pi,t = (1 + µ1 )ci,t .                             (15)

    Firms in the capital-good industry adaptively strive to increase market shares and prof-
its by improving technology via innovation and imitation. Firms invest in R&D a fraction
  [0, 1] of their past sales Si,t-1 :

                                      RDi,t = Si,t-1 .                                  (16)

R&D activity is performed by workers devoted to this activity, whose demand is:

                                                   RDi,t
                                      LR &D
                                       i,t  =                                           (17)
                                                    wi,t

Firms split their R&D workers LR    &D between innovation (IN ) and imitation (IM )
                                  i,t                        i,t                 i,t
activities according to the parameter   [0, 1]:

                                      INi,t = LR &D
                                               i,t  ,                                   (18)

                                  IMi,t = (1 -  )LR &D
                                                  i,t  .                                (19)
    Innovation is a two-step process. The first determines whether a firm obtains or not
access to an innovation ­ irrespectively of whether it will ultimately be a success or a
failure ­ through a draw from a Bernoulli distribution with mean:
                                    in
                                    i,t = 1 - e-1 INi,t ,                               (20)

with parameter 1  [0, 1]. If a firm innovates, it may draw a new machine-embodying
technology (Ain     in
             i,t , Bi,t ) according to:

                                   Ain               A
                                    i,t = Ai,t (1 + xi,t ),                             (21)
                                    in
                                   Bi,t = Bi,t (1 + xB
                                                     i,t ),                             (22)
where xA         B
        i,t and xi,t are two independent draws from a Beta(1 , 1 ) distribution, (1 , 1 ) 
R2                              ¯1 ]  R.
 + over the fixed support [x1 , x
                             ¯
    Imitation also follows a two-step procedure. The access to imitation come from sam-
pling a Bernoulli with mean:
                                      im
                                     i,t = 1 - e-2 IMi,t ,                            (23)



                                              32
being parameter 2  [0, 1]. Firms accessing the second stage may copy technology
(Aim   im
  i , Bi ) from a close competitor and select the machine to produce using the rule:

                             min[ph       h
                                  i,t + bcAh ,j,t ],   h = , in, im,                      (24)
                                              i


where b  R+ is a payback parameter.
   Firms in consumption-good sector do not conduct R&D, instead they access new tech-
nologies incorporating new machines to their existing capital stock j,t . Firms invest ac-
                             e , computed by an adaptive rule:
cording to expected demand Dj,t
                         e
                        Dj,t = g (Dj,t-1 , Dj,t-2 , Dj,t-h ),   0 < h < t,                (25)

where Dj,t-h is the actual demand faced by firm j at time t - h. h  N is a parameter
and g : Rh  R+ is the expectation function, usually an unweighed moving average
over 4 periods. The corresponding desired level of production Qd
                                                               j,t , considering the actual
inventories Nj,t from previous period, is:

                                  Qd            e
                                   j,t = (1 + )Dj,t - Nj,t-1 ,                            (26)

        d = D e the desired inventories and   R a parameter.
being Nj,t       j,t                                     +
   If the desired capital stock Kj  d ­ computed as a linear function of the desired level of
                                                                      d
production Qd j,t ­ is higher than the current Kj,t , firms invest EI j,t to expand capacity:

                                     EI d      d
                                        j,t = Kj,t - Kj,t-1 .                             (27)

   Replacement investment SI d  j,t , to substitute a set RSj,t of existing machines by more
productive ones, is decided according to a fixed payback period b  R+ . Machines A        i 
j,t are evaluated by the ratio between the price of new machines and the corresponding
cost savings:
                                                        pi,t
                          RSj,t = A      i    j,t :  Ai          b ,                     (28)
                                                    cj,t - c j,t

where p          
        i,t and cj,t are the price and unit cost of production upon the selected new machine.
   Prospective firms in both sectors decide on entry based on the number Ftz      -1 (z = 1, 2)
and financial conditions of incumbents. The number of entrants in sector z is:

                   bz         z             z    z
                    t = max (ot + (1 - o)M At ) Ft-1 , 0 ,             z = 1, 2,          (29)

being o  [0, 1] a mix parameter and t      z a uniform random draw on the fixed support

[xz  ¯z ] representing the idiosyncratic component in the entry process. The sectoral market
    ,x
 ¯2 2
attractiveness M Az  t is evaluated based on the dynamics of firms' balance sheets:

                     M Az       z       z
                        t = M C t - M C t-1            (bounded to [xz  ¯z ]),
                                                                       ,x                 (30)
                                                                    ¯2 2
defined as the (log) ratio between the aggregate sectoral stocks of liquid assets N Wtz
                                                                                      -1
(bank deposits) and debt Debz t-1 (bank loans):

                              M Cz          z            z
                                 t = log N Wt-1 - log Debt-1 .                            (31)




                                                  33
Labour search-and-match
Labour demand in the consumption-good sector Ld    j,t is determined by desired production
 d
Qj,t and the average productivity of current capital stock Aj,t :

                                                             Qd
                                                              j,t
                                                    Ld
                                                     j,t =        .                                 (32)
                                                             Aj,t

In the capital-good sector, instead, Ld    i,t considers orders Qi,t and labour productivity Bi,t .
In what follows, only the behaviour of the consumption-good firms (subscript j ) is shown
but capital-good sector operate under the same rules, except it follows the wage offers
from top-paying firms in the consumption-good sector.
    Firms decide whether to hire (or fire) workers according to the expected production
Qj,t . If it is increasing, Ld
  d
                             j,t new workers are (tentatively) hired in addition to the existing
number Lj,t-1 . Each firm (expectedly) get a fraction of the number of applicant workers
La,t in its candidates queue { s  j,t }, proportional to firm market share fj,t-1 :

                          E(Ls                                 S
                             j,t ) = ( (1 - Ut-1 ) + u Ut-1 ) L fj,t-1 ,                            (33)

where LS is the (fixed) total labour supply, Ut is the unemployment rate and , u  R+
are parameters defining the number of applications each job seeker sends if employed or
unemployed, respectively. Considering the set of workers in { s j,t }, each firm select the
subset of desired workers { dj,t } to make a job (wage) offer:
                                  d                       s
                              {   j,t }   ={    j,t   {   j,t }   : wr,t  wj,t
                                                                           o
                                                                               }.                   (34)

Firms target workers that would accept the wage offer wj,t   o , considering the wage w r
                                                                                            ,t
requested by workers, if any. Firm j hires up to the total demand Ld j,t or up to all workers
in the queue, whichever is lower. The total number of workers Lj,t the firm will employ
in t, given the current workforce Lj,t-1 , is bound by:

                0  Lj,t  Ld     s
                          j,t  Lj,t ,                 Lz
                                                       j,t = Lj,t-1 + #{
                                                                               z
                                                                               j,t },   z = d, s.   (35)

    The search, wage determination and firing processes differ according to the configura-
tion. When there is no negotiation, firm j offers the wage:
              o      o                         o
             wj,t = wj,t-1 (1 + W Pj,t + N(0, werr )) bounded to pj,t-1 Aj,t-1 ,                    (36)

that is accepted by the worker if she has no better offer. The wage premium is defined as:

                                          At       Aj,t
                       W P j,t = 2             + 4        ,              1 + 2  1,                  (37)
                                          At-1     Aj,t-1

being At the aggregate labour productivity,  the time difference operator, and (1 , 2 ) 
R2                  o                                        o
 + parameters. wj,t is also applied to existing workers. wj,t is bounded to the break-
even wage (zero unit profits myopic expectation). When one-round of negotiation exists,
workers have reservation wages equal to the unemployment benefit, if any, and request a
wage wr,t in the job application:

                                   w      ,t-1 (1   + ) if employed in t-1
                        wr,t =                                                          .           (38)
                                   ws,t                      if unemployed in t-1

                                                        34
w ,t is the current wage for the employed workers and  R+ , a parameter. Unemployed
workers have a shrinking satisfying wage ws,t , accounting for the wage history:
                                                              Ts
                                                         1
                               ws,t   = max        u
                                                  wt ,              w   ,t-h   ,           (39)
                                                         Ts
                                                              h=1

being Ts  N , the moving average time-span parameter. An employed worker accepts
                o she receives if higher than current wage w . An unemployed worker
the best offer wj,t                                                ,t
accepts the best offer if at least equal to the unemployment benefit wt u.

    Government imposes a minimum wage wt          min on firms, indexed on aggregate produc-

tivity At :
                                    min      min        At
                                  wt    = wt -1 1 + 1          .                         (40)
                                                        At-1

Banks, government, and consumption
There are B commercial banks (subscript k ) which take deposits and provide credit to
firms. Bank-firm pairs are set randomly and are stable along firms' lifetime. Bank profits
come from interest received on loans (Loansk,t ) and on reserves at the central bank (Resk,t )
deducted from interest paid on deposits (Depok,t ) and from losses from defaulted loans
(BadDebk,t ):

                b
                k,t = r
                        deb
                            Loansk,t + rres Resk,l - rD Depok,t - BadDebk,t ,              (41)

being (rdeb , r, rD )  R3
                        + the interest rates on debt, bank reserves, and deposits, respectively.
   Government taxes firms and banks profits at a fixed rate tr  R+ :

                                 T axt = 1   2   b
                                         t + t + t tr,                                     (42)

where 1       2       b
          t , t and t are the aggregate total profits of the capital-good, the consumer-good
and the banking sectors, respectively. It pays to unemployed workers a benefit wt    u which

is a fraction of the current average wage w¯t :
                                             u
                                            wt = w
                                                 ¯t-1 ,                                    (43)

where   [0, 1] is a parameter. The recurring total public expenditure Gt and the public
primary deficit (or surplus) are:

                                       Gt = (LS - LD   u
                                                   t )wt .                                 (44)

                                       Deft = Gt - T axt ,                                 (45)
The stock of public debt is updated as in:

                            Debt = Debt-1 + Deft - cb   bail
                                                   t + Gt ,                                (46)

where cb                                                                       bail is the cost
         t is the operational result (profits/losses) of the central bank and Gt
of rescuing (bail-out) the banking sector during financial crises, if any.
    Workers fully consume their income (if possible) and do not get credit. Accordingly,
desired aggregate consumption Ct    d depends on the income of both employed and unem-

ployed workers plus the desired unsatisfied consumption from previous periods:
                             d                            d
                            Ct =        w   ,t   + Gt + (Ct -1 - Ct-1 ).                   (47)


                                                    35
The effective consumption Ct is bound by the real production Q2  t of the consumption-good
sector:
                                       d
                          Ct = min(Ct    , Q2
                                            t ), Q2t =    Qj,t .                       (48)
                                                           j

    The model applies the standard national account identities by the aggregation of
agents' stocks and flows. The aggregate value added by capital- and consumption-good
firms Yt equals their aggregated production Q1           2
                                                t and Qt , respectively (there are no interme-
diate goods). That is equal to the sum of the effective consumption Ct , the total investment
It and the change in firm's inventories Nt :

                               Q1    2
                                t + Qt = Yt = Ct + It + Nt .                                 (49)

   For further details, see Dosi et al. (2010), Dosi et al. (2015) and Dosi et al. (2017).


Appendix B
Further model results
This Appendix presents graphs that show the pattern of change in several outcome vari-
ables beyond those stressed in the text.
    The temporal dynamics of the HH index of market concentration is shown in Figure
B.1(a). Market concentration increases in both scenarios as non-unionised firms enter.
After the transient (t > 200), the index stabilizes at marginally higher levels when the
invasion fails and at much higher ones when it succeeds. Figure B.1(b) shows that the
invasion scenario presents significantly higher total distributed bonuses, mostly driven
by the elevated profits of the few top performing firms. Figure B.1(c) shows that higher
bonuses and lower wages result into a higher income inequalities. This contributes to a
more skewed wage distribution as measured by the wage standard deviation in Figure
B.1(d).
    Figure B.2 presents the decomposition results for the shorter time lapse [170; 200] at
the end of the transient period. Panel B.2(a) includes the entire market while Panel B.2(b)
shows the contribution of unionised firms and Panel B.2(c) shows the contribution of non-
unionised firms, respectively.
    Additionally, Figure B.3 displays two specifications for the shift-and-share decompo-
sition over the entire post-transient period, Panel B.3(a) follows the evidence in Table 4
with employment shares while Panel B.3(b) applies output shares to the weights. The
within-firm change dominates in both cases.




                                              36
Figure B.1: Comparison of market concentration (consumer-good sector) and income distribution
dynamics between two scenarios.

                                                                     (a) Market        concentration
                                                                         Market concentration ( all experiments )                                                                                                 (b) Bonus    share
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bonus share         over GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ( all experiments )
                                          0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.022
                                                     Invasion                                                                                                                                      Invasion
                                                     No Invasion                                                                                                                                   No Invasion




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.020
Standardized Herfindahl-Hirschman index

                                          0.03




                                                                                                                                                     Total real bonuses on GDP

                                                                                                                                                                                       0.018
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.016
                                          0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.014
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.012
                                          0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.010
                                          0.00




                                                 0                       100                         200                         300          400                                              0                      100                        200                         300   400

                                                                                                      Time                                                                                                                                          Time
                                                                    ( vertical dotted line: regime change / Sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )                                                                             ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 100 )



                                                                                   (c)    Gini
                                                                                    Gini index ( allindex
                                                                                                     experiments )                                                                                               (d) Wage     standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Real wages                  deviation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dispersion ( all experiments )
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.30




                                                     Invasion                                                                                                                                      Invasion
                                          0.25




                                                     No Invasion                                                                                                                                   No Invasion
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                          0.20




                                                                                                                                                     Standard deviation of log wages
Workers' income Gini index




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.20
                                          0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.15
                                          0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                                          0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                          0.00




                                                 0                       100                         200                         300          400                                              0                      100                        200                         300   400

                                                                                                       Time                                                                                                                                         Time
                                                                           ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 100 )                                                                                      ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 100 )




                                                                   Lines: MC average for 100 MC runs | Dotted vertical lines: regime change.




                                                                                                                                                    37
  Figure B.2: Comparison of FHK decomposition during the transition period in two scenarios.
                                               FHK decomposition
                                                              (a)of productivity
                                                                  All  firms growth ( all firms )

                                                                                                                        Within
                                                                                                                        Between



                                     10
                                                                                                                        Cross
                                                                                                                        Entry
                                                                                                                        Exit
         Labor productivity growth

                                     5
                                     0
                                     -5




                                               Invasion                                                 No Invasion

                                           ( Share = labor / MC runs = 100 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271-300 )
                                          FHK decomposition   (b)  of productivity firms
                                                                    Unionised
                                                                 ( Consumption-goods
                                                                                    growth    ( pre-change firms )
                                                                                       sector )
                                     4




                                                                                                                        Within
                                                                                                                        Between
                                                                                                                        Cross
                                                                                                                        Entry
                                                                                                                        Exit
                                     2
         Labor productivity growth

                                     0
                                     -2
                                     -4




                                               Invasion                                                 No Invasion

                                            ( Share = labor / MC runs = 100 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271-300 )
                                          FHK decomposition  of productivity growth
                                                      (c) Non-unionised         firms
                                                            ( Consumption-goods sector
                                                                                      () post-change firms )


                                                                                                                        Within
                                     10




                                                                                                                        Between
                                                                                                                        Cross
                                                                                                                        Entry
                                                                                                                        Exit
         Labor productivity growth

                                     5
                                     0
                                     -5




                                               Invasion                                                 No Invasion

                                            ( Share = labor / MC runs = 100 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271-300 )
                                                                  ( Consumption-goods sector )


Labour productivity growth moving averages for 100 MC runs, 8-period window, period [170, 200].
                                                                           38
                            Figure B.3: FHK decomposition based on different firm share measures in two scenarios.
                                                  FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( all firms )
                                           (a) Decomposition based on firm employment shares (default)
                            30




                                                                                                                           Within
                                                                                                                           Between
                                                                                                                           Cross
                                                                                                                           Entry
                                                                                                                           Exit
                            20
Labor productivity growth

                            10
                            0
                            -10




                                                 Invasion                                                 No Invasion

                                              ( Share
                                                  FHK   labor / MC runs = 100
                                                      = decomposition      of /productivity
                                                                                Window = 8 periods
                                                                                             growth    ( all =
                                                                                                   / Period        ) )
                                                                                                               301-500
                                                                                                             firms
                                                   (b) Decomposition       based on firm
                                                                    ( Consumption-goods     output
                                                                                          sector )    shares

                                                                                                                           Within
                                                                                                                           Between
                            20




                                                                                                                           Cross
                                                                                                                           Entry
                                                                                                                           Exit
                            15
Labor productivity growth

                            10
                            5
                            0




                                                 Invasion                                                 No Invasion

                                              ( Share = output / MC runs = 100 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 301-500 )
                                                                     ( Consumption-goods sector )


Labour productivity growth moving averages for 100 MC runs, 8-period window, period [200, 400].




                                                                              39
Appendix C
Global sensitivity analysis
The K+S model is calibrated using the values presented in Table C.1 below (column
VALUE) for the parameters and initial conditions. Global sensitivity analysis (SA) is per-
formed across the entire parametric space, inside the closed region defined by Table C.1
(columns M IN . and M AX .), and the synthetic results are reported (columns µ , D IRECT
and I NTERACTION) for the most sensitive among the tested output variables (results for
the remaining variables can be requested to the authors). Two SA methodologies are em-
ployed, elementary effects (EE) and Sobol variance decomposition (SVD).
    SA is performed for t  [200, 400], i.e., after the transient period, on a set of output
variables (the "metrics") relevant to the current discussion, namely the average overall
productivity growth rate (A        ¯) and standard deviation A    ¯sd , the mean joint market share of
non-unionised firms (f     ¯n ), and the turbulence in the consumption-good market measured
by the average number of exiting firms (n       ¯ ext,2 ).17 All the model's parameters and initial
conditions, their calibration values, as well as the key SA tests statistics, are detailed in the
following.
    EE analysis is summarized by the µ statistic in Table C.1, which is a measure of the
direct absolute effects of each factor (parameter or initial condition) on the chosen output
variable, being the parametric space rescaled to the [0, 1] interval on each dimension. The
statistical significance of this statistic, the probability of not rejecting H0 : µ       i = 0 is also
evaluated and indicated by the usual asterisk convention. The EE computation is per-
formed directly over model samples from an optimized 10-trajectory one-at-a-time design
of experiments (DoE). Each DoE sampling point is sampled three times, to compensate for
stochastic components in the model.
    The SVD analysis is reported in Table C.1 by two statistics: (D IRECT column) the de-
composition of the direct influence of each factor on the variance of the tested output vari-
able (adding up to 1), and (I NTERACTION column) its indirect influence share, by interact-
ing with other factors (non-linear/non-additive effects). The SVD analysis is performed
using a Kriging meta-model fitted using samples from a near-orthogonal Latin hypercube
DoE. Each DoE point is sampled 10 times.
    The sensitivity analysis is performed on both scenarios, under successful invasion or
not. However, the main results hold irrespective of the set-up. Out of the 67 parameters
and initial conditions (the "factors") in this K+S version, as a first step we apply the Morris
elementary effects (EE) method.18 This is important because it allows identifying those
factors which significantly affect the selected model metrics. The EE analysis (Table C.1)
indicates that n¯ ext,2 is the metric sensitive to the larger number of those factors (19) while
A  ¯ is the least sensitive, with 7 influential factors.19 A      ¯sd and f  ¯n are in an intermediate
  17
      Other relevant metrics, like the macro aggregates' growth rates, the inequality measures, and the indus-
trial performance indicators were already evaluated in previous papers based on the labour-augmented K+S
model and are not be replicated here. The general results from these past analyses indicate a relatively small
dependence of the model qualitative results on the chosen parametrization.
   18
      Briefly, EE proposes both a specific design of experiments, to efficiently sample the parametric space
under a multi-path, one-factor-at-a-time strategy, and a absolute importance statistic to evaluate direct and
indirect (non-linear/non-additive) effects of the parameters on model results and their statistical significance
(Morris, 1991, Saltelli et al., 2008).
   19
      The selection criteria is to consider the top 80% EE contributors at 5% significance.



                                                      40
situation with 14 and 12 influential factors, respectively. In total, 25 unique relevant factors
were identified after discarding duplicates.
    In order to quantify the effect of each of the relevant factors over the selected metrics,
directly or in interaction with other factors, as a second step we perform a Sobol Variance
Decomposition (SVD).20 Because of the high computational cost to produce the SVD using
the original simulation model, a simplified version of it ­ a meta-model ­ is estimated us-
ing the Kriging method and employed for the SVD.21 The meta-model is estimated by nu-
merical maximum likelihood using a set of observations multi-sampled from the original
model using a high-efficiency, nearly-orthogonal Latin hypercube design of experiments
(Cioppa and Lucas, 2007).
    The SVD results (Table C.1) indicate a smaller subset of 9 important factors for the cho-
sen metrics.22 These factors, in overall order of importance, define (i) the intensity of the
competition in the consumer-good market (), (ii) the tenure skill-accumulation rate for
employed workers (T ), (iii) the work-life span before retirement (Tr ), (iv) the maximum
technical advantage of an entrant firm (x5 ), (v) the shape of the technological opportunity
space for entrants (2 , 2 ), (vi) the importance of unfilled demand for firm competitiveness
(2 ), (vii) the lower bound of the entrant-firm size distribution (x   ¯2
                                                                        2 ), and (viii) the initial
                                                      2
number of firms in the consumer-good sector (F0 ). The equations and values related to
each parameter are presented in Appendices A and C, respectively.
    Overall, the impacts of all the tested factors in the SVD are relatively mild, and the dif-
ferences between the two scenarios are small.23 Figure C.4 presents an exploration of the
Kriging meta-model response surface for the two critical factors on each metric. The flat
surfaces in Figures C.4(b), and C.4(c) indicate the linear interaction nature of the system
response surfaces for the identified top-influence factors, T /2 , and /x5 , respectively.
Productivity growth (A       ¯) shows the most rugged surface, indicating the intense presence
on non-linearities in the interaction between the two factors, despite the small amplitude
from minimum to maximum results (below 7%). Additionally, just two factors,  and x5 ,
account for more than 40% of the estimated meta-model effects on the market-dynamics
metrics f ¯n and n¯ ext,2 . However, also for these two variables, the maximal amplitude of
the effects is mild (both below 14%). Therefore, for those three metrics, the model results
are qualitatively robust to any parametric configuration.
    The only metric for which factors influence is qualitatively relevant is the firm-
productivity standard deviation (A     ¯sd ), as shown by Figure C.4(b). Firstly, it shows the
strong impact of worker-skill accumulation, driven by parameter T , on the dispersion of
the firm-level productivities. This hints at the significant consequences, in terms of firm
  20
      The SVD is a variance-based, global SA method consisting in the decomposition of the chosen metrics
variance into shares according to the contribution of the variances of the factors selected for analysis. This
methodology deals better with non-linearities and non-additive interactions than EE or the traditional local
SA methods. It allows to precisely disentangle both direct and interaction quantitative effects of the factors
over the entire parametric space (Sobol, 1993, Saltelli et al., 2008).
   21
      To summarize, the Kriging meta-model "mimics" the K+S model using a simpler, mathematically-
tractable approximation, fitted over a representative sample of the original model response surface. Kriging
is a spatial interpolation method that under fairly general assumptions provides the best linear unbiased pre-
dictors for the response of complex, non-linear computer simulation models (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006,
Salle and Yildizoglu, 2014).
   22
      The selection criteria is to consider the top 80% SVD contributors.
   23
      The response surfaces selected for Figure C.4 are the ones most affected in both scenarios by the indicated
factors, which, in turn, are the two most relevant factors for each metric. Figures C.4(a), C.4(b), and C.4(d) are
from the no-invasion case, while C.4(c) is from the invasion one.


                                                       41
heterogeneity, of the interaction of learning and labour market processes in the model. Sec-
ondly, the importance of 2 , or the minimum technological capabilities of entrant firms, in
the classical "creative destruction" Schumpeterian sense. Indeed, this dispersion metric is
very sensitive to changes of the two factors, additively, indicating the selected calibration
point (T = 0.01, 2 = 2) is quite conservative in terms of the possibilities of the K+S
model in reproducing the empirical stylized fact of the sustained heterogeneity among
firms.




                                             42
                      Meta-model response surface ( Tr = 120 )                                                    Meta-model response surface ( x5 = 0.3 )




  17.0                                                                                         1.0

    16.8                                                                                         0.8

      16.6                                                                                             0.6




                                                                                               Asd
  deltaA




           16.4                                                                                         0.4
           16.2                                                                                          0.2
            16.0
                  5                                                                                           5

                      4                                                                                           4                

                                                                                   0.30                                                                                   0.10
                            3                                                                                           3
                      alp




                                                                                                                  alp
                                                                            0.25                                                                                   0.08
                       ha2




                                                                                                                   ha2
                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                2                                0.20                                                       2                                  T
                                                                     sup                                                                          0.04     tau
                                                      0.15       x22
                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                      1 0.10                                                                                      1

             (a) Overall
               Meta      productivity
                    -model            growth
                           response surface   rate (A
                                            ( omega3
                                                     ¯
                                                     =) 1 )                                        (b) Firm-productivity standard
                                                                                                         Meta-model response      deviation
                                                                                                                             surface         (A¯sd
                                                                                                                                     ( F20 = 200 ))

   95% confidence interval: d_Am = [-173.22,205.17] at defaults (red dot) 95% confidence interval: AsdPreChg2 = [-0.2,0.95] at defaults (red dot)




                                                                                               24.5
   0.95
                                                                                                24.0

                                                                                                  23.5
                                                                                               next2
   fn




           0.90                                                                                        23.0

                                                                                                        22.5
                                                                                                         22.0
              1.0                                                                                         1.0
                  0.8                                                                                          0.8

                       0.6                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                    5                                                                                      5
                      x5




                                                                              4                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                  x5




                            0.4                                                                                         0.4
                                                                     3                                                                                    3
                                0.2                          2        chi                                                   0.2                   2        chi

                                                  1                                                                                        1
                                      0.0                                                                                         0.0

                                                  ¯n )
   (c) Joint market share of non-unionised firms (f                                                                                         ¯ ext,2 )
                                                                                                        (d) Exiting consumption-good firms (n

   95% confidence interval: f2postChg = [0.76,1.05] at defaults (red dot) 95% confidence interval: next2 = [-0.14,44.15] at defaults (red dot)
Figure   C.4: Global sensitivity analysis response surfaces.                        Modelled using fitted Kriging meta-
model.
Red dot: calibration settings | Markers: maximum (blue) and minimum (orange) predicted values.




                                                                                          43
                                                                                                                S YMBOL         D ESCRIPTION                                             VALUE             M IN .          M AX .               µ               D IRECT         I NTERACTION
                                                                                                                Policy and credit market
                                                                                                                              Unemployment subsidy rate on average wage                  0.200             0.000            1.000            0.679*              0.0191            0.00062
                                                                                                                tr            Tax rate                                                   0.100             0.000            0.300             0.064              0.0001            0.00058
                                                                                                                r             Prime interest rate                                        0.010             0.005            0.050             0.386              0.0013            0.00058
                                                                                                                rD            Interest rate on bank deposits                             0.000             0.000            0.010            0.189*              0.0013            0.00060
                                                                                                                µdeb          Mark-up of interest on debt over prime rate                0.000             0.100            0.500            0.124*              0.0018            0.00057
                                                                                                                µres          Mark-up of interest on reserve to prime rate               1.000             0.500            1.000            0.086*              0.0004            0.00056
                                                                                                                              Prudential limit on debt (sales multiple)                    3                 1                4              0.037**             0.0008            0.00056
                                                                                                                min           Prudential limit on debt (fixed floor)                     20000               0             100000            0.119*              0.0008            0.00056
                                                                                                                Labour market
                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                werr         SD of error when evaluating the market wage                  0.100            0.000            1.000             0.170              0.0003            0.00056
                                                                                                                             Minimum desired wage increase rate                           0.020            0.005            0.200             0.099*             0.0000            0.00055
                                                                                                                T            Skills accumulation rate on tenure                           0.010            0.001            0.100             0.835*             0.2458            0.00087
                                                                                                                U            Skills deterioration rate on unemployment                    0.010            0.001            0.100             0.107              0.0025            0.00054
                                                                                                                Tr           Number of periods before retirement (work life)               120               60              240              0.252              0.0220            0.00057




44
                                                                                                                Ts           Number of wage memory periods                                   4               1                 8              0.141*             0.0034            0.00056
                                                                                                                             Number of firms to send applications (employed)                5                1                20              0.217              0.0002            0.00057
                                                                                                                un           Number of firms to send applications (unempl.)                 10               1                20              0.191              0.0034            0.00058
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   direct and interaction effects indexes (n = 5120 samples).




                                                                                                                2            Aggregate productivity pass-trough                           1.000            0.950            1.050             0.244              0.0023            0.00058
                                                                                                                4            Firm-level productivity pass-trough                          0.500            0.000            1.000             0.050*             0.0000            0.00057
                                                                                                                6            Share of firm free cash flow paid as bonus                   0.200            0.000            0.500             0.089              0.0017            0.00056
                                                                                                                Technology
                                                                                                                                Maximum machine-tools useful life                            19               10               40              0.061*             0.0010            0.00058
                                                                                                                                R&D investment propensity over sales                       0.040            0.010            0.200             0.060*             0.0011            0.00058
                                                                                                                                Share of R&D expenditure in imitation                      0.500            0.200            0.800             0.149*             0.0120            0.00063
                                                                                                                b               Payback period for machine replacement                       9                 1               10              0.130              0.0004            0.00060
                                                                                                                dimmach         Machine-tool unit production capacity                       40                10              100              0.183              0.0003            0.00059
                                                                                                                (1 , 1 )        Beta distribution parameters (innovation process)          (3,3)            (1,1)            (5,5)         (0.236,0.054*)    (0.0002,0.0008)   (0.00059,0.00060)
                                                                                                                (2 , 2 )        Beta distribution parameters (entrant productivity)        (2,4)            (1,1)            (5,5)       (0.416***,0.584*)   (0.2949,0.1714)   (0.00113,0.00088)
                                                                                                                (1 , 2 )        Search capabilities for innovation/imitation          (0.300,0.300)     (0.100,0.100)   (0.600,0.600)     (0.090*,0.102*)    (0.0033,0.0095)   (0.00087,0.00085)
                                                                                                                [x 1 , x
                                                                                                                       ¯1 ]     Beta distribution support (innovation process )       [-0.150,0.150]   [-0.300,0.100]   [-0.100,0.300]    (0.064*,0.308*)    (0.0002,0.0042)   (0.00088,0.00086)
                                                                                                                 ¯
                                                                                                                (continue...)




     rescaled to [0, 1]. µ significance: *** 0.1% | ** 1% | * 5% | (no asterisk) not significant at 5% level.
     viation of firm log productivity (the most sensitive variable). µ statistic estimated using factors
     Baseline values for non-unionised firms. Sensitivity analysis statistics relative to the standard de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   for sensitivity analysis, elementary effects µ statistic (n = 2040 samples) and Sobol decomposition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Table C.1: Model parameters and initial conditions, calibration values, minimum-maximum range
                                                                                                                S YMBOL          D ESCRIPTION                                                VALUE             M IN .          M AX .             µ              D IRECT         I NTERACTION
                                                                                                                Industrial dynamics
                                                                                                                                 Share of new customers for capital-good firm                  0.500            0.200            0.800            0.175*           0.0022            0.00087
                                                                                                                                 Desired inventories share                                     0.100            0.000            0.300            0.338            0.0000            0.00085
                                                                                                                µ1               Mark-up in capital-good sector                                0.100            0.010            0.200            0.084*           0.0057            0.00086
                                                                                                                o                Weight of market conditions for entry decision                0.500            0.000            1.000            0.060*           0.0003            0.00085
                                                                                                                                 Replicator dynamics coefficient (compet. intensity)           1.000            0.200            5.000            0.181*           0.0001            0.00085
                                                                                                                                 Mark-up adjustment coefficient                                0.040            0.010            0.100            0.071            0.0001            0.00085
                                                                                                                u                Planned utilization by consumption-good entrant               0.750            0.500            1.000            0.943            0.0064            0.00086
                                                                                                                x5               Max technical advantage of capital-good entrant               0.300            0.000            1.000            0.730*           0.1423            0.00109
                                                                                                                exit1            Min orders to stay in capital-good sector                       1                1                5              0.110            0.0111            0.00101
                                                                                                                exit2            Min share to stay in consumption-good sector                  10-5             10-6             10-3             0.106            0.0001            0.00102
                                                                                                                [1 , 2 ]         Min/max capital ratio for consumer-good entrant          [0.100,0.900]     [0.000,0.500]    [0.500,1.000]    (0.266,0.285)   (0.0003,0.0059)   (0.00103,0.00111)
                                                                                                                [3 , 4 ]         Min/max net wealth ratio for capital-good entrant        [0.100,0.900]     [0.000,0.500]    [0.500,1.000]   (0.076,0.234*)   (0.0136,0.0007)   (0.00124,0.00115)
                                                                                                                1                Competitiveness weight for price                              1.000            0.200            5.000            0.198            0.0001            0.00118




45
                                                                                                                2                Competitiveness weight for unfilled demand                    1.000            0.200            5.000            0.338*           0.0010            0.00119
                                                                                                                3                Competitiveness weight for quality                            1.000            0.200            5.000            0.133*           0.0274            0.00129
                                                                                                                [x 1  ¯1
                                                                                                                   2, x 2]       Entry distribution support for capital-good firm         [-0.150,0.150]   [-0.300,0.100]   [-0.100,0.300]    (0.281,0.245)   (0.0017,0.0161)   (0.00124,0.00124)
                                                                                                                 ¯
                                                                                                                [x 2  ¯2
                                                                                                                   2, x 2]       Entry distribution support for consumer-good firm        [-0.150,0.150]   [-0.300,0.100]      [-0.1,0.3]    (0.232,0.097*)   (0.0000,0.0080)   (0.00123,0.00122)
                                                                                                                 ¯1        1
                                                                                                                [Fmin , Fmax   ] Min/max number of capital-good firms                         [1,100]          [10,20]          [20,40]       (0.081,0.333)   (0.0176,0.0040)   (0.00124,0.00119)
                                                                                                                    2      2
                                                                                                                [Fmin   , Fmax ] Min/max number of consumer-good firms                        [1,400]         [100,200]        [200,400]     (0.072*,0.558)   (0.0028,0.0021)   (0.00119,0.00118)
                                                                                                                Initial conditions
                                                                                                                µ2
                                                                                                                 0                   Initial mark-up in consumption-good sector               0.200             0.100            0.500            0.220*           0.0023            0.00122
                                                                                                                K0                   Initial capital stock in consumer-good sector             800               200             3000             0.100*           0.0005            0.00113
                                                                                                                LS0                  Number of workers                                       2.5105            1.3105           5.0105            0.188            0.0042            0.00111
                                                                                                                Sav0                 Initial consumer unfilled-demand savings                1.1106            0.5106           5.0106            0.062            0.0003            0.00113
                                                                                                                B0                   Number of banks                                            10                5                15             0.203            0.0041            0.00119
                                                                                                                    1       2
                                                                                                                (F0   , F0    )      Initial number of capital/consumption-good firms       (20,200)          (10,100)         (40,400)      (0.142*,0.198)   (0.0474,0.0098)   (0.00131,0.00119)
                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                N W0                 Initial net wealth of banking sector                    1.0106            0.5106           5.0106            0.056*           0.0065            0.00118
                                                                                                                          1      2
                                                                                                                (N W0       , N W0 ) Initial net wealth capital/consumption-good sector   (10000,5000)      (2000,2000)     (50000,50000)     (0.471,0.259)   (0.0072,0.0007)   (0.00111,0.00106)




     rescaled to [0, 1]. µ significance: *** 0.1% | ** 1% | * 5% | (no asterisk) not significant at 5% level.
     viation of firm log productivity (the most sensitive variable). µ statistic estimated using factors
     Baseline values for non-unionised firms. Sensitivity analysis statistics relative to the standard de-
                                                                                                                           is close to zero in the long run.




                          Workers    Capital-good firms    Consumption-good firms          Bank           Government
                                     current     capital    current     capital      current    capital
     Consumption            -C         +C                                                                              0
     Investment                        +I                                 -I                                           0
     Govt. expenditures    +G                                                                                -G        0
     Wages                 +W        -W 1                    -W 2                                                      0
     Profits, firms                  -1           +1         -2          +2                                            0




46
     Profits, bank                                                                    -b         +b                    0
     Debt interests                 -rDeb1
                                         t-1               -rDeb2
                                                                t-1                 +rDebt-1                           0
     Deposits interests             +rN Wt1
                                          -1               +rN Wt2
                                                                 -1                 -rN Wt-1                           0
                                          1                      2
     Taxes                           -T ax                  -T ax                                           +T ax      0
     Change in debt                             +Deb1                  +Deb2                   -Deb                    0
     Change in deposits                         -N W 1                 -N W 2                  +N W                    0
                             0         0         0            0         0              0        0             0        0
                                                                                                                           Table C.2: Stock-and-flow consistency: transaction flow matrix. (*) Government deficit/superavit
