                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SOCIOECONOMIC DECLINE AND DEATH:
                 MIDLIFE IMPACTS OF GRADUATING IN A RECESSION

                                       Hannes Schwandt
                                      Till M. von Wachter

                                      Working Paper 26638
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26638


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We are thankful to David Card, Janet Currie, Bill Evans, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Steve Pischke,
Julian Reif, Jonathan Skinner, Ann Stevens, seminar participants at UC Davis, Cemfi Madrid,
Aarhus, Hohenheim, Ifo, University of Connecticut, and conference participants at NBER
Summer Institute 2019, NBER Labor Studies meeting 2016, NBER Universities' Research
Conference 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum,
Society of Labor Economics 2019, International Health Economics Associa- tion 2019, and the
American Society of Health Economics 2019. Nicolas Oderbolz provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hannes Schwandt and Till M. von Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Socioeconomic Decline and Death: Midlife Impacts of Graduating in a Recession
Hannes Schwandt and Till M. von Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 26638
January 2020
JEL No. E32,I10,J10

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses several large cross-sectional data sources and a new approach to estimate midlife
effects of entering the labor market in a recession on mortality by cause and various measures of
socioeconomic status. We find that cohorts coming of age during the deep recession of the early
1980s suffer increases in mortality that appear in their late 30s and further strengthen through age
50. We show these mortality impacts are driven by disease-related causes such as heart disease,
lung cancer, and liver disease, as well as drug overdoses. At the same time, unlucky middle-aged
labor market entrants earn less and work more while receiving less welfare support. They are also
less likely to be married, more likely to be divorced, and experience higher rates of childlessness.
Our findings demonstrate that tempo-rary disadvantages in the labor market during young
adulthood can have substantial impacts on lifetime outcomes, can affect life and death in middle
age, and go beyond the transitory initial career effects typically studied.


Hannes Schwandt
SESP
Northwestern University
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and CEPR
schwandt@northwestern.edu

Till M. von Wachter
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
MC 147703
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
tvwachter@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction

Economists and policy makers have long been concerned that entering the labor market in a
recession could worsen lifetime outcomes of young workers through no fault of their own.2
Research has indeed shown that entering the labor market in a recession leads to large initial
losses in earnings and employment. These studies typically find the initial effects fade after
about ten years in the labor market (e.g., Oyer, 2006; Kahn, 2010; Wozniak, 2010; Oreopou-
los et al., 2012; Schwandt and von Wachter, 2019; Rothstein, 2019). Less is currently known
about the longer-term effects of adverse labor market entry as these cohorts go through mid-
dle age, or how these shocks affect outcomes beyond earnings that become more relevant in
middle age, such as mortality and broader measures of socioeconomic status (SES).
    Yet, some of the available evidence suggests that the initial effects could linger past the
ten to fifteen years usually studied. Losses in cumulated lifetime income implied by typical
estimates per se could lead to lower wealth accumulation, and there is some evidence of
reductions in housing wealth among individuals coming of age in the Great Recession (e.g.,
Dettling and Hsu, 2014). Several studies have documented lasting changes in occupational
choice (Oyer, 2006, 2008; Altonji et al., 2016) and employer characteristics (Oreopoulos
et al., 2012), and Kahn (2010) finds that 1982 college graduates may begin to lose ground
again around 15 years after job entry.
    Moreover, unlucky labor market entry may have impacts beyond employment and earn-
ings that affect SES more broadly and worsen longer-term health. For example, Currie and
Schwandt (2014) show that recession exposure in early adulthood reduces lifetime fertility
for women. There is also evidence that male college graduates from the 1982 recession
experience worsening self-reported health in middle age (Maclean, 2013). Potential longer-
term health effects may be a persistent consequence of initial declines in career outcomes
and ensuing effects on socioeconomic status. In addition, evidence suggests that the pe-
riod of school-leaving can be a formative age for behavioral health (Kessler et al., 2005).
Overall, these findings raise concerns that entering the labor market in a recession may have
larger consequences than current estimates on earnings suggest. Yet, so far these broader
and longer-term effects have not been the focus of the literature on recession entrants.
    2
     See, e.g., New York Times, 2006, "Hello Young Workers: One Way to Reach the Top is To Start There"
;Wall Street Journal, 2009, "The Curse of the Class of 2009"; Hearing of the Joint Committee of Congress,
2010, "Avoiding a Lost Generation: How to Minimize the Impact of the Great Recession on Young Workers";
The Economist, 2018, "Temporary economic downturns have long-lasting consequences"; Wall Street Journal,
2018, "Playing Catch-Up in the Game of Life,"; Financial Times, 2018, "The untold career value of a little bit
of luck at the outset."


                                                      1
     In this paper, we estimate the midlife effects of graduating during a recession on mor-
tality and various measures of socioeconomic status. Using several large cross-sectional
data sources and a new approach addressing data limitations and potential selection bias, we
find that cohorts that entered the labor market during the early 1980s recession experience
increases in mortality in middle age. The increases in mortality are chiefly driven by cer-
tain causes of death, including heart disease, lung cancer, liver disease, and drug poisoning.
We also show that these cohorts experience a rise in divorce rates, have fewer children, and
experience a widening gap in earnings with respect to luckier labor market entrants.
     We focus on mortality because it is an important and standard measure of population
health that is reliably measured for a large number of cohorts throughout the life cycle.
Measuring the long-term effect of adverse labor market entry on mortality is also impor-
tant in light of the ongoing debate on the nexus between economic outcomes and health and
longevity. Despite much work on the topic, the direction of causality remains controver-
sial and careful research suggests that indicators of economic prosperity, such as income or
wealth, may have little measurable causal effects on health (for a review, see Cutler et al.
(2011a)).
     One example is the literature on business cycles and health, pioneered by Ruhm (2000),
which finds that aggregate mortality is lower during times of high unemployment. Another
example is the discussion surrounding the sources of recent increases in midlife mortality
related to drug overdoses, liver disease, and suicide uncovered by Case and Deaton (2015).
Case and Deaton (2015, 2017, 2018) argue that socioeconomic hardship is a major driving
force fueling what they coin a "deaths of despair" crisis. But despite a growing number of
studies analyzing the relationship of economic conditions and increasing midlife mortality,
it remains debated whether a causal relationship can be detected in data (Carpenter et al.,
2017; Ruhm, 2018; Currie et al., 2018; Bound et al., 2018; Ruhm, 2019).3
     Our study addresses one particular causal channel between economic conditions and
mortality, running from initial labor market conditions to long-term mortality outcomes of
affected cohorts in middle age. A key advantage of our approach is that aggregate economic
fluctuations such as the unemployment rate are unlikely to be driven by individual health
differences. Moreover, by focusing on labor market entrants, we analyze a group that ex-
periences a large economic shock that is unrelated to their own earnings potential. Finally,
by focusing chiefly on the longer-term effects, we deal with the fact that health responses to
economic conditions may take time to accumulate and therefore might be hard to detect in
  3
      For recent media articles on that debate see NewYorkTimes (2019) and WashingtonPost (2019).



                                                     2
a more contemporaneous analysis. To better understand the context of our mortality results,
we also exploit our methodology to examine the effect on a range of SES measures in mid-
dle age. Studying these outcomes is interesting in its own right because they may be directly
relevant beyond earnings and because they may reflect adjustment costs that individuals may
have incurred to rebuild their careers and to recover initial lost earnings. These outcomes are
also relevant in terms of potential relationships to mortality stressed by prior literature.
    Our approach focuses on fluctuations in the state-level unemployment rate, which pro-
vides us with exogenous variation while allowing us to account for potentially confounding
trends at the national level. Hence, our analysis is not able to capture effects of national
economic conditions on labor market entrants. To analyze effects in middle age, we focus
on cohorts entering the labor market in different U.S. states before, during, and after the
1982 recession -- the largest post-war recession before the Great Recession -- that we can
observe from labor market entry until at least age 49. We use Vital Statistics data from
1979 to 2016 and population estimates from the Census and the ACS to construct mortality
rates that are regressed on the state-level unemployment rate that a cohort faced at the time
of graduation. Information on socioeconomic outcomes, including earnings, labor supply,
marital status, divorce, and cohabitation is derived from the Decennial Census (Census), the
American Community Survey (ACS), and the Current Population Survey (CPS).
    The large sample sizes of our cross-sectional data sources are important to capture the
effects we seek to measure. One complication is that these data do not contain information
on the state and the year in which an individual entered the labor market. Furthermore,
people might migrate to a different state before graduating or adjust their graduation year
in response to local economic conditions. These selection responses can severely bias the
analysis even if we had a perfect measure of the location and the time of graduation. We
address these measurement and selection issues using a method introduced by Schwandt and
von Wachter (2019). As explained in the paper, we re-weight unemployment rates to reflect
the economic conditions a cohort would face at graduation if it had migration and education
rates similar to surrounding cohorts. A key advantage of this approach is that it only requires
information at the birth-state and birth-year level and hence can be applied to Vital Statistics
data, which otherwise could not be used to study the long-term effects of state-level labor
market entry shocks.
    Using this approach, we obtain four main findings. First, we find that a temporarily
higher state unemployment rate at the age of labor market entry leads to precisely estimated
increases in mortality in middle age. The magnitude of these effects is meaningful ­ if


                                               3
sustained until the end of their life, a 3.9 percentage point higher unemployment rate (as
experienced by the 1982 graduation cohort) would lead to a decrease in life expectancy by
six to nine months.
     Our second main findings is that these midlife mortality increases are driven to an impor-
tant extent by increases in mortality due to specific causes of death. These causes are both
disease-related and "external" causes, such as lung cancer, liver disease, and drug poisoning.
Hence, entering the labor market during a recession raises mortality by increasing impor-
tant elements of "deaths of despair" in the language of Case and Deaton (2015, 2017). In
contrast, we find no long-term effects on other causes of death, such as accidents or cancers
other than lung cancer.
     Our third main finding is that entering the labor market during a recession has a substan-
tial impact on a range of SES measures in middle age: unlucky cohorts show lower marriage
rates, higher divorce rates, and smaller family size. We also find that after initial earnings
recovery in their mid-thirties, adversely affected entry cohorts suffer a reduction in earnings
as they reach their mid-forties, confirming Kahn's (2010) exploration of college graduates
from the early 1980s recession based on a shorter time period. Our research design does
not allow us to disentangle potentially complex causal channels between these outcomes and
mortality. But these results make clear that entering the labor market during the 1980s reces-
sion had broad effects in middle age on a range of key life outcomes that may influence, and
may itself be influenced by, underlying health related to mortality.
     Our fourth main finding is that there is some heterogeneity in the effects of the initial
unemployment rate on midlife outcomes. While the effects on overall mortality are similar
by race, increases in our measure of "deaths of despair" appear to be concentrated among
non-Hispanic whites. White men also tend to experience a decline in earnings in midlife,
and tend to experience larger reductions in family stability than their non-white counterparts.
This is despite the fact that non-whites experience larger short-run effects on earnings and
other outcomes (Schwandt and von Wachter, 2019). An important exception is that non-
whites experience a lasting reduction in receipt of welfare income, without an appreciable
rise in earnings.
     Our paper makes several contributions to related strands of literature. Ours is the first
paper to study the effect of entering the labor market in a recession on mortality. So far,
the literature has not focused on mortality likely because mortality rates at younger ages are
small and the effects on mortality likely take longer to materialize. We are also the first to
explicitly focus on the longer-term effects of adverse labor market entry.


                                              4
    The paper thereby extends a growing body of literature studying the short- to medium-
term effects on key labor market outcomes such as earnings, wages, and employment (Oyer,
2006, 2008; Kahn, 2010; Wozniak, 2010; Genda et al., 2010; Oreopoulos et al., 2012; Altonji
et al., 2016; Schwandt and von Wachter, 2019), and a smaller literature studying these effects
on fertility and marital status (e.g., Kondo 2011; Currie and Schwandt 2014) and health
(Maclean, 2013; Cutler et al., 2015).4 The paper also relates to studies estimating the causal
effects of specific labor market shocks on health and mortality at other ages, complementing
previous studies that find persistent mortality effects for economic conditions around birth
(Van den Berg et al., 2006), adolescence (Cutler et al., 2016), and before retirement (Coile
et al., 2014).
    With respect to papers looking at short- and long-term effects of other labor market
shocks, such as job displacements, on mortality (e.g., Sullivan and von Wachter, 2009;
Browning and Henesen, 2012; Eliason and Storrie, 2009) or health (e.g., Schaller and Stevens
2015; Kuhn et al. 2009; Burgard et al. 2007; Browning et al. 2006) that typically analyze
workers who lose stable jobs due to a downsizing or plant closure closer to middle age, our
paper studies the long-term effects of economic shocks on young labor market entrants.5 In
contrast to those papers, we study an aggregate shock, which is a less specific treatment, but
which may be more clearly exogenous with respect to workers' own health or productivity.
    Our paper is also related to the broader literature that seeks to establish a causal link
between income or SES and mortality (e.g., Cutler et al., 2011b; Sullivan and von Wachter,
2009; Cutler et al., 2016; Schwandt, 2018). An advantage of our paper is that we exploit
external labor market shocks to establish a causal link from economic conditions to mortality.
A potential drawback of this approach is that we cannot obtain the causal effect of a specific
measure of income or SES. However, our finding that a broad range of SES measures is
affected by the economic shock suggests that it may be difficult to find a single summary
measure for shifts in economic status. Instead, the mortality effect itself could be thought of
as a summary measure of those long-term effects of economic shocks that individuals could
not buffer through mechanisms available to them. Clearly, this does not capture all the costs
of the shock to individuals, but it represents a particularly stark adverse consequence.
    Within the broader literature on socioeconomic outcomes and mortality, our findings
help to shed light on several phenomena discussed in the recent literature. We replicate
   4
      Studies suggest other social outcomes that may be related to health worsen for cohorts entering the labor
market in recessions as well, including increases in crime (e.g., Bell et al. 2018) and reductions in self-esteem
(e.g., Maclean et al. 2016).
    5
      A closely related literature studies the effect of individual unemployment spells on mortality and other
health outcomes (e.g., Halliday, 2014; McLeod et al., 2012; Roelfs et al., 2011; Martikainen et al., 2007).

                                                       5
the reverse, negative relationship of mortality and contemporaneous unemployment rates for
young labor market entrants (e.g., Ruhm, 2000; Miller et al., 2009; Stevens et al., 2015;
Ruhm, 2015; Hollingsworth et al., 2017). But we find this relationship reverses sign and
becomes positive in the long run for these cohorts. This suggests that a positive SES-health
relationship may appear in mortality data only after a substantial lag. Increasing SES-health
gradients with age have been well-documented in the empirical literature (e.g., Case et al.,
2002; Currie and Stabile, 2003) and recently incorporated in a model of life-cycle mortality
by Moreau and Lleras-Muney (2019). Yet, there have been doubts about how much of the
gradient and its rise represent true causal effects of SES on health (e.g., Cutler et al., 2011a).
Our results are consistent with the notion that initial differences in SES tend to have an
increasing impact on health and eventually on mortality as individuals become older.
    Moreover, our paper establishes a direct causal link between initial economic condi-
tions, long-term socioeconomic decline, and mortality among cohorts at the core of recent
increases in midlife mortality (Case and Deaton, 2015, 2017; Borella et al., 2019). This
supports the notion brought forward by Case and Deaton (2015, 2017, 2018) that persistent
social and economic hardship may be an important channel behind current midlife mortality
crisis. However, it is important to point out that by design, our paper is not meant to explain
the entire or even a large fraction of the midlife mortality crisis, since we look only at initial
labor market conditions orthogonal to the national unemployment rate, and neither address
the effects of recessions for older worker nor the role of wider economic trends, e.g. related
to trade (Pierce and Schott, forthcoming; Autor et al., forthcoming).
    Finally, by showing how the concept of the "double-weighted" unemployment rate intro-
duced by Schwandt and von Wachter (2019) can be used to study initial conditions in large
cross-sectional mortality data sets, our paper makes a useful conceptual contribution that we
expect will benefit a range of future studies based on similar administrative data. Taking
this step is important because large, administrative data spanning many cohorts and years is
required to study the effect of long-term aggregate shocks on mortality ­ due to infrequently
occurring shocks, moderate effects sizes, and substantially lagged effects as cohorts age ­
but typically vital statistics data lag key information on labor market history typically used
for this kind of analysis.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section introduces the data
while the third section lays out our estimation approach. The fourth section presents our
main findings on the effects of entering the labor market in a recession on mortality in middle
age, overall and by cause of death. The fifth section summarizes our findings on long-term


                                                6
responses in measures of SES. The sixth section discusses our findings in light of common
economic mechanisms. The final section concludes.


2       Data

Our analysis is based on four data sets: the U.S. Vital Statistics (Vital Stats), which provides
information on every death in the United States since 1968; the Decennial Census of Popula-
tion (Census) in combination with the American Community Survey (ACS), which provide
the population denominator for the construction of annual mortality rates as well as socioe-
conomic characteristics; the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the March Current
Population Survey (CPS), which provides socioeconomic characteristics for repeated cross-
sections for large samples of individuals; and annual state-level unemployment rates from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
    Annual mortality rates require annual population estimates. We construct population
estimates by state of birth and year of birth using the Census years 1980, 1990, and 2000
and ACS annual estimates for 2001­2016. We apply a linear interpolation for the pre-2000
inter-census years. The death files from the Vital Stats include the cause of death along
with core demographic characteristics such as age, sex, race, and state of birth. The same
characteristics are reported in the Census/ACS, which allows us to construct death rates for
the subgroups defined by these demographics.6
    We analyze labor market and family formation outcomes from pooled data from the
CPS (waves 1979­2016), the Census (1980, 1990, 2000), and the ACS (2001­2016). Our
baseline specification focuses on U.S.-born individuals and links the unemployment rate at
labor market entry via individuals' state and year of birth. The CPS does not contain the
state of birth so we use the state of current residence as a proxy (see Schwandt and von
Wachter, 2019, and Section 5.1 for a discussion). We leave the CPS data unrestricted in
terms of nativity in years prior to 1994, as the country of birth is only reported afterwards.
We analyze both mortality and socioeconomic outcomes in four demographic subgroups:
male and female non-Hispanic whites (referred to as male and female whites), and male and
female non-whites and Hispanics (referred to as male and female non-whites).
    Our main economic outcome is log earnings, which refers an individual's total pre-tax
    6
     After 1989, the mortality files additionally include information on the decedent's education; thus in prin-
ciple, we could construct mortality rates by education group and graduation year for the years following 1989.
However, constructing mortality rates by education group is problematic due to missing information and coding
mismatches between the Vital Stats and the Census (Currie and Schwandt, 2016b).



                                                       7
wage and salary income in a given calendar year. Labor force participation is measured
as reporting any positive earnings. Welfare receipt includes total annual pre-tax income
received from public assistance programs.7 Poverty status is assessed by comparing family
income to the federal poverty line. Family formation measures include current marital status
and the number of own children currently living in the respondent's household (the number
of own children ever born is not reported in the CPS or Census/ACS data after 2000).


3       Empirical Approach

To obtain the causal effect of economic conditions at job market entry on mortality and
socioeconomic outcomes we would ideally like to estimate the following regression model:

                                outcomei,t =  + a eci0 + a +             i,t                            (1)

    where outcomei,t are different outcomes of an individual i at different ages a, eci0 are
local labor market conditions at labor market entry, and a are age fixed effects. The co-
efficients a represent age-specific deviations from the typical age profile resulting from
differences in initial local labor market conditions. To implement the equation, we have to
choose a level aggregation for the appropriate labor market. For our analysis, we follow the
majority of the literature and use annual state-level unemployment rates as indicators for the
state of the local labor market. For a causal interpretation of a we further require that eco-
nomic conditions at labor market entry be orthogonal to other determinants of the respective
outcome that are not captured by the model.

3.1     Identification strategy

There are two main challenges to estimating Equation (1). The first challenge is a data limita-
tion: the Vital Stats mortality data and other population-wide data sources do not contain the
state and year of graduation. The second challenge is a selection issue: if people select when
to graduate or where to graduate in response to local labor market conditions, then economic
conditions at labor market entry are not orthogonal to other factors potentially impacting an
individual's later outcomes.
    We follow the method developed by Schwandt and von Wachter (2019) to address both
    7
     These include Supplemental Security Income payments to blind or disabled persons with low incomes; Aid
to Families with Dependent Children; and General Assistance (not including separate payments for hospital or
other medical care).



                                                     8
challenges. We use data from the Census and the ACS to construct a proxy for the graduation
year unemployment rate that only relies on information on an individual's state of birth and
year of birth. Because these characteristics are fixed, they cannot be affected by labor market
conditions around graduation. A key advantage of this approach is that these characteristics
can be linked to the Vital Stats data, which also report the state and year of birth.8
                                                                              A
    To implement this approach, we first estimate migration shares mig b,s as the average
share of cohorts in our sample born in state b that live in state s at ages A = 16, 18, 20, 22.
Note that we only use state-specific average migration rates (i.e., state fixed-effects in the
underlying regression model of individual level migration indicators) rather than migration
rates of a specific birth cohort (state-cohort fixed effects), which could be driven by an en-
dogenous response to contemporaneous labor market conditions. Next, we estimate gradua-
                A
tion shares edub,c , indicating the share of sample cohorts born in state b in year c who grad-
uate at age A = 16, 18, 20, 22+. We predict graduation shares using both state fixed effects
and country-wide cohort fixed effects (but not their interaction). The "double-weighted"
(DW) average graduation year unemployment rate is then given by:

                                                        51
                                                  A               A
                                uDW
                                 b,c   =       edub,c         mig b,s us,c+A                           (2)
                                           A            s=1

    The double-weighted unemployment rate does not rely on endogenous migration at labor
market entry or timing of labor market entry in response to local labor market conditions,
as it is constructed using only state averages over time and national averages across periods,
but not state-period variation. Moreover, because the cohorts are assigned their graduation
state based on their state of birth, which is a fixed characteristic, the double-weighted unem-
ployment rate is also not affected by state-cohort-specific migration after graduation.

3.2      Double-weighted specification (baseline)

We regress mortality and other outcomes on the double-weighted average unemployment
rate, using the following specification:

                     outcomeb,c,a =  + a uDW
                                          b,c + a + b + c + t +                  b,c,a                 (3)

       The indices b, c, a, and t refer to the birth state, birth year (cohort), age, and calendar
   8
     This approach is based on synthetic cohorts (Deaton, 1985) and is further developed in Currie and
Schwandt (2014), which link maternal life cycles to unemployment rates using mothers' own state and year of
birth.


                                                    9
year; hence  , ,  , and  are the coefficients on unrestricted age, birth state, birth cohort,
and calendar year fixed effects, respectively.9 The data are collapsed at the state-of-birth by
year-of-birth by age level. Observations are weighted by the relevant population in a given
cell and standard errors are clustered at the state-of-birth by year-of birth level to account for
cohort-specific serial correlation in labor market outcomes.
    Given the included fixed effects, the coefficient vector a captures deviations from the
typical mortality age profiles related to cohort-state-specific variation in the unemployment
rate at labor market entry that are uncorrelated with contemporaneous nationwide shocks
and independent of responses in graduation timing and migration to state-cohort-specific
shocks. Notice that we do not include the current state unemployment rate in our main
results; therefore a captures the effect of graduating in a recession, given the regular subse-
quent evolution of local labor market conditions. However, controlling for the current state
unemployment rate does not affect results substantially.

3.3    Mincerian specification

We compare our baseline estimates to a specification that links individuals to the economic
conditions in the state and the year in which they graduated. Such a specification is often
used in previous studies that focused on college graduates and typically use longitudinal data
containing direct information on the state and the year of labor market entry. In the CPS, we
can proxy for this information using individuals' current state of residence and their reported
educational attainment. We construct the "Mincerian" year of labor market entry as year of
birth, plus six, plus years of education, and use it as the main explanatory variable in the
following regression:

                   outcomes,g,t =  + e us,g + e + s + g + t + d +                      s,g,t               (4)

    where us,g is the unemployment rate in the state of current residence s at the "Mincerian"
year of graduation g . e refers to years of potential experience (years since graduation) and
t to the calendar year. We additionally include education-group fixed effects d . The data
are collapsed by the state of residence, graduation year, calendar year, and four education
groups, and observations are weighted by the population weighted cell-size. Standard errors
are clustered at the level of graduation year by state.
   9
    We drop one dummy for each age, birth state, birth cohort, and calendar year effects. It is well known that
cohort, year, and age effects are not separately identified, and hence we drop a second dummy from the birth
cohort effects. Choosing alternative restrictions has no bearing on our main results.


                                                     10
     Compared to the double-weighted average unemployment rate, the unemployment rate
used in the Mincerian specification contains more identifying variation as it is not averaged
across multiple years and all states. Moreover, the sample of the Mincerian specification
is larger, as the double-weighted specification links each cohort to unemployment rates be-
tween ages 16 and 22. While the contrast with the Mincerian model is useful when we
analyze economic outcomes, as discussed above the double-weighted specification is our
preferred model for two key reason. It is not prone to bias stemming from endogenous tim-
ing or migration before graduation or to migration after graduation. Most importantly, the
double-weighted specification can be used in the Vital Statistics mortality data.

3.4   Sample restrictions

State-level unemployment rates are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics only since
1976. Therefore, we exclude individuals who were born before 1960, i.e., who were 16-year-
olds before 1976, in the double-weighted specification and individuals who graduated before
1976 when using the Mincerian specification. Our sample period starts in 1979, which is the
year in which Vital Statistics death certificates started to report the state of birth. All data sets
are further restricted to individuals born in the United States, with the exception of CPS data
prior to 1994. Finally, we include only cohorts that are observed across all ages, resulting in
different cohort ranges when analyzing wider or narrower age ranges. Our baseline cohorts
were born between 1960 and 1967, and are observed from age 19 to age 49.

3.5   Summary statistics

Table 1 shows mortality rates across five-year age groups and mortality causes for the 1960­
1967 birth cohorts. Between age groups 19­25 and 46­49, overall mortality increases more
than threefold (from 11.3 to 37 deaths per 10,000). Disease-related mortality, which in-
creases from 2.7 deaths to 28.7 deaths per 10,000, drives this increase. Deaths due to external
causes fluctuate between 8.6 and 6.1 per 10,000 over these age ranges (see Appendix Figure
A.1 for the typical age profiles of mortality due to diseases and external causes). The final
column of Table 1 shows mortality due to deaths of despair, which include deaths due to liver
disease, suicide, and drug poisoning. Deaths of despair increase from 1.8 to 6.9 per 10,000
over this age range. Part of this increase is driven by the surge of the opioid epidemic and
drug poisoning deaths in later years of the sample rather than reflecting age effects. Table
A.2 reports summary statistics for labor market and family formation outcomes and displays
familiar life-cycle gradients. Tables A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix report summary statistics

                                                 11
by gender and race for mortality and socioeconomic outcomes, respectively.


4     Impacts on mortality

As backdrop to our regression analysis, we assessed nationwide cohort-level trends of overall
mortality and mortality due to deaths of despair. Figure 1 shows age profiles for different
cohorts that are divided into boom, bust, and regular cohorts depending on the unemployment
rate around their graduation age (proxied by age 18 in this figure). As benchmark, dashed
lines connect mortality levels at age 40 of boom cohorts. For overall mortality, the dashed
line has a negative slope, suggesting that all-cause mortality at age 40 fell over time. For
deaths of despair, however, the dashed line has a positive slope, indicating that mortality
for those causes increased across cohorts. What is key for our analysis, the mortality rate
at age 40 for bust cohorts lies above the dashed line in both figures, indicating that cohorts
facing higher unemployment rates at age 18 experienced higher mortality rates at age 40
than those with more favorable economic conditions. At the same time, these figures also
show the presence of cohort and time effects unrelated to labor market entry conditions, such
as the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the mid-1990s. This highlights the need to control for time
and cohort effects in a regression framework if one seeks to estimate the causal effect of
economic conditions at labor market entry on subsequent mortality.

4.1   Overall mortality

Figure 2 plots the coefficients (with 95 percent confidence intervals) from regressions of
overall deaths per 10,000 on the double-weighted average graduation year unemployment
rate , interacted with two-year age groups (a in Equation (3)). The effects at age 19 and
20, i.e. the contemporaneous effects of higher unemployment on mortality, are negative.
For every additional percentage point in unemployment at graduation, mortality at age 19
and 20 is reduced by about 0.2 deaths per 10,000. This finding is in line with Ruhm (2000)
and related studies, who have shown that mortality tends to decrease during times of high
unemployment. The figure shows that this negative effect vanishes at subsequent ages, and
fluctuates around zero between the mid-20s and the mid-30s. In the late 30s, however, a
positive effect on mortality appears that further increases up to the late 40s (see Appendix
Figure A.2 for log-mortality results). Mortality at age 49 increases by about 1 death per
10,000 for every percentage point increase in the graduation year unemployment rate.
    Table 2 shows the point estimates corresponding to Figure 2 (column 5). To obtain


                                             12
a balanced sample across all ages our main results focus on individuals born between 1960
and 1967 that entered the labor market approximately between 1978 and 1989. However, this
cohort restriction does not drive our main finding. The remaining columns of Table 2 show
findings from an increasingly larger number of cohorts, including only the age effects that
can be identified with all cohorts present (see also Figure (A.4)). Effects are similar when we
shorten the analyzed age window in order to include additional birth cohorts. These results
suggest that entering the labor market during bad economic times has a positive long-term
effect on mortality. Furthermore, this effect is not visible or even reversed in the short run.10

4.2    Effects on cause-specific mortality

Figure 3 shows separate regression results for deaths due to diseases and external causes. It
is apparent that the negative effect on mortality at young ages is entirely driven by external
causes, while the positive and increasing effects at middle ages is driven by disease-related
deaths.
    In order to further explore the drivers of the positive long-term effects at middle ages,
Table 3 shows regression results for leading disease-related mortality causes. These regres-
sions use mortality in logs as rates differ up to a factor 100 across age groups (see Table
1). For deaths due to liver disease, heart disease, and lung cancer we find an effect pattern
that resembles the positive effects for overall disease-related mortality in Figure 3. We do
not find effects of early labor market conditions on deaths due to other cancers, even though
cancers other than lung cancer are jointly a leading cause of death in the late 40s.
    Overall, we find that the positive effects on mortality in middle age from adverse initial
labor market conditions are to a large extent driven by disease-related causes that can be
linked to detrimental health behaviors, such as smoking, drinking, poor diet, and lack of
exercise.
    Yet, it turns out that the apparent absence of an effect on overall external deaths in the
right panel of Figure 3 masks important heterogeneity across different causes. Figure 4
zooms in on different external causes of death. The negative contemporaneous effects at
ages 19 and 20 are entirely driven by a decline in accidents (first panel).11 The second panel
of Figure 3 shows that there is no effect on suicide, either at younger or at middle ages. For
drug poisoning deaths (third panel), however, a positive and significant effect appears after
  10
      Our findings are robust to the choice of cohort, age, and year fixed effects. Appendix Figure A.3 shows
that specifications with alternative cohort effects result in virtually the same effect pattern.
   11
      This finding is in line with Evans and Moore (2011, 2012) who show that economic activity increases
short-term mortality.


                                                     13
age 40.
    Figure 5 shows positive midlife impacts on deaths of despair, as defined by Case and
Deaton (2015, 2017), and compares effects to broader sets of deaths related to health be-
haviors, including lung cancer and heart disease. The left panel shows effects on deaths per
10,000. Adding lung cancer has little impact on estimates at younger ages but greater impacts
in the 40s. At age 49, the total impact doubles compared to deaths of despair alone. Further
adding heart disease increases impacts more dramatically, with point estimates around 0.6 in
the late 40s, about six times the impact on deaths of despair alone. Jointly, these causes of
death can explain approximately two thirds of the overall increase in mortality we find (see
Figure 2). Heart disease is the leading cause of death in this age group, which may partly
explain the large impacts when this cause is included. The right panel of Figure 5 therefore
shows effects on log mortality rates, which can be interpreted as percent increases. The re-
sulting differences across the three groups of causes are smaller, but the specification that
includes heart disease still yields the largest point estimates.
    Overall, we interpret the patterns shown in Figure 5 to reinforce our finding from Table
3 that the positive effects on mortality in middle age from adverse initial labor market condi-
tions are to a large extent driven by disease-related causes that can be linked to detrimental
health behaviors. The results also indicate that mortality analyses that focus on long-term
socioeconomic decline and the role of economic hardship might include lung cancer and
heart disease deaths, besides the more strictly defined deaths of despair.

4.3   Demographic heterogeneity of mortality effects

Table 4 shows impacts of the unemployment rate at the time of labor market entry on mor-
tality by demographic group (summary statistics reported in Table A.1). Given sizable dif-
ferences in mortality levels across race and gender, we show effects on log mortality.
     Midlife impacts of the unemployment rate at labor market entry on overall mortality are
similar across race, but they are two to three times larger for women than for men in percent-
age terms (albeit relative to a smaller baseline rate). Interestingly, for non-whites, some mor-
tality impacts already appear in the 20s, and this early effect occurs both for disease-related
deaths and deaths of despair. This could be partly driven by larger adverse consequences
of initial unemployment rates on earnings and poverty for non-whites (Schwandt and von
Wachter (2019)). In addition, both the HIV and the crack epidemics of the early 1980s to
mid-1990s hit the non-white community much harder. During that time, HIV-infections and
crack addiction could lead to death within a few years. Appendix Table A.5 shows disease-


                                              14
related mortality excluding HIV/Aids deaths, and indeed, point estimates for non-whites are
reduced by about one-third.
    Midlife impacts on deaths of despair in Panel (B) of Table 4, on the other hand, are driven
by whites. Point estimates for non-whites are small and not significantly different from
zero. This finding is in line with literature showing that non-whites were less strongly hit by
the opioid epidemic as doctors discriminated against non-white patients in their prescribing
behavior (Pletcher et al., 2008). When we include lung cancer and heart disease in the second
panel, we find, if anything, stronger midlife impacts for nonwhites.
    In sum, the pattern in Table 4 suggests that while the overall mortality impact of initial
labor market conditions is similar across races, there are differences in the most-affected
causes, partly depending on the exposure of different demographic groups to different epi-
demics occurring during the sample period.

4.4    Magnitude of mortality effects

How large are the estimated mortality effects? The answer to this question crucially depends
on whether and how we assume the mortality impact sustains after age 49, the end of our
age window. If mortality impacts only occurred between ages 19 and 49, the impact on life
expectancy would be moderate: entering the labor market during the 1982 recession (i.e.,
facing a 3.9 percentage point increase in the entry unemployment rate) would reduce life
expectancy by 0.6 months. However, given our estimates of increasing mortality impacts
over age, it seems more likely that effects sustain past age 49. We calculate life expectancy
losses based on a linear and a percent extrapolation (illustrated in Figure A.5). The linear
extrapolation assumes that impacts increase linearly with age, following the trend estimated
for age 40 to 49. For the percent extrapolation we use a constant 2 percent effect for the rest
of life.12
    Adding the impact of a 3.9 percentage point increase in the entry unemployment rate
to the mortality age profile (using the percent extrapolation) makes only a minor difference
at any given age (see Figure A.6). But these impacts accumulate over the life cycle. As
reported in Table 5, the linear and percent extrapolations imply a loss in life expectancy of
5.9 and 8.9 months, respectively. For a hypothetical cohort of 4 million (approximately the
  12
     Alternatively, we can extrapolate impacts at older ages based on log-linear Gompertz models. However,
such models imply much larger impacts at older ages than the linear or percent extrapolations that we use.
Fitting a linear age trend through the log mortality impact (Figure A.2, right panel), with a negative impact
at age 19 and positive impacts above age 40, results in a positive age slope implying that the impacts on log
mortality increase with age, beyond the 2 percent observed at the late 40s.



                                                     15
size of the 1964 birth cohort), this is equivalent to a total of 2 million and 3 million life years
lost, respectively.
     A life expectancy loss of six to nine months is reasonable compared to mortality impacts
of labor market and business cycle shocks estimated in previous literature. Sullivan and von
Wachter (2009) find that job loss as part of a mass layoff reduces life expectancy by 1 to
1.5 years. Our mortality effect is about half the size, but our estimated impacts on income
are smaller, too. Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) estimate a 10­20 percent reduction in
lifetime earnings, whereas results in Schwandt and von Wachter (2019) imply a loss of 6%
of cumulated earnings in the first ten working years from entering the labor market in a
recession. Given our findings in Section 5 this is an underestimate of the total effect on
earnings.
     Another benchmark is the contemporaneous mortality effect of business cycle fluctua-
tions (Ruhm, 2000; Miller et al., 2009; Stevens et al., 2015). We use the contemporaneous
impacts by single year of age reported in Miller et al. (2009) to calculate the effect of a 3.9
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate on life expectancy (this refers to the im-
pact on the length of life for an individual that experiences a strong local recession at every
year of age throughout life), resulting in an increase in life expectancy by 1.9 months. In
other words, the negative longevity impacts of entering the labor market during a recession
is three to 4.5 times larger than the positive contemporaneous mortality impacts.
     Another way to benchmark our estimates is to compare them the overall increases in
deaths of despair studied in the literature. Between 1990 and 2010, deaths of despair in-
creased by around 3.4 per 10,000 at age 50 to 54 (Case and Deaton, 2017). These cohorts
entered the labor market in the late 1960s to the late 1970s, with recessions occurring during
a total of two years and three months of that period. Even in the hypothetical case that all of
these cohorts were fully impacted by a strong recession (experiencing a 4 percentage point
increase in the entry unemployment rate), deaths of despair would only increase by 0.4 per
10,000.


5   Impacts on labor market and family formation outcomes

In this section, we expand our analysis and estimate the longer-term effects in middle age of
entering the labor market in a recession on a broad set of labor market and family formation
outcomes. This is of interest in its own right since most prior studies have focused on effects
in the first ten to fifteen years, partly motivated by the desire to combine a larger number
of entry cohorts in their estimates. Here we focus on cohorts coming of age before, during,

                                                16
and after the early 1980s recession and hence can follow these cohorts into middle age.
In addition, these findings are relevant since they give further context for the increases in
mortality in middle age we find. In interpreting these findings, it is important to bear in mind
that our research design allows us to estimate the causal effect of adverse initial entry on a
range of outcomes, but does not allow us to disentangle likely complex interdependencies.
    To benchmark our findings to the prior literature, we start by comparing the short- and
medium-run effects for log earnings for individuals entering the labor market in 1976­1987
(the equivalent to our 1960­1967 baseline birth cohorts in the double-weighted specifica-
tion) with results for individuals entering 1976­2015 that are studied in Schwandt and von
Wachter (2019). We then study a broader set of socioeconomic outcomes in middle age for
the 1976­1987 entry cohorts using the double-weighted specification discussed in Section
3.2.

5.1    Earnings impacts using the Mincerian specification

The top panel in Figure 6 shows the impact of the graduation year unemployment rate on log
earnings by years of potential labor market experience based on the Mincerian specification
in three different samples. The blue and green lines show effects in CPS and Census/ACS
data, respectively, for individuals graduating in 1976­1987 who can be followed up to 30
years past graduation. The dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. The red line
with hollow squares (labeled SvW) replicates the baseline estimates from Schwandt and von
Wachter (2019) using CPS data and including observations from all individuals graduating
between 1976 and 2015.13
    All three sample specifications show a similar short- and medium-term effect. Initially,
earnings are decreased by -2.5 to -4 percent for every percentage point increase in the grad-
uation year unemployment rate, and this effect fades out within ten years. But this is not yet
the full story. Negative effects reappear 15 to 20 years after graduation and they remain at
around minus one percent until the end of our observation period.
    As described in Section 3, to address selection issues we also replicated these findings
using our double-weighted unemployment rate. The bottom panel of Figure 6 shows earnings
effects by age using the double-weighted specification and the same baseline cohorts as in
the mortality analysis. Compared to the Mincerian specification, estimates are less precise,
both due to the smaller number of included cohorts and the reduction in identifying variation
  13
     As described in the data section, we use state of current residence in the CPS data as a proxy for state of
birth. The similarity between the CPS and the Census results suggests that this proxy is reasonable.



                                                      17
caused by the two-way averaging inherent in the double-weighted average graduation year
unemployment rate. Moreover, the effect at age 19 is smaller than the effect at age 20
as at that age those cohort members with more than 12 years of education have not yet
entered the labor market. But besides these differences, the overall pattern is very similar
to the Mincerian specification shown in the top panel. The initial negative effects of the
unemployment rate at labor market entry fade out in the late 20s and early 30s but then
reappear in the mid-30s. The point estimates, shown by decade of age in Table 6 (A), imply
about a one percent loss in middle-age income for every percentage point increase in the
double-weighted graduation year unemployment rate.

5.2   Effects on labor market outcomes

For the analysis of additional outcomes, we pool the CPS and Census/ACS samples to max-
imize our sample sizes. Figure 7 and Table 6 show the impact on log earnings in the pooled
sample, along with further labor market outcomes. In midlife, despite having lower an-
nual earnings, recession graduates have higher rates of labor force participation. However,
compared to the means in the same age group shown in the bottom panel of Table 1 (78.2
percent), the point estimates shown in Table 6 imply that the effect of a three-point rise in the
unemployment rate increases the longer-term employment rate only by 0.92 percent relative
to the mean. Recession cohorts are also less likely to receive welfare income in middle age.
Yet, despite the decline in earnings and welfare receipt, they do not experience a longer-term
impact on poverty rates. We will discuss these results further when considering separate
demographic groups.

5.3   Effects on family formation

Figure 8 and Table 6 show that we find precisely estimated effects of entering the labor mar-
ket in a recession on family formation outcomes over the life course and up to middle age.
In the short-term, recession graduates experience slightly elevated marriage rates. However,
with increasing age this marriage bonus decreases and turns negative in the late 30s when
recession graduates are less likely to be married than their more lucky counterparts. The sec-
ond panel in Figure 8 shows that the effect on marriage rates is partially driven by divorces,
which spike in the late 20s and follow the peak of the marriage rate effect by about five years.
For unlucky labor market entrants, divorce rates remain elevated until age 49. Compared to
the means at ages 40­49 (bottom panel of Table 1), the magnitude of these effects (reported
in Table 6) is small to moderate. A three-point rise in the unemployment rate -- roughly

                                               18
the typical increase in a recession -- would imply a reduction of somewhat less than 2.5
percent in middle age marriage rates relative to the mean (63.5 percent), and a rise of about
3.5 percent in middle-age divorce rates relative to the mean (19.34 percent).
     The bottom two panels in Figure 8 show corresponding effects of entering the labor mar-
ket in a recession on cohabitation with own children. Recession graduates are more likely
to have own children living in their household in their mid-20s, in line with higher marriage
rates at that age.14 However, in midlife they are less likely to have any own children in their
household. The effects are again of moderate size, with a three-point rise in unemployment
rates implying effects of 3-4 percent relative to the mean. We cannot distinguish whether
this effect is driven by adolescent children moving out, younger children living with a di-
vorced partner, or lower overall fertility rates. Given that Currie and Schwandt (2014) show
increased unemployment rates during women's early 20s lower their completed fertility, it
is likely that at least part of our findings is due to reduced overall fertility rather than being
only a reflection of differences in birth spacing or cohabitation patterns.

5.4    Demographic heterogeneity of socioeconomic impacts

In Tables 7 and 8, we analyze the impacts on labor market and family formation outcomes
separately by gender and again two broad race groups, whites (referring to non-Hispanic
whites), and non-whites (including Hispanics). The main takeaway is that even though the
initial labor market effects are much stronger for non-whites, the long-term effects on in-
come and family formation tend to be driven by whites. While both white men and women
experience a reduction in midlife marriage rates and in the presence of children in house-
hold, longer-term effects on earnings are concentrated on white men. While key findings are
precisely estimated, an important caveat is that in some instances we do not have sufficient
precision in the non-white samples.
    The initial earnings effect of entering the labor market in a recession is about double for
non-whites compared to whites (Panel A of Table 7). Both groups experience a reduction in
the initial loss, and by age 30­40, non-whites have no long-term loss. However, the losses
for white men never quite disappear in their thirties and the losses grow larger in their 40s.
To the extent that negative long-term effects for whites may be driven by employment in jobs
  14
     Note that the zero effect at age 19, one year after the modal labor market entry, is somewhat at odds with
the well established finding of procyclical fertility (Currie and Schwandt, 2014). One potential explanation is
that fertility tends to lead rather than lag fluctuations in the unemployment rate (Buckles et al., 2018). It is
also likely that upon exiting school around age 18, individuals take some time to learn about the adverse labor
market situation and to find a partner and have children, leading to a gradual increase of the effect by age.



                                                      19
with flatter income age profiles (see Section 6), the absence of an effect for non-whites could
mean that jobs with steep income profiles are not available to disadvantaged populations
even in better economic times. Among these cohorts, white women appear to have smaller,
imprecisely estimated initial earnings losses and no signs of longer-term effects.
     In the bottom row of Table 7, we show the p-values of two-sided t-tests of the equality
of the coefficients at age 40-50 of each demographic with the corresponding effect for white
men. It is clear that white men have statistically different long-term earnings effects from
entering the labor market than women and non-white men. Women, however, appear to ex-
perience stronger effects on labor supply (Panel A of Table 7).15 As a mirror image, welfare
receipt is significantly negatively impacted for all demographic groups except for white men
(Panel B of Table 7). The effects are strongest for non-white women, who also have substan-
tially higher baseline rates (Table A.2). There are no precisely estimated effects on poverty
for any demographic group. The findings on labor supply, welfare receipt, and poverty could
be partly influenced by the strong 1990s labor market that affected these cohorts in their mid-
to late-30s and early 40s. As further discussed in Section 6, for women both the short- and
longer-run labor supply effects could also be affected by family considerations.
     Turning to family status, Panel A of Table 8 shows that the effect of entering the labor
market in a recession on marriage and divorce rates are largely concentrated on white men
and women both in the short and long run. Marriage rates are strongly elevated among white
recession graduates in their 20s, perhaps pointing to lower opportunity costs of marriage and
family formation. However, this marriage premium is lost quickly due to higher divorce
rates in the late 20s (for men) or the catch up in marriage rates of non-recession cohorts. In
midlife, marriage rates are consistently lower among white recession graduates. White men
in particular also face permanently higher divorce rates.16
     Finally, cohabitation with any own children and the number of cohabiting children is
impacted negatively in midlife for both white men and women (Panel B of Table 8).17 Inter-
estingly, however, female recession graduates are initially more likely to report own children
  15
      White women, and non-white women in particular, experience large reductions in initial labor supply upon
entering the labor market in a recession. Interestingly, especially for white women, these effects turn positive
in their 30s and they remain higher in their 40s, potentially linked to lower marriage rates across those ages
(Johnson and Skinner, 1986). The effects are of the same magnitude but imprecisely estimated for non-white
women. Non-white men also experience positive midlife labor supply effects.
   16
      The average differences in the effects on marriage rates in the short and long run between whites and non-
whites are precisely estimated. The p-value of a two-sided t-test of equality of the effect for the two race groups
is 0.04. In contrast, the corresponding p-value for a test of the effect on any children living in the household is
0.15.
   17
      While non-whites experience imprecisely estimated negative effect on the number of cohabiting children
in the long run, there is little effect on likelihood of living with any children.

                                                       20
in their household, and this positive impact lasts until their mid-30s. As it is unlikely that
non-recession female graduates entirely catch-up in their late 30s when female fertility is
low, this pattern suggests that part of the negative long-term effect on cohabitation with own
children is driven by earlier-born offspring leaving the household. The pattern would be
consistent with a rise in early life marriage rates observed at least for white women. How-
ever, here we cannot conclusively say how these effects relate to changes in spacing and total
fertility.


6        Discussion

Our analysis has revealed a range of short- and long-term impacts of labor market entry
conditions on mortality and socioeconomic outcomes. In this section, we discuss potential
underlying mechanisms. While identifying the effects of specific channels goes beyond the
scope of this paper, the discussion relates our results to economic hypotheses and findings in
the literature.

6.1      Discussion of mortality effects

The positive short-term effects of entering the labor market in a recession on longevity we
find are in line with an established literature that has documented that mortality is procycli-
cal, i.e., the contemporaneous effects of aggregate unemployment on mortality are negative
(Ruhm, 2000; Miller et al., 2009; Stevens et al., 2015; Ruhm, 2015). For labor market en-
trants, the group of primary concern in this paper, we find these contemporaneous effects are
relatively short-lived and fade within a few years after labor market entry.18
    While we find no effects in the 20s and early 30s from entering the labor market in
a recession, positive mortality impacts from initial unemployment rates appear in the late
30s and grow steadily in their 40s, and up to age 49. These results complement previous
studies that find long-run mortality effects for economic and labor market conditions around
birth, adolescence, and before retirement (Van den Berg et al., 2006; Cutler et al., 2016; Coile
et al., 2014). Our results are also consistent with findings that empirical SES-health gradients
increase with age up to age 55 (e.g., Case et al., 2002; Currie and Stabile, 2003). While it
has been difficult to establish how much of the gradient and its increase with age are due
to causal effects, our results show that labor market entry shocks do have such increasing
    18
      For these individuals, we show the contemporaneous mortality effects are mainly driven by accidents,
suggesting that depressed economic activity lowers the risk of fatal injuries on the road and at the workplace
(in line with Evans and Moore (2011, 2012)).


                                                     21
causal effects on mortality. The patterns we find are predicted by the model of life-cycle
mortality by Moreau and Lleras-Muney (2019) and can be generated both by temporary and
permanent reductions in health investments. In their model, even temporary reductions in
health investments have permanent scarring effects because health depreciation over time
is modeled as additive, not multiplicative in the stock. Notably, in either case the model
predicts low impacts in young adulthood when accumulated age-driven appreciation is still
low, pushing few individuals over the death threshold.
    Our finding that these increases are driven by causes linked to health behaviors, suggests
that entry conditions affect midlife mortality via impacts on SES and living circumstances,
which in turn affect health (rather than a direct, non-health effect on mortality via, for in-
stance, a rise in accidents). One mechanism driving these long-term mortality increases
could be persistent behavioral or psychological responses to the initial strong impacts on
economic outcomes. At an especially impressionable age and a vulnerable transition period,
a person may be more likely to adopt unhealthy behaviors or fail to eliminate those acquired
in high school or college (Kessler et al., 2005).
    The persistent earnings reductions and worse social outcomes we find in the long run may
further contribute to poor health behaviors and unhealthy living circumstances, e.g., via so-
cial isolation (Cornwell and Waite, 2009). These factors might drag down health sufficiently
to raise mortality in midlife (Steptoe et al., 2013), when the incidence of adverse health
generally increases. As further discussed below, poor health might in turn reinforce socioe-
conomic impacts, lowering an individual's labor market productivity and socio-economic
status and worsening social isolation.
    Our results provide empirical support for the hypothesis that increases in deaths of de-
spair can be driven by persistent effects of socioeconomic decline (Case and Deaton, 2015,
2017). In particular, Case and Deaton (2018) emphasize the role of a broad set of socioeco-
nomic outcomes, including family formation and cohabitation, and conjecture that the full
impact of some of these factors may only occur over a longer time horizon. Our results
show this is the case for unlucky labor market entrants. While our analysis is able to identify
drivers of deaths of despair linked to market entrants' exposure to local short-term business
cycle fluctuations, Pierce and Schott (forthcoming) and Autor et al. (forthcoming) document
impacts of longer-term structural changes, such as reductions in manufacturing jobs induced
by globalization and import competition.
    In a discussion of Case and Deaton (2017), Lleras-Muney (2017) examines the trends in
deaths of despair in light of a structural framework of life cycle mortality (based on Moreau


                                              22
and Lleras-Muney, 2019). Lleras-Muney (2017) concludes that midlife increases in deaths
of despair "can only be the result of permanent changes in parameters beginning early in
adulthood" and that "there [must have] been a permanent deterioration in one or more fac-
tors that affect health, starting at about the time of labor market entry." (As noted above, a
permanent health deterioration can also be generated a temporary reduction in investments.)
Our results demonstrate that labor market entry conditions are one such factor with persistent
impacts on midlife mortality.
    At a broader level, our results also contribute to an ongoing, highly publicized debate
about mortality trends and inequality in mortality. Overall, mortality has strongly declined
over the past decades, with particular improvements for African-Americans (Currie and
Schwandt, 2016b). In contrast, poor, non-hispanic whites in middle age have faced stagnat-
ing or even raising mortality rates (Case and Deaton, 2015). Moreover, Currie and Schwandt
(2016a,b) document strong convergence in mortality rates between rich and poor areas for
infants, children, and adolescents, while inequality in mortality has stagnated or increased
at middle and older ages (Wilmoth et al., 2011; Pijoan-Mas and R´         ios-Rull, 2014; Goldring
et al., 2016; Chetty et al., 2016). Our results suggest that initial labor market conditions might
play a role in transmitting the effects of economic conditions on inequality in mortality.

6.2    Discussion of socioeconomic effects

Several hypotheses have been advanced in the literature to explain the short- to medium-
term effects on earnings from entering the labor market in a recession. Short-term earnings
effects have been explained by a combination of worsening job opportunities, time-intensive
job search, and reduced opportunities for skill investment. For example, Oreopoulos et al.
(2012) suggest persistent effects can arise if time-intensive job search slows down as workers
mobility costs rise with age.19 To explain worsening effects on earnings of early labor market
conditions that initially seemed to fade documented by Kahn (2010) for college graduates
  19
     Oreopoulos et al. (2012) lay out a theoretical model in which high- and low-skill workers search for jobs,
and each aim to obtain jobs at higher paying firms. A temporary reduction in the availability of good jobs
leads to a loss in earnings as workers are temporarily downgraded to worse firms. While typical measures of
search intensity would suggest a catch-up within three to four years once the economy returns to normal, the
pattern can take longer if workers search costs increases as they age (for example due to family formation).
The patterns could last longer if workers have the opportunity to accumulate firm- or occupation-specific skills
once they found the right employer. If better firms also offer better opportunities for career advancement or
human capital accumulation, then initial effects can last a long time. Typical models of career development
have concave experience or tenure profiles in wages, and hence do not predict permanent effects on earnings
from adverse initial conditions. To obtain such permanent effects, Oreopoulos et al. (2012) posit that recovery
may be incomplete if workers stop searching or stop investing in skills, perhaps because the costs of doing so
rise with age, e.g., due to family formation or homeownership.

                                                      23
and we confirm for all white men, Gibbons and Waldman (2006) propose a model in which
firms are ex-ante identical, but decide to offer certain jobs with more opportunities for career
advancement only in good economic times. As a result, unlucky entrants could remain stuck
in lower quality jobs, from which they may be more likely laid off again. Similarly, if one
were to introduce layoffs in the Oreopoulos et al. (2012) search environment, otherwise equal
unlucky cohorts have, on average, lower job tenure, and hence may again be most at risk of
experiencing a layoff in middle age. Given that workers graduating in the 1982 recession
faced the early 2000s recession in their 40s, this may be a plausible explanation. The fact
that we do not observe employment effects is compatible with this explanation, since most
job losers find jobs again quite quickly.
    Another reason for a widening gap in earnings may be adverse health shocks themselves
that typically start to occur in middle age. For example, we find that the effect of entering the
labor market in a recession on mortality starts to rise in the mid-30s (e.g., see disease-related
deaths in Figure 2). If these increases in mortality reflect the overall health of these cohorts,
such lower health would likely reduce overall productivity and hence earnings (Meyer and
Mok, 2019). Worsening health may also affect family stability and, to a lesser extent given
the age range, fertility (Balen and Crawshaw, 2006). It is important to note that any worsen-
ing health does not appear to lead to reductions in employment, as we find affected workers'
earnings rise in their 30s and 40s, on average, compared to luckier labor market entrants.
    It is likely that at least part of the changes in broader socioeconomic outcomes we studied
are themselves directly affected by initial labor market conditions. On the one hand, it is
possible that workers respond to the initial shock in ways that have repercussions over the
life cycle. For example, in the short run, individuals may decide to delay marriage and
fertility due to lower income. In contrast, a lower opportunity cost, especially for women,
may lead to anticipated marriage, consistent with our findings. In the long run, these marginal
marriages may provide less stable matches or may be more unstable due to lower lifetime
earnings and wealth. On the other hand, the reductions in earnings we find may also directly
affect workers' opportunities in the marriage market, and hence their choices to get married
and have children.20
   20
      Some of our group-specific findings could also be explained by economic mechanisms. For example,
while for women a recession-induced reduction of the opportunity cost of childbearing may initially lead to
increased family formation, in the longer run, the negative impacts on marriage and cohabitation rates with
own children could reduce the opportunity cost of employment, and thus drive female recession graduates into
the labor market at older ages. Another hypothesis could be that non-whites have lower marriage and higher
out-of-wedlock birth rates, as well as no long-term income effects (due to lack of steep career ladders), which
is why family formation outcomes are not impacted.



                                                     24
    Given that socioeconomic outcomes and earnings are likely to be to some degree directly
affected by early initial conditions, they then in turn might themselves affect health and
hence mortality. For example, both lower lifetime earnings and wealth, as well as higher
divorce rates and smaller families, may worsen health and increase mortality. While this is
an interesting question for future research, here we cannot tease apart the likely complex
causal pathways running from health to socioeconomic status and vice versa. However, our
finding clearly indicate that early labor market entry has a broad effect on individuals lives up
until age 50, affecting both mortality as well as family formation and labor market outcomes.


7   Conclusion

In this paper we have used several large cross-sectional data sources and a new approach to
estimate midlife effects of entering the labor market in a recession on mortality by cause and
various measures of socioeconomic status. This is the first paper to study adverse labor mar-
ket entry on mortality and on socioeconomic status effects going beyond age forty. To obtain
such longer-term effects, we focus on cohorts coming of age in the late 1970s to mid-1980s,
a period of particularly pronounced labor market swings. To estimate the unemployment
rate in the state of labor market entry based on cross-sectional data despite data limitations
and selection from mobility, we implement a new approach based on a double-weighted
unemployment rate introduced by Schwandt and von Wachter (2019).
     We obtain four main findings. For cohorts coming of age during the early 1980s reces-
sion, a temporarily higher state unemployment rate at the age of labor market entry leads
to precisely estimated increases in mortality that appear in the late thirties and increase un-
til age 50. These increases in mortality are driven to an important extent by a rise in both
disease-related and "external" causes, including lung cancer, liver disease, and drug poison-
ing. We also find entering the labor market during a recession has a substantial impact on a
broad range of measures of socioeconomic status in middle age, including a decline in mar-
riage rates, a rise in divorce rates, and a decline in family size. We also find that after initial
recovery in their mid-thirties, adversely affected entry cohorts suffer a reduction in earnings
as they reach their mid-forties. Finally, while the effects on overall mortality are similar
by race, increases in deaths of despair appear to be chiefly concentrated among white, non-
Hispanic men. White men also tend to experience a decline in earnings in midlife and tend
to experience larger reductions in family stability than their non-white counterparts. This
is despite the fact that non-whites experience larger short-run effects on earnings and other
outcomes (Schwandt and von Wachter, 2019).

                                                25
    These findings suggest long-term costs of entering the labor market in a recession may
be greater than previously understood in the related economic literature. In particular, our
finding that adverse initial labor market conditions raise long-term mortality implies that the
costs of recessions go beyond initial earnings effects documented in the literature. They
confirm findings from a growing body of literature that labor market shocks more generally
can have long-term consequences for health and mortality (e.g., Sullivan and von Wachter,
2009, Cutler et al. (2016)). Our result that various socioeconomic outcomes also worsen
in midlife further underscores that initial labor market conditions have effects that can last
beyond the initial adjustment period typically studied. Moreover, mortality can be viewed
as an extreme health outcome, not capturing all impacts on latent health. Our estimates
are therefore likely to provide a lower bound of the full long-term health effects of initial
economic conditions for the cohorts we study.
    Addressing a broader literature on trends in health inequality and the relationship of
socioeconomic status and health, our results provide evidence of a positive causal pathway
from economic conditions to health and mortality that becomes relevant as individuals age.
We find more than a decade needs to pass before these effects are measured in the data. These
results suggest that some of the roots of the trends in health inequality observed in midlife
and old-age might be found in earlier periods of life, consistent with evidence in Case et al.
(2002) and Currie and Stabile (2003) and predictions of a life cycle models of mortality in
Moreau and Lleras-Muney (2019). Mortality can be viewed as an extreme health outcome,
not capturing all impacts on latent health. Hence, ur estimates may provide a lower bound
of the full long-term health effects of initial economic conditions for the cohorts we study.




                                              26
References

A LTONJI , J. G., L. B. K AHN , AND J. D. S PEER (2016): "Cashier or consultant? Entry
  labor market conditions, field of study, and career success," Journal of Labor Economics,
  34, S361­S401.

AUTOR , D. H., D. D ORN , AND G. H. H ANSON (forthcoming): "When Work Disappears:
 Manufacturing Decline and the Falling Marriage-Market Value of Men," American Eco-
 nomic Review: Insights.

BALEN , R. AND M. C RAWSHAW (2006): Sexuality and fertility issues in ill health and
 disability: From early adolescence to adulthood, Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

B ELL , B., A. B INDLER , AND S. M ACHIN (2018): "Crime Scars: Recessions and the Mak-
  ing of Career Criminals," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100, 392­404.

B ORELLA , M., M. D E NARDI , AND F. YANG (2019): "The lost ones: the opportunities
  and outcomes of non-college educated Americans born in the 1960s," Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

B OUND , J., A. T. G ERONIMUS , T. WAIDMANN , AND J. RODRIGUEZ (2018): "Local Eco-
  nomic Hardship and Its Role in Life Expectancy Trends," Michigan Retirement Research
  Center Research Paper.

B ROWNING , M. AND E. H ENESEN (2012): "Effect of job loss due to plant closure on
  mortality and hospitalization," Journal of Health Economics, 31, 599­616.

B ROWNING , M., A. M OLLER DANO , AND E. H EINSEN (2006): "Job displacement and
  stress-related health outcomes," Health Economics, 92, 1061­1075.

B UCKLES , K., D. H UNGERMAN , AND S. L UGAUER (2018): "Is Fertility a Leading Eco-
  nomic Indicator?" Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

B URGARD , S., J. B RAND , AND J. H OUSE (2007): "Toward a better estimation of the effect
  of job loss on health," Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 92, 369­384.

C ARPENTER , C. S., C. B. M C C LELLAN , AND D. I. R EES (2017): "Economic conditions,
  illicit drug use, and substance use disorders in the United States," Journal of Health Eco-
  nomics, 52, 63­73.


                                             27
C ASE , A. AND A. D EATON (2015): "Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among
  white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century," Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 112, 15078­15083.

------ (2017): "Mortality and morbidity in the 21st century," Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity, 397.

------ (2018): "Deaths of despair redux: a response to Christopher Ruhm," Mimeo.

C ASE , A., D. L UBOTSKY, AND C. PAXSON (2002): "Economic Status and Health in Child-
  hood: The Origins of the Gradient," American Economic Review, 92, 1308­1334.

C HETTY, R., M. S TEPNER , S. A BRAHAM , S. L IN , B. S CUDERI , N. T URNER , A. B ERG -
  ERON , AND D. C UTLER (2016): "The association between income and life expectancy in
  the United States, 2001-2014," Jama, 315, 1750­1766.

C OILE , C. C., P. B. L EVINE , AND R. M C K NIGHT (2014): "Recessions, older workers, and
  longevity: How long are recessions good for your health?" American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 6, 92­119.

C ORNWELL , E. Y. AND L. J. WAITE (2009): "Social disconnectedness, perceived isolation,
  and health among older adults." Journal of Health and Social Behavior.

C URRIE , J., J. Y. J IN , AND M. S CHNELL (2018): "US employment and opioids: Is there a
  connection?" Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

C URRIE , J. AND H. S CHWANDT (2014): "Short-and long-term effects of unemployment on
  fertility," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 14734­14739.

------ (2016a): "Inequality in mortality decreased among the young while increasing for
  older adults, 1990­2010," Science, 352, 708­712.

------ (2016b): "Mortality inequality: the good news from a county-level approach," The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30, 29­52.

C URRIE , J. AND M. S TABILE (2003): "Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is the
  Relationship Stronger for Older Children?" American Economic Review, 93, 1813­1823.

C UTLER , D. M., W. H UANG , AND A. L LERAS -M UNEY (2015): "When does education
  matter? The protective effect of education for cohorts graduating in bad times," Social
  Science and Medicine, 127, 63­73.

                                           28
------ (2016): "Economic Conditions and Mortality: Evidence from 200 Years of Data,"
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

C UTLER , D. M., A. L LERAS -M UNEY, AND T. VOGL (2011a): "Socioeconomic status and
  health: dimensions and mechanisms," Oxford Handbook of Health Economics.

------ (2011b): "Socioeconomic Status and Health: Dimensions and Mechanisms," Oxford
  Handbook of Health Economics, 1, 124­163, dOI: 10.3386/w14333.

D EATON , A. (1985): "Panel data from time series of cross-sections," Journal of Economet-
  rics, 30, 109­126.

------ (1997): The analysis of household surveys: a microeconometric approach to devel-
  opment policy, The World Bank.

D ETTLING , L. J. AND J. W. H SU (2014): "The State of Young Adults' Balance Sheets:
  Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
  Review, 96, 305­30.

E LIASON , M. AND D. S TORRIE (2009): "Does job loss shorten life?" Journal of Human
   Resources, 44, 277­302.

E VANS , W. N. AND T. J. M OORE (2011): "The short-term mortality consequences of in-
   come receipt," Journal of Public Economics, 95, 1410­1424.

------ (2012): "Liquidity, economic activity, and mortality," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 94, 400­418.

G ENDA , Y., A. KONDO , AND S. O HTA (2010): "Long-term effects of a recession at labor
  market entry in Japan and the United States," Journal of Human resources, 45, 157­196.

G IBBONS , R. AND M. WALDMAN (2006): "Enriching a theory of wage and promotion
   dynamics inside firms," Journal of Labor Economics, 24, 59­107.

G OLDRING , T., F. L ANGE , S. R ICHARDS -S HUBIK , ET AL . (2016): "Testing for changes
  in the SES-mortality gradient when the distribution of education changes too," Journal of
  Health Economics, 46, 120­130.

H ALLIDAY, T. J. (2014): "Unemployment and mortality: Evidence from the PSID," Social
  Science and Medicine, 113, 15­22.

                                            29
H OLLINGSWORTH , A., C. J. RUHM , AND K. S IMON (2017): "Macroeconomic conditions
  and opioid abuse," Journal of health economics, 56, 222­233.

J OHNSON , W. R. AND J. S KINNER (1986): "Labor supply and marital separation," The
   American Economic Review, 455­469.

K AHN , L. B. (2010): "The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college
  in a bad economy," Labour Economics, 17, 303­316.

K ESSLER , R. C., P. B ERGLUND , O. D EMLER , R. J IN , K. R. M ERIKANGAS , AND E. E.
  WALTERS (2005): "Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disor-
  ders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication," Archives of general psychiatry, 62,
  593­602.

KONDO , A. (2011): "Gender-specific labor market conditions and family formation," Jour-
 nal of Population Economics, 25, 151­174.

                                       ¨
K UHN , A., R. L ALIVE , AND J. Z WEIM ULLER (2009): "The public health costs of job loss,"
  Journal of Health Economics, 28, 1099­1115.

L LERAS -M UNEY, A. (2017): "Comment on Case and Deaton's "Mortality and morbidity in
   the 21st century"," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 452­467.

M ACLEAN , J. C. (2013): "The health effects of leaving school in a bad economy," Journal
  of Health Economics, 32, 951­964.

M ACLEAN , J. C., R. C OVINGTON , AND A. S IKORA K ESSLER (2016): "Labor Market
  Conditions at School-Leaving: Long-Run Effects on Marriage And Fertility," Contempo-
  rary Economic Policy, 34, 63­88.

M ARTIKAINEN , P., N. M AKI¨ , AND M. J ANTTI
                                          ¨     (2007): "The effects of unemployment
  on mortality following workplace downsizing and workplace closure: a register-based
  follow-up study of Finnish men and women during economic boom and recession," Amer-
  ican Journal of Epidemiology, 165, 1070­1075.

M C L EOD , C. B., J. N. L AVIS , Y. C. M AC NAB , AND C. H ERTZMAN (2012): "Unemploy-
  ment and Mortality: A comparative study of Germany and the United States," American
  Public Health Association.



                                            30
M EYER , B. D. AND W. K. M OK (2019): "Disability, earnings, income and consumption,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 171, 51­69.

M ILLER , D. L., M. E. PAGE , A. H. S TEVENS , AND M. F ILIPSKI (2009): "Why are reces-
  sions good for your health?" The American Economic Review, 122­127.

M OREAU , F. AND A. L LERAS -M UNEY (2019): "A Unified Law of Mortality: Implications
  for Economic Analyses," Tech. rep., Working paper.

N EW YORK T IMES (2019): "It's Not Just Poor White People Driving a Decline in Life Ex-
  pectancy," Nov. 26.

O REOPOULOS , P., T. VON WACHTER , AND A. H EISZ (2012): "The short-and long-term
  career effects of graduating in a recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 4, 1­29.

OYER , P. (2006): "Initial labor market conditions and long-term outcomes for economists,"
 The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 143­160.

------ (2008): "The making of an investment banker: Stock market shocks, career choice,
  and lifetime income," The Journal of Finance, 63, 2601­2628.

P IERCE , J. R. AND P. K. S CHOTT (forthcoming): "Trade liberalization and mortality: Evi-
   dence from US counties," American Economic Review: Insights.

P IJOAN -M AS , J. AND J.-V. R´
                              I OS -RULL (2014): "Heterogeneity in expected longevities,"
   Demography, 51, 2075­2102.

P LETCHER , M. J., S. G. K ERTESZ , M. A. KOHN , AND R. G ONZALES (2008): "Trends
   in opioid prescribing by race/ethnicity for patients seeking care in US emergency depart-
   ments," Jama, 299, 70­78.

ROELFS , D. J., E. S HOR , K. W. DAVIDSON , AND J. E. S CHWARTZ (2011): "Losing life
 and livelihood: A systematic review and meta-analysis of unemployment and all-cause
 mortality," Social Science and Medicine, 72, 840­854.

ROTHSTEIN , J. (2019): "The Lost Generation? Scarring after the Great Recession," .

RUHM , C. J. (2000): "Are Recessions Good for Your Health?" The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 115, 617­650.

                                            31
------ (2015): "Recessions, healthy no more?" Journal of health economics, 42, 17­28.

------ (2018): "Deaths of despair or drug problems?" Tech. rep., National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

------ (2019): "Drivers of the fatal drug epidemic," Journal of health economics, 64, 25­
  42.

S CHALLER , J. AND A. H. S TEVENS (2015): "Short-run effects of job loss on health con-
   ditions, health insurance, and health care utilization," Journal of Health Economics, 43,
   190­203.

S CHWANDT, H. (2018): "Wealth shocks and health outcomes: Evidence from stock market
   fluctuations," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 349­77.

S CHWANDT, H. AND T. VON WACHTER (2019): "Unlucky Cohorts: Estimating the Long-
   term Effects of Entering the Labor Market in a Recession in Large Cross-sectional Data
   Sets," Journal of Labor Economics, 37, S161­S198.

S TEPTOE , A., A. S HANKAR , P. D EMAKAKOS , AND J. WARDLE (2013): "Social isolation,
   loneliness, and all-cause mortality in older men and women," Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences, 110, 5797­5801.

S TEVENS , A. H., D. L. M ILLER , M. E. PAGE , AND M. F ILIPSKI (2015): "The best of
   times, the worst of times: understanding pro-cyclical mortality," American Economic
   Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 279­311.

S ULLIVAN , D. AND T. VON WACHTER (2009): "Job displacement and mortality: An anal-
   ysis using administrative data," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1265­1306.

VAN DEN B ERG , G. J., M. L INDEBOOM , AND F. P ORTRAIT (2006): "Economic conditions
 early in life and individual mortality," The American Economic Review, 96, 290­302.

WASHINGTON P OST (2019): "There's something terribly wrong: Americans are dying
 young at alarming rates," Nov. 25.

W ILMOTH , J. R., C. B OE , AND M. BARBIERI (2011): "Geographic Differences in Life Ex-
 pectancy at Age 50 in the United States Compared with Other High-Income Countries," in
 Differences in Mortality at Older Ages: Dimensions and Sources, ed. by E. M. Crimmins,
 S. H. Preston, and B. Cohen, Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 123­143.

                                            32
W OZNIAK , A. (2010): "Are college graduates more responsive to distant labor market op-
 portunities?" Journal of Human Resources, 45, 944­970.




                                          33
        8                Figures and Tables


         Figure 1: Mortality Profiles and US-wide Unemployment Rates at Age 18, Across Cohorts


                                     Overall death rate                                                   Deaths of despair
                    25




                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                         40 40
                                                     Age 40     40




                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                       Age 40
Deaths per 10,000




                                                                     40
                                                                               40
                    20




                                                                          40



                                                                                         3

                                                                                                                                   30
                    15




                                                30
                                       30                                                                         30
                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                             30
                         18
                                                     30        30
                                           18
                              18
                                   18 18                  30                                           18 18 18
                                                                                             18   18
                    10




                                                                                         1




                          1980        1990             2000           2010                    1980        1990              2000          2010
                                                 Year                                                              Year

                                      Boom cohorts                             Bust cohorts                Regular cohorts

        Notes: Mortality profiles from age 18 up to age 43 are shown for selected cohorts.
        Boom/bust/regular cohorts refer to cohorts experiencing low/high/medium national unem-
        ployment rates at age 18. Dashed red lines fitted through the mortality rates of boom cohorts
        at age 40.




                                                                                    34
Figure 2: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Mortality Rate by
Age
                                  1.2
        Effect on deaths per 10,000
    -.4     0       .4     .8




                                        20   25   30    35   40       45         50
                                                       Age

Note: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from a regression of death
rates on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate interacted with 2-year
age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year, and state
of birth. Data from Vital Stats, Census, and ACS, years 1979­2016. Further regression
and sample details as in Table 2. Coefficients for 5-year age groups are reported in Table 2
column (5).




                                                       35
Figure 3: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Cause-Specific
Mortality

                                          Disease-related deaths                                             External causes
                               1.5




                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                  1
                               1
     Effect on deaths/10,000




                                                                        Effect on deaths/10,000
                                                                                                  .5
                               .5




                                                                                                  0
                               0




                                     20         30         40      50                                   20     30         40   50
                                                     Age                                                            Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of
cause-specific death rates on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate
interacted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Vital Stats, Census, and ACS, years 1979­2016.
External causes refer to all causes not included in disease-related deaths. Further regression
and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                                        36
Figure 4: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on external cause
mortality and deaths of despair

                                             Accidents                                                  Suicides
     Effect on deaths/10,000




                                                                  Effect on deaths/10,000
                               .25




                                                                                            .25
                               0




                                                                                            0
                               -.25




                                                                                            -.25
                                      20     30         40   50                                    20   30         40   50
                                                  Age                                                        Age

                                           Drug poisoning
     Effect on deaths/10,000
                               .2
                               .1
                               0
                               -.1




                                      20     30         40   50
                                                  Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of
cause-specific death rates on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate
interacted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Vital Stats, Census, and ACS, years 1979­2016.
Accidental drug poisoning counted as "drug poisoning" but not as "accidents." Further re-
gression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                                  37
Figure 5: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on "deaths of despair"
and related causes

                                         Levels                                                           Logs




                                                                             .08
                 .8
     Effect on deaths/10,000




                                                                   Effect on log deaths
                                                                                  .04
          0            .4




                                                                      0      -.04
                 -.4




                               20      30         40       50                             20         30          40       50
                                            Age                                                           Age

                           Deaths of despair       + lung cancer                          + lung cancer + heart disease


Note: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of cause-
specific death rates on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate interacted
with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year,
and state of birth. Data from Vital Stats, Census, and ACS, years 1979­2016. Accidental
drug poisoning counted as "drug poisoning" but not as "accidents." Further regression and
sample details as in Table 2. Deaths of despair include deaths due to liver disease, drug
overdoses, and suicide (blue line). The thin black line additionally includes deaths due to
lung cancer. The thick green line additionally includes deaths due to lung cancer and heart
disease. Because of the sharp increase in deaths due to lung cancer and heart disease with
age, we show the effects in both levels and logs. We only show confidence intervals for
deaths of despair to avoid clutter.




                                                                38
Figure 6: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Earnings by Cohort
and Data Set

Panel A: Mincerian Specification ­ Effects by Potential Labor Market Experience
                          0
                 Effect on log earnings
            -.05 -.0375 -.025 -.0125




                                          0              10                      20           30
                                                           Years since graduation

                                                   CPS, graduation cohorts 1976-2015 (SvW)
                                                   CPS, graduation cohorts 1976-1987
                                                   Census/ACS, graduation cohorts 1976-1987




Panel B: Double-Weighted Specification ­ Effects by Age
               Effect on log earnings
            -.05      -.025        0




                                              20           30                    40           50
                                                                    Age
                                                      CPS, birth cohorts '60-'67
                                                      Census/ACS, birth cohorts '60-'67


Notes: Results are based on the Mincerian specification (Eq. (2)) and double-weighted
specification (Eq. (3)), using data from the ASEC Supplement to CPS from 1976 to 2016,
the Censuses from 1980, 1990, 2000, and the ACS from 2001­2016. "SvW" refers to the
specification estimated in Schwandt and von Wachter (2019).
                                                                   39
Figure 7: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Economic Outcomes

                           Log earnings                           Any earnings




                                                       1
     -.04 -.02 0
         Effect




                                                  Effect
                                                     0 -1
                   20       30         40    50              20    30         40   50
                                 Age                                    Age

                        Any welfare income                          Poverty
          1




                                                       1
          .5




                                                       .5
     Effect




                                                   Effect
     0




                                                  0
          -.5




                                                       -.5



                   20       30         40    50              20    30         40   50
                                 Age                                    Age


Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of economic
outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate interacted with 2-
year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year, and
state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further regression and
sample details as in Table 2.




                                                  40
Figure 8: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Family Formation
Outcomes

                                  Married                                      Divorced
             2




                                                             1
                                                             .5
          1
     Effect




                                                        Effect
     0




                                                        0
             -1




                                                             -.5
                       20        30         40     50              20          30         40       50
                                      Age                                           Age

                      Number of children in household                   No children in household
     -.02 0 .02 .04




                                                        -1 0 1
          Effect




                                                         Effect
                                                             -2




                       20       30          40     50              20          30         40       50
                                      Age                                           Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of fam-
ily formation outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                        41
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

Panel A: Mortality (deaths per 10,000)

                          Disease-related deaths                               External causes
                                        Lung                                 Acci-               Drug     Deaths of
         Total    Total   Heart                         Liver      Total           Suicide
                                       cancer                                dents               pois.     despair
 Age
 19-25   11.32     2.73   0.51             0.02            0.03    8.59      5.16      1.53      0.20        1.76
 26-30   12.71     5.79   2.38             0.04            0.12    6.91      3.16      1.56      0.47        2.15
 31-35   14.94     8.79   3.37             0.13            0.26    6.15      2.55      1.53      0.86        2.65
 36-40   18.57    11.99   2.79             0.37            0.55    6.58      2.50      1.62      1.55        3.73
 41-45   26.62    19.06   4.60             0.97            1.07    7.55      2.55      1.86      2.41        5.35
 46-49   36.99    28.70   7.13             1.87            1.79    8.29      2.51      2.14      2.99        6.93


Panel B: Socioeconomic Outcomes
                    Economic outcomes                                     Family formation outcomes
                      Any           Any              In                                                    No
           Log                                               Married         Divorced    Number
                    earnings       welfare         poverty                                              children
         earnings                                           (percent)        (percent)   children
                    (percent)     (percent)       (percent)                                             (percent)
 Age
 19-29     9.31       82.52         5.30           13.93          37.83         6.29          0.51       69.67
 30-39    10.03       81.61         3.49           9.59           63.49        14.90          1.35       35.40
 40-49    10.20       78.20         1.17           8.99           63.56        19.34          1.20       38.72

Notes: Death rates in panel A are based on Vital Statistics, Census, and ACS data. Panel
B shows socioeconomic outcomes from the Census, ACS, and CPS, aggregated using pop-
ulation weights. Sample in both panels includes cohorts born in the US from 1960 through
1967 who are observed from age 19 to age 49. "Deaths of despair" are the sum of "Liver,"
"Suicide," and "Drug poisoning." "Heart" and "Liver" refer to deaths due to heart and liver
disease, respectively. "Drug poisoning" refers to accidental drug poisonings. "Number chil-
dren" refers to the number of own children living in the household. "No children" refers to
respondents without any own children living in the household.




                                                  42
Table 2: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Mortality for Differ-
ent Birth Cohorts
                                              Dep. var.: Deaths per 10,000
                     (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)
                Cohort '60-'91      Cohort '60-'86 Cohort '60-'76 Cohort '60-'71         Cohort '60-'67
 Age 19           -0.100              -0.101              -0.097         -0.201             -0.242
                   (0.049)             (0.050)           (0.068)          (0.079)            (0.104)
                                             
 Age 20-25         -0.016             -0.083              -0.028           -0.040             -0.095
                   (0.043)             (0.038)           (0.047)          (0.058)            (0.080)
 Age 26-30                              0.002            -0.037          -0.107               -0.038
                                       (0.042)           (0.041)          (0.046)            (0.057)
 Age 31-35                                                0.070            0.022             -0.004
                                                         (0.053)          (0.051)            (0.057)
 Age 36-40                                              0.195            0.149              0.111
                                                         (0.059)          (0.057)            (0.053)
 Age 41-45                                                               0.485              0.415
                                                                          (0.091)            (0.091)
 Age 46-49                                                                                  0.805
                                                                                             (0.146)
 Total deaths      811,140            1,208,897        1,703,722         1,839,011         1,730,886
 Mean d. v.         10.41               11.00            13.35             15.89              18.96
 R2                  0.66                0.67             0.81              0.89               0.92
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Note: Regressions of death rates on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment
rate interacted with age group dummies (Eq. (3)) are shown. Data from Vital Stats, Census,
and ACS, years 1979­2016. Each column shows one regression, varying age ranges and
restricting cohorts to those observed across the entire analyzed age range. Total deaths vary
accordingly. Regressions include fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year, and state of
birth. Standard errors (in parenthesis) clustered at the state-of-birth by year-of-birth level.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Observations population-
weighted.




                                              43
Table 3: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Disease-Related
Causes of Death (Log Death Rate)
                         (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                  Disease-related    Liver disease   Heart disease   Lung cancer    Other cancer
 Age 19                0.006            -0.168           -0.032        -0.099          -0.005
                      (0.013)           (0.114)         (0.029)        (0.090)        (0.022)
 Age 20-25           0.010              -0.007          -0.017        -0.071          -0.018
                      (0.005)           (0.034)         (0.009)        (0.036)        (0.009)
 Age 26-30            0.009              0.020         -0.022         -0.066           -0.006
                      (0.005)           (0.023)         (0.009)        (0.029)        (0.008)
 Age 31-35           0.018               0.015         0.022            -0.026        -0.013
                      (0.004)           (0.019)         (0.008)        (0.017)        (0.007)
 Age 36-40           0.020             0.044           0.043            0.002          -0.001
                      (0.004)           (0.014)         (0.007)        (0.015)        (0.006)
 Age 41-45           0.029             0.038           0.043          0.052             0.007
                      (0.005)           (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.015)        (0.006)
 Age 46-49           0.031             0.057           0.051          0.072             0.007
                      (0.005)           (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.014)        (0.005)
 Total deaths       1,055,846           50,354         285,436         43,891         222,228
 Mean dep. var.        2.11              -.828            .744           -.967          .538
 R2                     0.95              0.83            0.89            0.87          0.87
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Note: Regressions of cause-specific death rates on the double-weighted labor market entry
unemployment rate interacted with age group dummies (Eq. (3)) are shown. Death rates
in logs as disease-related deaths increase sharply with age. Data from Vital Stats, Census,
and ACS, years 1979­2016. Regressions include fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year,
and state of birth. Standard errors (in parenthesis) clustered at the state-of-birth by year-
of-birth level. Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Observations
population-weighted.




                                             44
                    Table 4: Effect on Mortality by Demographic Group

Panel A: Overall and disease-related deaths
                               Log death rate                            Log disease-related mortality
                                        Non-           Non-                               Non-       Non-
                 White        White                               White        White
                                        white          white                              white      white
                 males       females                              males       females
                                        males         females                             males     females
 Age 19-29       -0.003      0.012     0.022          0.024       -0.001      0.006      0.028       0.009
                (0.004)      (0.006)   (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.013)    (0.013)
 Age 30-39       0.005       0.015      0.014         0.026      0.021        0.011      0.038      0.030
                (0.003)      (0.005)   (0.007)        (0.008)    (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.010)    (0.010)
 Age 40-49      0.016        0.031      0.011         0.036      0.031       0.034       0.046      0.048
                (0.004)      (0.006)   (0.007)        (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.010)    (0.011)
 Total deaths   806,239      411,691   327,306        185,650    429,244      280,665    198,773    147,164
 Mean d.v.        3.01         2.22     3.46            2.7       2.14          1.67      2.75       2.36
 R2               0.86         0.88      0.72           0.81       0.91         0.89       0.86       0.85


Panel B: Deaths of despair

                          Log deaths of despair                 Log despair + lung cancer + heart disease
                                       Non-           Non-                               Non-       Non-
                 White        White                              White       White
                                       white          white                              white      white
                 males       females                             males      females
                                       males         females                             males     females
 Age 19-29      -0.015     -0.026      0.035         0.050      -0.013      -0.022       0.018      0.010
                (0.008)    (0.014)     (0.014)       (0.024)     (0.006)    (0.012)     (0.015)    (0.018)
 Age 30-39       -0.011     0.004       0.022         0.035       0.003      0.021      0.031       0.028
                (0.007)    (0.014)     (0.013)       (0.021)     (0.005)    (0.011)     (0.012)    (0.015)
 Age 40-49      0.015      0.051        0.004         0.020     0.027       0.062       0.055      0.085
                (0.007)    (0.013)     (0.014)       (0.017)     (0.005)    (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.015)
 Total deaths   187,558      74,239    41,592        16,505     343,319     138,365     113,868    53,669
 Mean d.v.        1.51        .416      1.34          .438       2.04        .953         2.27      1.41
 R2               0.69        0.76      0.54          0.58        0.85        0.84        0.77      0.73

Notes: Data and specification as in Table 3. White refers to non-Hispanic white. Non-white
refers to non-white and Hispanic white. p-value of t-test for race difference of age 40-49 co-
efficient for Log deaths of despair is 0.075. All other age 40-49 coefficients not significantly
different between whites and non-whites. Deaths of despair include liver disease, drug poi-
soning, and suicide. Mean cause-specific mortality rates by age and demographic group are
reported in Table A.1.

                                                45
Table 5: Predicted Impacts of Effect ofUnemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry On Over-
all Cohort Mortality


                                                1982 recession graduation cohort
                                                 (+3.9 p.p. unemployment rate)
                                    linear extrapolation                percent extrapolation
                                             (1)                                 (2)
 Excess deaths (in cohort of 4 million)
 At age 0                                  0                                       0
 At age 20                               -374                                    -374
 At age 50                               7,089                                   7,089
 At age 65                              41,741                                  39,183
 At age 80                              90,624                                 121,327
 Cohort share deceased prematurely
 At age 65                                  1.04                                 0.98
 At age 80                                  2.27                                 3.03
 Loss in life expectancy at birth
 Months per capita                         -5.90                                -8.91
 Sum of life years
 (in cohort of 4m)                      -1,973,297                           -2,978,912
Notes: Linear extrapolation assumes that after age 50 the mortality rate increases annually
by an additional 0.09 per 10,000 and percent extrapolation assumes that after age 50 the
mortality rate is increased by a constant 2 percent, respectively, for each percentage point
increase in the graduation year unemployment rate. Excess deaths and life years lost are
based on initial birth cohort sizes of 4 million (the 1964 birth cohort is 4,027,490). Mortality
effects prior to age 50 are taken from the baseline results shown in Figure 2. Appendix
Figure A.6 plots the extrapolated effect patterns.




                                              46
Table 6: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Socioeconomic Out-
comes

Panel A: Economic Outcomes
                                             Any          Any           In
                                 Log
                                           earnings      welfare      poverty
                               earnings
                                           (percent)    (percent)    (percent)
            Age 19-29          -0.019       -0.260       0.491       0.445
                                 (0.004)    (0.133)      (0.055)     (0.093)
            Age 30-39           -0.007      0.363         0.055       0.026
                                 (0.003)    (0.130)      (0.049)     (0.088)
            Age 40-49          -0.009       0.239       -0.154        0.056
                                 (0.003)    (0.118)      (0.040)     (0.073)
            Observations   6,805,719       6,807,383   6,807,383    6,807,377
            Mean dep. var.    9.9             80.4        3.01         10.6
              2
            R                 0.77            0.27        0.25         0.33

Panel B: Family Formation Outcomes

                                                        Number          No
                                Married    Divorced
                                                           of        children
                               (percent)   (percent)
                                                        children     (percent)
            Age 19-29            0.219      0.165        0.012       -0.556
                                (0.234)     (0.083)      (0.005)      (0.203)
            Age 30-39           -0.208       0.132       0.009         -0.159
                                (0.138)     (0.086)      (0.004)      (0.126)
            Age 40-49          -0.499       0.229       -0.013       0.527
                                (0.147)     (0.082)      (0.004)      (0.160)
            Observations   6,807,383       6,807,383   6,807,383    6,807,383
            Mean dep. var.    56.3            14.4        1.05         46.5
            R2                0.61            0.37        0.65         0.68

Notes: Regressions of socioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry
unemployment rate interacted with age group dummies (Eq. (3)) are shown. Data from
Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Regressions include fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Standard errors (in parenthesis) clustered at the state-of-
birth by year-of-birth level. Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Observations weighted by population-weighted cell size.




                                             47
             Table 7: Effect on Economic Outcomes by Demographic Group

Panel A: Labor market outcomes
                               Log earnings                               Any earnings (percent)
                                         Non-        Non-                                Non-        Non-
                White        White                              White        White
                                         white       white                               white       white
                males       females                             males       females
                                         males      females                              males      females
 Age 19-29    -0.019         -0.008    -0.040      -0.041        -0.015     -0.461      -0.027     -1.294
                (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.174)      (0.180)   (0.348)      (0.374)
 Age 30-39     -0.010        -0.006      -0.005      -0.002       0.190     0.420      0.674         0.259
                (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.165)      (0.193)   (0.277)      (0.306)
 Age 40-49    -0.021         -0.005      0.006       0.004       -0.117     0.397      0.717         0.371
                (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.168)      (0.166)   (0.259)      (0.289)
 Obs.         2,706,863   2,781,916    617,265      699,675   2,706,875    2,781,979    617,845     700,684
 Mean d.v.       10.2        9.7         9.84         9.54       86.6         77.1        79.9        71.8
 t-test                     0.008       0.001        0.002                   0.011       0.007       0.147


Panel B: Welfare and poverty

                     Any welfare income (percent)                 Below poverty threshold (percent)
                                        Non-        Non-                                Non-        Non-
                White        White                              White       White
                                        white       white                               white       white
                males       females                             males      females
                                        males      females                              males      females
 Age 19-29     0.244        0.366      0.698       1.862        0.145      0.442       0.567       1.726
               (0.057)      (0.086)    (0.161)      (0.294)    (0.115)     (0.150)     (0.326)     (0.326)
 Age 30-39      0.057        0.044      0.031        0.245      0.028       0.142       -0.151      -0.138
               (0.047)      (0.074)    (0.142)      (0.248)    (0.107)     (0.129)     (0.294)     (0.273)
 Age 40-49      -0.058     -0.160      -0.181      -0.587       0.065       0.152       -0.122      -0.163
               (0.039)      (0.061)    (0.099)      (0.189)    (0.104)     (0.113)     (0.279)     (0.234)
 Obs.         2,706,875   2,781,979    617,845     700,684    2,706,875   2,781,979    617,840     700,683
 Mean d.v.       1.11        2.85        2.45        10          6.59        9.05        15.4       23.5
 t-test                     0.134       0.256       0.006                   0.562       0.512       0.389


Notes: Data and specification as in Table 6. White refers to non-Hispanic white. Non-white
refers to non-white and Hispanic white. The t-test row reports the p-value of the difference
between the age 40-49 coefficient in the each column with the the same coefficient in the
regressions for whites. Mean socioeconomic outcomes by age and demographic group are
reported in Table A.2.


                                              48
Table 8: Effect of State Unemployment Rate at Labor Market Entry on Family Formation
Outcomes by Demographic Group

Panel A: Marital status
                           Married (percent)                             Divorced (percent)
                                        Non-       Non-                               Non-       Non-
                White        White                            White        White
                                        white      white                              white      white
                males       females                           males       females
                                        males     females                             males     females
 Age 19-29     0.456        0.489       -0.208     -0.428    0.326         0.218       0.096      -0.338
               (0.261)      (0.286)    (0.438)    (0.419)    (0.130)      (0.150)     (0.184)    (0.235)
 Age 30-39      -0.309      -0.277     -0.320      0.301     0.490         0.016       0.291    -0.602
               (0.196)      (0.200)    (0.424)    (0.398)    (0.147)      (0.147)     (0.297)    (0.282)
 Age 40-49    -0.770       -0.629       -0.211     0.308     0.564         0.079       0.329      -0.121
               (0.200)      (0.193)    (0.353)    (0.306)    (0.152)      (0.138)     (0.205)    (0.210)
 Obs.         2,706,875   2,781,979    617,845    700,684   2,706,875    2,781,979   617,845    700,684
 Mean d.v.       57.3        63.2        43.1      42.6        12.2         15.3      13.2         19
 t-test                     0.588       0.179      0.004                   0.022      0.360      0.014


Panel B: Own children in household
                          Number of children                            No children (percent)
                                        Non-       Non-                               Non-       Non-
                White        White                            White        White
                                        white      white                              white      white
                males       females                           males       females
                                        males     females                             males     females
 Age 19-29      0.008      0.024        -0.004     0.011      -0.278     -1.129        -0.146    -0.562
               (0.005)      (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.215)      (0.272)     (0.358)   (0.370)
 Age 30-39      0.006       0.013       -0.012     0.006      0.096       -0.347        0.206   -0.304
               (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.194)      (0.204)     (0.403)   (0.368)
 Age 40-49    -0.014       -0.018       -0.009     -0.015    0.762        0.656         0.145     0.121
               (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.190)      (0.218)     (0.365)   (0.341)
 Obs.         2,706,875   2,781,979    617,845    700,684   2,706,875    2,781,979   617,845    700,684
 Mean d.v.       .948        1.16        .788      1.25        52.1         39.9      60.6        37.1
 t-test                     0.584       0.599      0.924                   0.651      0.123      0.091

Notes: Data and specification as in Table 6. White refers to non-Hispanic white. Non-white
refers to non-white and Hispanic white. The t-test row reports the p-value of the difference
between the age 40-49 coefficient in the each column with the the same coefficient in the
regressions for whites. Mean socioeconomic outcomes by age and demographic group are
reported in Table A.2.


                                            49
   Appendix

                       Figure A.1: Average Mortality by Age (log scale)

               U.S. Age-Specific Mortality Rates per 1000 in 1990, by Cause
     100
     10
     1
     .1




           0      10        20       30      40        50      60         70       80
                                             age

                  Overall deaths          Disease related        External causes


Notes: Lifecycle mortality profiles are shown by cause, based on Vital Stats and Census data
for 2000. External causes include all deaths that are not disease-related.




                                              50
           Figure A.2: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Mortality

               Effect on deaths per 10,000                    Effect on log deaths




                                                  .04
     1.2
     .8




                                                  .02
     .4




                                                  0
     0




                                                  -.02
     -.4




            20   25   30    35   40   45     50          20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                           Age                                          Age


Notes: This figure shows baseline results regressing death rates in levels (left, replicating
Figure 2) and in logs (right).




                                                  51
                               Figure A.3: Baseline Mortality Results With Alternative Cohort Effects

                 1.2
     Effect on deaths/10,000
       0        .4
                 -.4     .8




                                  20         25         30          35        40         45           50
                                                                   Age
                                       Cohort dummies (baseline)         Squared cohort effects
                                       Cubic cohort effects              Cohort dummies sum to zero


Notes: The blue solid line replicates the baseline results as shown in Figure 2. The dashed
lines show results from specifications that replace cohort fixed effects with squared and cubic
cohort effects. The red dashed line shows coefficients from a specification in which we
restrict cohort effects to sum to zero (as suggested by Deaton (1997)).




                                                                   52
  Figure A.4: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Mortality, by Cohort

                                          Cohorts 1960 - 1991                     Cohorts 1960 - 1986
     Effect on deaths/10,000
                               1




                                                                       1
                               .5




                                                                       .5
                               0




                                                                       0
                               -.5




                                                                       -.5
                                     20   25   30    35 40   45   50         20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                                                    Age                                     Age

                                          Cohorts 1960 - 1976                     Cohorts 1960 - 1971
     Effect on deaths/10,000
                               1




                                                                       1
                               .5




                                                                       .5
                               0




                                                                       0
                               -.5




                                                                       -.5




                                     20   25   30    35 40   45   50         20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                                                    Age                                     Age


Notes: This figure plots coefficients of the baseline specification for different age/cohort
ranges for 2-year age groups. Numerical results for 5-year age groups are reported in Table
2.




                                                                       53
                                          Figure A.5: Extrapolating Effects into Old Age


                                  Linear extrapolation                                                  Percent extrapolation
             10




                                                                                   .1        .08
                         8
 Effect on deaths/10,000




                                                                    Effect on log death rate
                                                                                      .06
                 6




                                                                               .04
         4




                                                                       .02
2




                                                                                   0
             0




                             20      50          80         110                                    20       50         80       110
                                          Age                                                                    Age

     Notes: This figure shows linear and percent extrapolations used in Table 5.




                                                               54
    Figure A.6: Mortality Profile of Baseline and 1982 Graduate Death Rate (+3.9 Percentage
    Point Entry Unemployment Rate), Using a Constant 2 Percent Extrapolation
            100
Deaths/10,000
 10     1




                  0             20                    40                  60                       80
                                                     Age
                      Baseline death rate            1982 recession graduate death rate


    Notes: Baseline death rate calculated based on cross-sectional mortality data for 2010. The
    Great Recession­graduate death rate is constructed by adding the effect of a five percentage
    point increase in the graduation year unemployment rate. A constant 2 percent effect is
    assumed for ages above age 50 (i.e. 10 percent is added to the age specific mortality rate).




                                                55
Figure A.7: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Earnings by Demographic
Group
                                             Log earnings

                             white male                                         white female
               .05




                                                                  .05
      Effect




                                                         Effect
        0




                                                           0
               -.05




                                                                  -.05
                      20     30         40     50                        20      30         40   50
                                  Age                                                 Age



                           non-white male                                     non-white female
               0




                                                                  0
      Effect




                                                         Effect
               -.2




                                                                  -.2




                      20     30         40     50                        20      30         40   50
                                  Age                                                 Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                    56
Figure A.8: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Percent with Any Earn-
ings by Demographic Group
                                          Any earnings

                          white male                                    white female
             1




                                                           1
         Effect




                                                       Effect
           0




                                                         0
             -1




                                                           -1
                   20     30         40     50                   20      30         40   50
                               Age                                            Age
    ^
                        non-white male                                non-white female
            2




                                                          2
               0




                                                             0
          Effect




                                                        Effect
        -2




                                                      -2
            -4




                                                          -4




                   20     30         40     50                   20      30         40   50
                               Age                                            Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                 57
Figure A.9: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Welfare Receipt by De-
mographic Group
                                            Any welfare income

                            white male                                           white female
               1




                                                                    1
            .5




                                                                 .5
       Effect




                                                            Effect
      0




                                                           0
               -.5




                                                                    -.5
                     20     30         40        50                       20      30         40   50
                                 Age                                                   Age



                          non-white male                                       non-white female
               4




                                                                    4
               2




                                                                    2
      Effect




                                                           Effect
               0




                                                                    0
               -2




                                                                    -2




                     20     30         40        50                       20      30         40   50
                                 Age                                                   Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                      58
Figure A.10: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Percent Married by
Demographic Group
                                         Married

                      white male                                    white female
         2




                                                       2
      Effect




                                                    Effect
       0




                                                     0
         -2




                                                       -2
               20     30         40       50                 20      30         40   50
                           Age                                            Age



                    non-white male                                non-white female
         2




                                                       2
           0




                                                         0
      Effect




                                                    Effect
         -2




                                                       -2
         -4




                                                       -4




               20     30         40       50                 20      30         40   50
                           Age                                            Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                               59
Figure A.11: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Percent Divorced by
Demographic Group
                                         Divorced

                      white male                                    white female
         1




                                                       1
      Effect




                                                    Effect
       0




                                                     0
         -1




                                                       -1
               20     30         40       50                 20      30         40   50
                           Age                                            Age



                    non-white male                                non-white female
         2




                                                       2
      Effect




                                                    Effect
       0




                                                     0
         -2




                                                       -2




               20     30         40       50                 20      30         40   50
                           Age                                            Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                               60
Figure A.12: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on the Number of Own
Children in Household by Demographic Group
                                  Number of children in household

                       white male                                        white female
         .05




                                                           .05
      Effect




                                                        Effect
       0




                                                         0
         -.05




                                                           -.05
                20     30           40        50                  20      30         40   50
                            Age                                                Age



                     non-white male                                    non-white female
         .1




                                                           .1
      Effect




                                                        Effect
        0




                                                          0
         -.1




                                                           -.1




                20     30           40        50                  20      30         40   50
                            Age                                                Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                   61
Figure A.13: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Percent Without Own
Children in household by Demographic Group
                                   No children in household

                      white male                                     white female
         2




                                                        2
      Effect




                                                     Effect
         0




                                                        0
         -2




                                                        -2
               20     30         40        50                 20      30         40   50
                           Age                                             Age



                    non-white male                                 non-white female
         2




                                                        2
      Effect




                                                     Effect
        0




                                                       0
         -2




                                                        -2




               20     30         40        50                 20      30         40   50
                           Age                                             Age


Notes: Coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted from regressions of so-
cioeconomic outcomes on the double-weighted labor market entry unemployment rate in-
teracted with 2-year age group dummies (Eq. (3)), including fixed effects for age groups,
cohort, year, and state of birth. Data from Census, ACS, and CPS, years 1979­2016. Further
regression and sample details as in Table 2.




                                                62
  Table A.1: Cause-Specific Deaths per 10,000, by Age Group and Demographic Group
                          Disease-related deaths                     External causes
                                       Lung                         Acci-              Drug     Deaths of
         Total    Total   Heart                     Liver   Total         Suicide
                                      cancer                        dents              pois.     despair
 White male
 19-25 16.09 2.93          0.54         0.02         0.02 13.16 8.83         2.79     0.26        3.07
 26-30 15.45 6.17          2.85         0.04         0.11 9.28 4.85          2.74     0.61        3.46
 31-35 17.65 9.06          3.96         0.15         0.29 8.59 3.81          2.69     1.18        4.16
 36-40 21.37 11.96 3.42                 0.37         0.65 9.41 3.68          2.86     2.09        5.60
 41-45 30.92 20.00 6.05                 1.00         1.35 10.92 3.86         3.27     3.13        7.75
 46-49 43.35 31.41 9.52                 1.97         2.31 11.93 3.81         3.78     3.70        9.79
 White female
 19-25 5.44        1.87    0.24         0.01         0.01 3.57 2.38          0.56     0.11        0.69
 26-30 5.62        2.94    0.55         0.03         0.06 2.68 1.47          0.57     0.20        0.83
 31-35 7.61        4.87    0.92         0.13         0.16 2.75 1.27          0.67     0.41        1.24
 36-40 11.78 8.19          1.30         0.37         0.38 3.59 1.38          0.82     1.03        2.24
 41-45 18.47 13.73 2.29                 0.97         0.72 4.74 1.38          1.08     1.97        3.78
 46-49 27.22 21.60 3.71                 1.87         1.27 5.62 1.36          1.30     2.67        5.24
 Non-white male
 19-25 20.77 4.63          1.26         0.02         0.05 16.15 5.90         1.92     0.35        2.32
 26-30 31.34 13.96 7.48                 0.06         0.27 17.38 5.12         2.36     1.11        3.74
 31-35 33.37 20.09 10.36                0.16         0.50 13.28 4.10         1.96     1.76        4.23
 36-40 34.09 22.59 6.09                 0.40         0.93 11.50 3.87         1.64     2.43        5.01
 41-45 43.87 32.63 8.72                 1.09         1.63 11.25 3.92         1.52     3.00        6.15
 46-49 54.65 44.04 12.83                1.91         2.45 10.61 3.56         1.45     3.38        7.29
 Non-white female
 19-25 6.95        3.28    0.61         0.01         0.06 3.66 1.46          0.31     0.16        0.53
 26-30 11.73 7.44          2.51         0.04         0.22 4.30 1.43          0.40     0.40        1.02
 31-35 15.14 11.37 3.81                 0.10         0.32 3.77 1.42          0.34     0.63        1.29
 36-40 19.88 16.18 3.08                 0.35         0.53 3.70 1.32          0.38     1.04        1.95
 41-45 27.26 23.33 4.39                 0.86         1.00 3.92 1.26          0.40     1.56        2.96
 46-49 36.37 32.13 6.46                 1.62         1.48 4.25 1.30          0.40     1.98        3.87
Notes: Death rates based on Vital Statistics, Census, and ACS data. Sample includes cohorts
born in the US from 1960 through 1967 who are observed from age 19 to age 49. "Deaths of
despair" are the sum of "Liver," "Suicide," and "Drug poisoning." "Heart" and "Liver" refer
to deaths due to heart and liver disease, respectively. "Drug poisoning" refers to accidental
drug poisonings. White refers to non-Hispanic white. Non-white refers to non-white and
Hispanic white.




                                               63
Table A.2: Economic and Family Formation Outcomes by Age Group and Demographic
Group
                     Economic outcomes                           Family formation outcomes
                      Any         Any          In                                             No
           Log                                         Married      Divorced    Number
                    earnings     welfare     poverty                                       children
         earnings                                     (percent)     (percent)   children
                    (percent)   (percent)   (percent)                                      (percent)
 White male
 19-29     9.57       90.25       1.62        7.91       33.21         4.47      0.31        80.06
 30-39    10.40       88.34       1.36        5.64       65.30        12.51      1.18        42.47
 40-49    10.55       83.14       0.62        6.41       66.89        16.87      1.18        41.29
 White female
 19-29     9.19       81.40       5.19       11.89       46.39         8.04      0.59        63.76
 30-39     9.76       76.08       3.32        8.47       70.56        15.70      1.52        27.00
 40-49     9.97       75.20       1.07        7.68       68.83        19.67      1.27        33.73
 Non-white male
 19-29     9.28       81.97       3.21       19.30       28.23         3.94      0.37        78.45
 30-39    10.04       83.77       3.07       13.06       49.78        14.14      1.03        51.71
 40-49    10.16       75.43       1.38       13.90       50.84        20.20      0.97        51.77
 Non-white female
 19-29     8.95       65.02       17.63      30.92       35.83        8.64       0.95        49.38
 30-39     9.68       75.94       11.36      23.19       46.31        20.78      1.65        25.72
 40-49     9.89       74.17        3.21      18.01       45.24        25.89      1.20        35.66

Notes: Data from the Census, ACS, and CPS, aggregated using population weights. Sample
in both panels includes cohorts born in the US from 1960 through 1967 who are observed
from age 19 to age 49. "Deaths of despair" are the sum of "Liver," "Suicide," and "Drug
poisoning." "Heart" and "Liver" refer to deaths due to heart and liver disease, respectively.
"Drug poisoning" refers to accidental drug poisonings. "Number children" refers to the
number of own children living in the household. "No children" refers to respondents without
any own children living in the household. White refers to non-Hispanic white. Non-white
refers to non-white and Hispanic white.




                                             64
Table A.3: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rates on Log Mortality for Differ-
ent Birth Cohorts
                                                Dep. var.: Log death rate
                     (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)
                Cohort '60-'91      Cohort '60-'86 Cohort '60-'76 Cohort '60-'71         Cohort '60-'67
 Age 19           -0.011               -0.008             -0.007           -0.008            -0.009
                   (0.005)             (0.004)           (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.006)
                                              
 Age 20-25         -0.002              -0.006             0.002           0.006               0.003
                   (0.004)             (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)
 Age 26-30                              0.003             0.004            0.004             0.007
                                       (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.004)
 Age 31-35                                                0.005           0.007             0.010
                                                         (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)
 Age 36-40                                                0.004           0.009             0.010
                                                         (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)
 Age 41-45                                                                0.012             0.018
                                                                          (0.003)           (0.003)
 Age 46-49                                                                                  0.020
                                                                                            (0.004)
 Total deaths      811,140            1,208,897        1,703,722         1,839,011         1,730,886
 Mean d. v.          2.31                2.37             2.54              2.69              2.83
 R2                  0.64                0.64             0.80              0.88               0.92
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Note: Regressions of log death rates on the double-weighted labor market entry unemploy-
ment rate interacted with age group dummies (Eq. (3)) are shown. Data from Vital Stats,
Census, and ACS, years 1979­2016. Each column shows one regression, varying age ranges
and restricting cohorts to those observed across the entire analyzed age range. Total deaths
vary accordingly. Regressions include fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year, and state of
birth. Standard errors (in parenthesis) clustered at the state-of-birth by year-of-birth level.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Observations population-
weighted.




                                              65
Table A.4: Effect of Labor Market Entry Unemployment Rate on Deaths of Despair Across
Cohorts
                                              Dep. var.: Deaths per 10,000
                     (1)                  (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)
                Cohort '60-'91      Cohort '60-'86 Cohort '60-'76 Cohort '60-'71       Cohort '60-'67
 Age 19             0.010              -0.026            -0.022           -0.017           0.003
                   (0.016)             (0.016)           (0.020)          (0.021)         (0.024)
 Age 20-25         0.026                -0.008            -0.001           -0.001          -0.004
                   (0.013)             (0.013)           (0.016)          (0.016)         (0.018)
 Age 26-30                             -0.019            -0.013           -0.017          -0.016
                                       (0.015)           (0.016)          (0.016)         (0.019)
 Age 31-35                                               -0.014           -0.010          -0.021
                                                         (0.017)          (0.017)         (0.018)
 Age 36-40                                               0.043           0.046              0.016
                                                         (0.019)          (0.019)         (0.019)
 Age 41-45                                                               0.091           0.081
                                                                          (0.025)         (0.025)
 Age 46-49                                                                               0.103
                                                                                          (0.036)
 Total deaths      167,470             254,667         342,565          357,584          319,894
 Mean d. v.          1.00                1.00            1.00             1.00              1.00
 R2                  0.59                0.63            0.69             0.78               0.83
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Note: Regressions of log deaths of despair on the double-weighted labor market entry un-
employment rate interacted with age group dummies (Eq. (3)) are shown. Data from Vital
Stats, Census, and ACS, years 1979­2016. Each column shows one regression, varying age
ranges and restricting cohorts to those observed across the entire analyzed age range. To-
tal deaths vary accordingly. Regressions include fixed effects for age groups, cohort, year,
and state of birth. Standard errors (in parenthesis) clustered at the state-of-birth by year-
of-birth level. Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Observations
population-weighted.




                                              66
Table A.5: Effect on Disease-Related Mortality by Demographic Group, Excluding
HIV/Aids

                        Log disease-related deaths          Log disease-related, excluding HIV/Aids
                                       Non-        Non-                          Non-       Non-
                White       White                            White     White
                                       white       white                         white      white
                males      females                           males    females
                                       males      females                        males     females
 Age 19-29       -0.001     0.006     0.028        0.009     -0.009    0.004     0.018      0.002
                (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.013)     (0.013)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.015)    (0.013)
 Age 30-39      0.021       0.011     0.038       0.030     0.018      0.010    0.030      0.030
                (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.010)     (0.010)   (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.009)    (0.009)
 Age 40-49      0.031      0.034      0.046       0.048     0.024     0.029     0.028      0.031
                (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.010)     (0.011)   (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.010)    (0.010)
 Total deaths   429,244    280,665    198,773     147,164   385,380   274,793   155,358    129,351
 Mean d.v.        2.14       1.67      2.75         2.36     1.97       1.63     2.47       2.22
 R2               0.91       0.89       0.86        0.85      0.91      0.89      0.85       0.85


Notes: White refers to non-Hispanic white. Non-white refers to non-white and Hispanic
white. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Mean cause-specific mortality rates by age
and demographic group are reported in Table A.1.




                                             67
