                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         HOUSEHOLD BALANCE SHEET CHANNELS OF MONETARY POLICY:
          A BACK OF THE ENVELOPE CALCULATION FOR THE EURO AREA

                                           Jiri Slacalek
                                          Oreste Tristani
                                       Giovanni L. Violante

                                        Working Paper 26630
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26630


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2020




We thank Felipe Alves, Hugo Lhuillier, Adrian Monninger, Alessandro Pizzigolotto and
Francisco Rodrigues for excellent research assistance. We also thank Fernando Alvarez, Rudi
Bachmann, Florin Bilbiie, Chris Carroll, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Bill Dupor, Nicola Fuchs-
Schündeln, Luigi Guiso, Jonathan Heathcote, Geoff Kenny, Luc Laeven, Michele Lenza, Davide
Malacrino, Benjamin Moll, Dirk Niepelt, Ricardo Reis, Michael Reiter, and Christian Wolf for
their comments. We are especially grateful to Ralph Luetticke for his insightful discussion. All
opinions expressed are personal and do not necessarily represent the views of the European
Central Bank or the European System of Central Banks. This paper uses data from the
Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jiri Slacalek, Oreste Tristani, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Balance Sheet Channels of Monetary Policy: A Back of the Envelope Calculation
for the Euro Area
Jiri Slacalek, Oreste Tristani, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 26630
January 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. E21,E52

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper formulates a back of the envelope approach to study the effects of monetary policy on
household consumption expenditures. We analyze several transmission mechanisms operating
through direct, partial equilibrium channels--intertemporal substitution and net interest rate
exposure--and indirect, general equilibrium channels--net nominal exposure, as well as wealth,
collateral and labor income channels. The strength of these forces varies across households
depending on their marginal propensities to consume, their balance sheet composition, the
sensitivity of their own earnings to fluctuations in aggregate labor income, and the responsiveness
of aggregate earnings, asset prices and inflation to monetary policy shocks. We quantify all these
channels in the euro area by combining micro data from the HFCS and the EU-LFS with
structural VARs estimated on aggregate time series. We find that the indirect labor income
channel and the housing wealth effect are strong drivers of the aggregate consumption response
to monetary policy and explain the cross-country heterogeneity in these responses.

Jiri Slacalek                                    Giovanni L. Violante
European Central Bank                            Department of Economics
D-60640 Frankfurt am Main                        Princeton University
Europe                                           Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
jiri.slacalek@ecb.int                            Princeton, NJ 08540
                                                 and NBER
Oreste Tristani                                  violante@princeton.edu
European Central Bank
D-60640 Frankfurt am Main
Europe
oreste.tristani@ecb.europa.eu
1     Introduction
In the last few years a new literature has flourished in macroeconomics. It embeds New Keyne-
sian elements (namely nominal rigidities) into the workhorse incomplete market framework. A
central contribution of this Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) literature is to revisit
the transmission mechanism of monetary policy (???). In Representative Agent New Keynesian
models (RANK), monetary policy affects consumption expenditures because households sub-
stitute intertemporally between consumption and saving in the wake of unexpected changes in
the interest rate. In HANK, this channel is small and coexists with a plethora of others. First,
intertemporal substitution is not the only direct, i.e. partial equilibrium, effect. Changes in the
interest rate affect household financial income differently depending on whether they are bor-
rowers or savers (i.e. their net interest rate exposure). Indirect effects operate through the general
equilibrium responses of inputs and asset prices, notably labor income and house prices. After
a monetary easing, the direct increase in households' expenditure and firms' investment stimu-
lates output, employment and wages. The additional increases in expenditure induced by higher
employment and wages are the essence of the indirect effect. The strength of these indirect chan-
nels crucially depends on the size of the marginal propensity to consume (MPC), which is an
order of magnitude higher in HANK models relative to RANK ones.1
    The recent literature on HANK models has followed two parallel paths in order to quantify
these various effects. Some authors have built rich DSGE models by adding a lot of realism on the
household side to otherwise standard New Keynesian environment (????????????). Others have
resorted to making simplifying assumptions that lead to analytical solutions (???????). These
two approaches are complements. The first one provides a better framework for the analysis
of business cycles and policy counterfactuals. The second one overcomes the computational
complexity of the first and offers transparent insights about the economic forces at work.
    In this paper, we follow this second approach and apply it to understand the relative strength
of these numerous transmission channels of monetary policy to household spending in the euro
area. In developing the theory, we closely follow ? and formulate an analytical decomposition
that showcases the relevant ingredients needed for this type of back of the envelope calculation.
We emphasize that the strength of all transmission channels to aggregate consumption depends
on three key dimensions of households' heterogeneity: their portfolios, their exposures to ag-
gregate fluctuations, and their marginal propensities to consume. Distinctly from ?, we argue
that a useful way to summarize such complex distribution is grouping households between the
non-hand-to-mouth, the wealthy hand-to-mouth and the poor hand-to-mouth (HtM) based on

    1 For   a summary of this literature, see e.g., ? and ?.


                                                               1
their holdings of liquid and illiquid assets as in ? and ?.2
    Our estimation consists of several steps combining aggregate and household-level data for
the four largest euro area countries: Germany, France, Italy, and Spain. From structural VARs, we
estimate how monetary policy affects inflation, asset prices, and aggregate employment. From
the EU Labor Force Survey (EU-LFS), we estimate the differential systematic sensitivity of these
three groups to cyclical fluctuations. Micro data on household balance sheets and income from
the Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS) gives us the distribution of household
portfolios. From the existing literature, we borrow estimates of the MPC out of transitory income
and capital gains. We then assemble all these ingredients and, guided by our decomposition,
provide a back of the envelope calculation that quantifies the impact of a surprise change in
interest rates on household expenditures, separating each channel. Using the estimated response
of aggregate quantities and prices from the VAR to assess the magnitudes of general equilibrium
feedbacks is another key difference between our approach and that of ? and ?.3
    At the euro area level we find that about 60 percent of the total increase in nondurable con-
sumption is due to the indirect income and housing wealth/collateral channels. Quantitatively,
hand-to-mouth households adjust their consumption markedly after the shock. The initial 100
basis-point cut of interest rates (80 basis points over a one-year horizon) results in an increase of
consumption of almost 1 percent for the poor hand-to-mouth and of 1.8 percent for the wealthy
hand-to-mouth. Spending of the non-hand-to-mouth households rises by 0.5 percent. Given
their disproportionate share in consumption (about 80%), the non-hand-to-mouth households
dominate the aggregate consumption increase of 0.7 percent.
    We find that the aggregate consumption response from this simple back of the envelope de-
composition matches well the one independently estimated in our structural VAR.
    The important role played by the indirect general equilibrium effects implies that a simple
RANK model would underestimate the dynamics of aggregate consumption. The intertemporal
substitution channel remains the prevalent one only for unconstrained households, and when
we separate the very rich (top 10 percent) from the rest of the unconstrained, even for them the
   2 The  way to think about these three types of households is the following. Hand to mouth households are at a
kink in their budget constraint, i.e. they either hold zero liquid wealth (zero is a kink because of the spread between
saving and borrowing rates) or they are at their unsecured credit limit. The difference between the two types is that
the wealthy hand-to-mouth ones also hold illiquid wealth (e.g., housing) above a certain threshold. Non hand-to­
mouth households are all the rest, i.e. the `unconstrained'.
    3 ? and ? share our same goal of estimating the response of consumer spending to monetary policy in the euro

area. They do so through a rich dynamic lifecycle model (i.e. it is more similar to the first approach discussed
above) where households can save in bonds and housing or stocks. Unlike us, their model generates endogenously
the distribution of MPCs, while we read it off existing evidence. Like us, ? estimate the effects of monetary policy
shocks on income and stock returns through a VAR external to the model. A disadvantage of using a large structural
model in this context is that its computational complexity prevents them from including nominal debt and the Fisher
channel as well as the housing channel (in case of ?), which we find to be important.


                                                          2
indirect effects become dominant because of their extensive holdings of housing and stocks.
    For the poor hand-to-mouth, all their increase in spending is due to the combination of three
elements: (i) aggregate employment increases after the monetary easing, (ii) their labor income
is especially sensitive to the cycle, and (iii) their MPC our of transitory income changes is large.
    The wealthy hand-to-mouth gain from this same labor income channel. In addition, because
they tend to be homeowners with large mortgages, they benefit for three reasons. After an inter-
est rate cut, house prices rise. Also inflation rises, reducing the real value of debt. This last force,
however, is quantitatively modest as a result of the well documented limited response of infla-
tion to monetary policy in the euro area. Finally, when they hold flexible rate mortgage contracts
they also take advantage from the reduction in interest payments.
    The differences in homeownership rates, mortgage market institutions (prevalence of adjust-
able-rate mortgages) and labor market institutions imply that the strength of the transmission
channels varies considerably across our four euro area economies. We mostly contrast Germany
and Spain, which represent polar cases in terms of these structural factors. For example, house-
holds in Spain are almost twice as likely to own their home and also hold much more adjustable-
rate debt. The two countries also differ in the share of hand-to-mouth households. Over 17
percent of Spanish households are wealthy hand-to-mouth compared to 12 percent in Germany.
In addition, we estimate a much stronger sensitivity of aggregate house prices and labor earnings
to monetary policy in Spain than in Germany.
    Because of all these differences, the income and the housing wealth/collateral effects in Spain
substantially exceed their counterparts in Germany. Even the direct net interest rate exposure
effect of a cut in the policy rate is large and positive in Spain, whereas it is small and negative
in Germany since German households are net savers. When we add up to obtain the total effect,
aggregate nondurable consumption responds very strongly in Spain (nearly 2 percent) and much
less so in Germany (0.4 percent).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section ?? outlines our analytical decomposition.
Section ?? explains how we empirically implement this decomposition. Section ?? describes our
findings. Section ?? concludes.


2    Decomposition of effects of a monetary policy shock
We develop an analytical decomposition of the effects of a monetary policy shock on household
consumption expenditures. The derivation follows closely ?, as well as ? and ?. We proceed
step by step and examine: (i) direct effects of changes in interest rates due to intertemporal
substitution and (ii) net interest rate exposures, (iii) indirect labor income effects, (iv) Fisher

                                                  3
effects due to the reevaluation of nominal long-term assets, and (v) effects associated with capital
gains on real, less liquid, assets such as stocks and housing.
    Rather than writing down a complex household problem with all these features at the same
time, we separate these channels and examine each one in isolation. The gains in terms of clar-
ity outweigh the tediousness of some repetition, we believe. We begin with the problem of
non hand-to-mouth unconstrained households and next we analyze the problem of the hand-to-
mouth ones. This decomposition will guide our empirical exercise.
    We study the effect of a purely transitory change in the (real) policy rate R = 1 + r, i.e. a one
period change that has no impact on future values of the interest rate. We assume this shock is
unexpected and perceived as `once and for all', i.e. we examine what the literature often calls
an MIT shock. This shock has also transitory effects on income, asset prices and inflation (but
permanently changes the price level).4
    To simplify the exposition, we abstract from idiosyncratic and aggregate risk. Specifically, we
abstract from the fact that a monetary policy shocks can lead to fluctuations in the precautionary
saving motive (and hence in current and future marginal propensity to consume) and shifts
in the share of hand-to-mouth households.5 We only model the effects of monetary policy on
consumption of nondurables and services, and abstract from the adjustment of durables.
    Throughout the derivations, we adopt a recursive formulation and denote future variables
by the `prime' sign.


2.1     Non-hand-to-mouth households
Non hand-to-mouth households are those for which borrowing constraints do not bind. Thus,
they are on their Euler equation for consumption and saving. We'll use this property repeatedly
in the derivations below. In particular, we take the extreme view that the constraint never binds
for them so they are, essentially, permanent-income consumers.

2.1.1   Household problem and marginal propensity to consume

We begin with a statement of the household problem and a derivation of a formula for the
marginal propensity to consume (MPC). The household is infinitely lived, with intra-period util-
ity u (c), with u > 0 and u < 0, where c denote consumption expenditures. Later we specialize
   4 We adopt this assumption of transitory effects for simplicity,
                                                                  but also because the typical half life of a monetary
shock is 6 months and the reference period in all our empirical analysis is a year. Persistent shocks are analyzed by
?, ? and ?.
     5 The precautionary saving motive at steady-state, however, could be thought of being absorbed into the level

of the marginal propensity to consume which, as we discuss later, we take directly from the data. ? document
moderate cyclical fluctuations in the share of hand-to-mouth households in the US.


                                                         4
the utility function to the CRRA class and let   0 be the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
Let b denote holdings of a one-period real asset, and y denote household income. The future is
discounted at rate 1/  - 1. The recursive formulation of the household problem is:

                                                                   ¯)
                              V (b, y; R) = max u (c) + V (b , y ; R                           (1)
                                                    c,b
                                                   s.t.
                                       b     = R (b + y - c)

      ¯ is the initial level of the policy rate.
where R
   The first-order condition (FOC) with respect to c is

                                                  uc =  RVb ,                                  (2)

                                                   ¯ )/b . Totally differentiating it with respect
where we used the notation Vb to denote V (b , y ; R
to c and b yields:
                                            ucc dc =  RVbb db .                                (3)

Define the individual marginal propensity to consume for a non HtM household with states
(b, y) as the change in consumption induced by a change in wealth:

                                                               dc
                                              µ ( b, y ) : =                                   (4)
                                                               db

and note that, by differentiating the budget constraint,

                                             1
                                               db + dc = db                                    (5)
                                             R

i.e. a marginal dollar of wealth can be either spent or saved. Thus,

                                                  dc      1 db
                                           µ :=      = 1-      ,                               (6)
                                                  db      R db

or, the MPC (where we dropped the arguments to lighten notation) equals one minus the marginal
propensity to save (MPS) adjusted by the interest rate between the two periods. Dividing (??)
by db, using it into the above equation and rearranging yields:

                                                  R2 Vbb
                                            µ=              .                                  (7)
                                               ucc + R2 Vbb



                                                          5
2.1.2   Direct effects

We begin by considering the effect of a transitory change in R on c, keeping y constant, i.e. what
the literature calls the direct effect of monetary policy. Combining the FOC (??) and the budget
constraint yields
                                                                ¯ .
                                  uc =  RVb R (b + y - c) , y ; R                                 (8)

Differentiating with respect to R and c yields

                          ucc dc = Vb dR +  RVbb (b + y - c) dR - R2 Vbb dc                       (9)

and note that the value function V depends on R only through b since next period the interest
                ¯ . Using the FOC (??) in the first term of the right hand side (RHS) and dividing
rate returns to R
through by ucc (c) yields:

                                R2 Vbb       uc dR R2 Vbb             dR
                         dc 1 +            =       +      (b + y - c)    .
                                  ucc        ucc R   ucc               R

Substituting (??) into the left-hand side and using the approximation dR/ R       dr yields:

                                       uc
                                dc =       (1 - µ) dr + µ (b + y - c) dr.
                                       ucc

From the definition of the elasticity of substitution for CRRA utility 1/ := - uu c
                                                                                cc c
                                                                                     we obtain:

                                          1
                             dc DIR = -     (1 - µ) cdr + µ (b + y - c) dr.                     (10)
                                          

The first term captures the intertemporal substitution effect (IES). An increase in r induces house-
holds to save more, by postponing consumption from today into the future. The substitution
effect increases in the value of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution 1/ and the value of
the marginal propensity to save (1 - µ). The second term captures net exposure to the interest
rate. An increase in r induces a positive income effect if the household is a net saver (b + y > c)
and a negative income effect if it is a borrower. The size of the income effect is proportional to
the MPC µ.

Long-term liquid assets. So far we have assumed that b is a short term (one-period) liquid asset.
Generalizing this derivation to long-term liquid assets and liabilities is immediate. Suppose that
a fraction  B of assets B and a fraction  of liabilities matures every period. The most relevant



                                                   6
example, in our context, is adjustable rates mortgages (ARMs).6 Then, it is easy to see that the
formula in (??) can be generalized to:

                                     1
                       dc DIR = -      (1 - µ) c dr + µ (b + y - c) +  B B -               dr,                    (11)
                                     

The last three terms in (??), combined in the squared bracket, form what ? calls the net interest
rate exposure effect (NIE) of monetary policy, thus:

                                             dc DIR = dc IES + dc N IE .


2.1.3   The indirect general equilibrium effects on income

Instead of fixing y, we now allow labor income y to be affected by r. This channel captures the
idea that changes in the interest rate can have so-called `aggregate demand effects', for example
because of the presence of nominal rigidities. An initial impulse to expenditures raises labor de-
mand and earnings, pushing up expenditures further through an equilibrium multiplier effect.7
    Since we only consider transitory changes in r, future income y is unaffected.8 Returning to
equation (??) and differentiating with respect to c and y we arrive at:

                                          ucc + R2 Vbb dc = R2 Vbb dy.                                            (12)

From the definition of the MPC in (??), we obtain:

                                                   dc I NC = µdy,                                                 (13)

where the last term is the indirect labor income effect (INC). Note that the change in labor income
translates into consumption proportionately to the MPC µ.
    To put more structure on this term, let  y,Y be the elasticity of individual income to aggregate
income. Individuals differ in their age, education, location, industry, occupation, skill level, etc.,
and all these characteristics determine a different degree of exposure to aggregate fluctuations.9

   6 The   reduction of interest payments on adjustable rate long term debt is often called in the literature cash-flow
effect. See, .eg., ?, ? and ?.
    7 Even in absence of nominal rigidities, a lower interest rate may expand investment, therefore increasing the

capital stock, the marginal product of labor and the wage.
    8 Sticky prices slow down dynamics. Our implicit assumption is that, within the time horizon we consider --one

year-- prices, and thus income, have fully adjusted.
    9 These individual elasticities 
                                     y,Y have to satisfy the aggregate consistency condition stating that when they
are summed across all individuals with weights equal to y/Y (the individual income share of the total), such sum
equals to one.


                                                          7
Then, another useful way to write (??) is

                                                               y
                                           dc I NC = µ y,Y       dY .                                           (14)
                                                               Y

The change in aggregate income produced by the monetary policy shock passes through to con-
sumption proportionately to the marginal propensity to consume µ, the sensitivity of individual
to aggregate income  y,Y and the individual share of total income y/Y . As discussed in ? and
?, unequal incidence of aggregate fluctuations across the population can be a source of dampen-
ing or amplification of macro shocks, depending on the covariance between exposure and MPC
across consumers.


2.1.4   Fisher effects through nominal long-term debt

We now extend the household problem to incorporate nominal long-term debt (namely, mort-
gages).10 The problem becomes:

                                                                         ¯, p )
                          V (b, y, m; R, p) = max u (c) + V (b , y , m ; R
                                                     c,b
                                                   s.t.
                                                                       m m
                                          b    = R b+y-c-
                                                                       p
                                         m     = (1 -  m ) m

where m is a geometrically decaying stock of nominal debt whose fraction m matures every
period, and p is the aggregate price level. Since we have already analyzed interest exposure
effects earlier, here we assume without loss of generality that the interest rate on these nominal
liabilities is zero and focus on the impact of the policy shock on the price level.11 We do not allow
the household to adjust m (i.e. we assume refinancing away), but given the focus on a transitory
change in the policy rate and the well known frictions in refinancing, this simplification is rather
innocuous.12
    The household's FOC becomes:

                                                    m m                       ¯, p ,
                            uc =  RVb      R b+y-c-                    ,y ,m ;R                                 (15)
                                                    p
  10 We note that if long-term debt is nominal, like in the case of most long-term mortgage contracts with adjustable

rates, then and  in Section ?? would equal, respectively, the real value of the contract m/ p and its maturity
parameter m in this section.
    11 The timing we adopted, for convenience, is that the mortgage payment is made at the beginning of the period,

at the same time as consumption expenditures.
    12 ?, ? and ?, among others, study the effects of monetary policy through refinancing.



                                                           8
where, we have used the fact that, since the price level changes permanently within the period,
p = p. This rise in the price level will lead to a re-evaluation effect on debt. Differentiating this
last equation with respect to c and p:

                                                m m     dp
              ucc dc = -  R2 Vbb dc +  R2 Vbb                                  ¯ , p dp.
                                                           +  RVbp b , y , m ; R                   (16)
                                                p        p

Combining the Envelope condition uc = Vb with (??) evaluated at steady state, forwarding one
period and differentiating with respect to p:

                                        ¯ 2   m (1 - m ) m    ¯
                               Vbp   =  R Vbb              +  RVbp .
                                                   p2

Note that Vbb = Vbb (and similarly for the subsequent periods) because the environment is sta-
tionary after the period of the shock. Under the assumption  R   ¯ = 1 we can substitute out
recursively the cross derivative of the value function to arrive at

                                                       
                                                m m
                                           ¯
                                     Vbp = RVbb
                                                p2     (1 - m ) j
                                                      j =1


which combined with (??) yields

                                                m m    dp               (1 - m )m     dp
              ucc dc = -  R2 Vbb dc +  R2 Vbb                  ¯
                                                          +  R RVbb                      .
                                                p       p                   p          p

                                                                ¯
For small deviations of the interest rate from steady-state, R/ R      1, and with the normalization
p = 1 we obtain
                                           dc NOM = µmdp.                                          (17)

This is what the literature calls the Fisher effect (NOM). An interest rate cut that generates inflation
(a permanent rise in the price level dp) reduces the real value of debt. The extent to which
current consumption responds to this re-evaluation effect depends on the size of the outstanding
nominal liabilities and on the MPC.

2.1.5   Effects through capital gains on real (less liquid) assets

We now allow the household to hold a real asset k such as stocks or housing. Let q be the relative
price of this asset and normalize its dividend to zero. We assume that only a fraction  < 1 of
households react to this price change and, when they do, they must pay a fixed transaction cost
 > 0 to adjust their stock of k. Let  > 0 be withdrawals from the illiquid asset for the purpose

                                                  9
of reallocating funds into liquid wealth b or consuming it.13 The household problem becomes:

                                                                            ¯,q
                             V (b, y, k; R, q) = max u (c) + V (b , y , k ; R ¯)                            (18)
                                                     c,b ,k
                                                     s.t.
                                            b   = R (b + y - c + )
                                          qk    = qk -  -  I{>0}
                                               qk

where the last inequality is a collateral constraint stating that the maximum amount that can
be withdrawn is a fraction  of the value of the asset. Note that, because the change in R is
transitory, also q returns to its steady state value after the first period.
      Consider a household who adjusts its portfolio (i.e. at the optimum  > 0) and whose col-
lateral constraint is not binding. We can split its problem between the consumption/saving
decision in the first stage and the allocation of saving between the two assets in the second stage.
Let total financial wealth next period be x = b + qk . The first-stage of the problem above, when
all wealth is temporarily liquid, can be therefore restated (with a slight abuse of notation for V )
as:

                                                                        ¯,q
                                V (b, y, k; R, q) = max u (c) + V ( x ; R ¯)
                                                            c, x
                                                         s.t.
                                                x   = R (b + y - c + qk) .

      Differentiating the Euler equation

                                                                       ¯,q
                                   uc =  RVx R (b + y - c + qk ) , y ; R ¯

with respect to c and q, keeping in mind that the effect of a change in the policy rate r on q is
transitory, we obtain
                                      ucc dc = -  R2 Vxx dc +  R2 Vxx kdq.

Rearranging, and taking into account that only a fraction  adjusts following the capital gain,
yields the average change for the holders of the real asset:

                                                dcCAP = µk · dq,

  13 We   focus on the case of a withdrawal ( > 0), but the derivation holds for deposits ( < 0) as well.


                                                            10
where, without loss of generality we have normalized q = 1.
   The key observation is that the MPC out of a capital gain in illiquid wealth µ is smaller than
the MPC out of a transitory liquid wealth/labor income change for non hand-to-mouth house-
holds (simply µ), because not everyone responds to the price change. This feature of the model
is consistent with the empirical evidence on MPCs out of different types of windfall incomes.
   We conclude by noting that, in the context of housing, this calculation is likely to provide
an upper bound for the effect of a rise in prices for two reasons. First, as discussed by ?, the
more transitory the price change, the higher the impact on consumption since more households
would adjust (i.e.  is larger). Second, we are abstracting from the fact that some households
expect to be homeowners in the future and, as a result of the higher house price, they need to
cut expenditures to afford the same housing consumption in the future. This bias, however, is
smaller the more transitory the price change is.


2.1.6   Summary

Combining all the pieces together, for a non hand-to-mouth household (denoted with subscript
n) the consumption response at impact to a transitory monetary policy shock is:

                          TOT     IES     N IE     I NC     NOM
                        dcn   = dcn   + dcn    + dcn    + dcn   + dcCAP
                                                                    n   ,

which can be unfolded as:
                       TOT
                     dcn        1
                             = - (1 - µ ) c n + µ ( b + y - c n ) +  B B -                     (19)
                       dr       
                                        y dY
                               + µ y,Y
                                        Y dr
                                        dp
                               +µ·m·
                                        dr
                                       dq
                               + µk · .
                                       dr

2.2     Hand-to-mouth households
We now develop an analogous derivation for poor and wealthy hand-to-mouth households. We
assume that the constraints that these households face before the shock are still binding after the
shock (i.e. the shock is small).

   Poor hand-to-mouth. Since they are not on their Euler equation, direct intertemporal substi-
tution effects are zero for the poor HtM. Their consumption is fully determined by the budget


                                               11
constraint with b and b set at the value of their unsecured credit limit b. If we also allow for
some holdings of nominal debt m with maturing portion m , we obtain:

                                                          m m
                                           c = y - br -       .
                                                          p

Differentiating the budget constraint with respect to c and R, we obtain

                                             dc N
                                                p
                                                  IE
                                                     = -b dr.                                  (20)

Comparing (??) to the net interest rate exposure channel for non HtM, (??), the key difference
emerging is the value of the MPC, which is equal to one for the HtM. Differentiating the budget
constraint with respect to c and p, and normalizing the initial price level p to 1 yields:

                                           dc NOM
                                              p   = m mdp,                                     (21)

i.e. for this group the Fisher effect only applies to the currently maturing portion of debt, medi-
ated by an MPC equal to one. The indirect income effect, equal to (??), is the only other force
active for poor HtM households. It is easy to see that differentiating the budget constraint with
respect to c and y we obtain
                                                          y
                                       dc I
                                          p
                                            NC
                                               =  y,Y       dY                                 (22)
                                                          Y
and thus, collecting these three channels the total consumption response of this group can be
summarized as:
                                dc TOT
                                   p   = dc N
                                            p
                                              IE
                                                 + dc I
                                                      p
                                                        NC
                                                           + dc NOM
                                                                p   ,

or, unfolded,

                                    dc TOT
                                       p
                                               = -b                                            (23)
                                      dr
                                                         y dY
                                                   +  y,Y
                                                         Y dr
                                                        dp
                                                   + m m .
                                                        dr

Note that, as explained above, some poor hand-to-mouth households are at the zero kink in their
budget constraint. Since they have no debt, for this subgroup, dc N
                                                                  p
                                                                    IE = dc NOM = 0.
                                                                            p

   Wealthy hand-to-mouth. Direct intertemporal substitution effects are zero also for the wealthy
HtM. Since these households might have adjustable rate mortgages in their portfolios besides


                                                   12
unsecured debt, their net interest rate exposure component becomes

                                     dc N
                                        p
                                          IE
                                             = -b -         dr.                                  (24)

   Fisher and indirect income effects are exactly as for the poor HtM. Because they own some
illiquid assets, effects through capital gains are operational for this type of households. In par-
ticular, for these households collateral constraints tend to bind, or they would borrow more to
consume more. A constrained household can take advantage of a price change only to the extent
that a rise in the value of collateral relaxes its credit limit and allows him to tap into its illiq-
uid wealth. As before let  be the fraction of households adjusting. Assume that the collateral
constraint
                                                 qk                                              (25)

is binding. The version of the budget constraint in (??) for a wealthy HtM household is therefore:

                                            c = y +  qk.

Differentiating the above equation with respect to c and q, and accounting for the fact that only
a share  of households taps into their illiquid wealth, yields (after the normalization q = 1):

                                         dCAP =  k · dq,

thus  is, effectively, the marginal propensity to consume out of the capital gain for this group.
   In conclusion, the total consumption response for a wealthy HtM household is:

                              TOT     N IE     I NC     NOM
                            dcw   = dcw    + dcw    + dcw   + dcCAP
                                                                w


which can be unfolded as:
                                      TOT
                                    dcw
                                            = -b -                                               (26)
                                      dr
                                                        y dY
                                                 +  y,Y
                                                        Y dr
                                                       dp
                                                 + m m
                                                       dr
                                                        dq
                                                 +  k · .
                                                        dr

   This concludes our theoretical decomposition. We now turn to its empirical implementation.


                                                13
3    Empirical implementation
In practice, we want to measure the impact of a monetary policy shock on non-durable expendi-
tures in the first year after the shock.
    We follow the strategy adopted for the decomposition and assume that the bulk of the het-
erogeneity in the population which is relevant for the monetary policy transmission can be cap-
tured by three groups of households: (i) non-hand-to-mouth, (ii) poor hand-to-mouth, and (iii)
wealthy hand-to-mouth.
    The idea that we leveraged in the decomposition is that HtM households face frictions which
make their consumption decision insensitive to changes in the interest rate, but highly sensitive
to transitory changes in income. On the contrary, the non HtM are permanent income consumers
and thus are insensitive to transitory income shocks but, being on their Euler equation, they are
responsive to changes in the real rate. In addition, these three hand-to-mouth groups differ in
the structure of their balance sheet and, potentially, in their degree of exposure to aggregate
income fluctuations. As clear from our discussion of Section ??, these features are central to the
decomposition.
    For each HtM type, we need a number of ingredients. To calculate the intertemporal substitu-
tion channel, we need values for the IES 1/ and the MPCs µ, which we obtain from the existing
empirical literature. To compute portfolio exposure to fluctuations in the interest rate, we need a
measure of liquid wealth (b) and saving, which we construct by combining data from the HFCS
with National Accounts data. We measure the indirect labor income effect in two steps. First, we
estimate the impact of a monetary policy shock on aggregate earnings through a structural VAR.
Second, we estimate the sensitivity  y,Y of labor income of each group to aggregate fluctuations
from the EU Labour Force Survey (LFS) data, as done by in ?, ? and ? for the US. To compute
the transmission through long-term nominal debt, we use HFCS data on household portfolios
jointly with VAR evidence on the impact of a monetary policy shock on inflation. To calculate the
effects occurring through capital gains, we again estimate the effects of monetary policy shocks
on asset prices (stocks and housing) through the same VAR, and obtain values of the MPC out
of stocks and housing from the literature.
    We obtain the total impact of a monetary policy shock on consumption by aggregating the
consumption response of the three groups weighted by their expenditures shares. Upon aggre-
gating, we do not impose any equilibrium condition. In particular, we do not impose C = Y ,
as done by ? and by (?) in their analysis of monetary transmission in the representative agent
and in the two-agent New Keynesian model. While this condition establishes some internal con-
sistency, it does so only for a closed economy without capital. Instead, we opt for subsuming


                                               14
                             Figure 1: Share of Hand-to-Mouth Households, Percent

       (a) Share of HtM Households Across Countries                                     (b) Share of HtM Households by Age
Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The left panel shows the shares of poor and the wealthy hand-to-mouth households in the euro area (EA) and in the four largest euro
area countries, Germany (DE), Spain (ES), France (FR) and Italy (IT). The right panel shows the shares of poor and the wealthy hand-to-mouth
households in the euro area by age of the reference person. Households are classified based on their holdings of net liquid and illiquid wealth
following ?. See section ?? for details.



all equilibrium relationships of the economy in the empirically estimated VAR that yields the
change in p,Y and q after a shock to r.
    The next two sections contain a detailed explanation of all the steps outlined above. All our
calculations are done separately for each of the four major countries in the euro area, Germany
(DE), Spain (ES), France (FR) and Italy (IT), as well as for the weighted aggregate of these four
which we call the `Euro Area.'


3.1      Classification of households by hand-to-mouth status
We follow ? and define the three groups based on their holdings of net liquid and illiquid wealth.
Poor hand-to-mouth households are those with zero or negative illiquid wealth and net liquid
assets close to zero or to the credit limit. Wealthy hand-to-mouth households share the previous
definition for liquid assets, but have positive holdings of net illiquid assets. Non hand-to-mouth
are the residual group. Here, by close we mean no more than half of their monthly disposable
labor income away from zero (if they hold positive liquid wealth) or from the credit limit (if they
hold positive liquid wealth). See Appendix ?? for further details.
    Figure ??(a) shows the shares of the poor and the wealthy hand-to-mouth households in
the euro area and in the four largest euro area countries. At the euro area level, about 10%
of households are classified as poor hand-to-mouth and about 12% of households are wealthy
hand-to-mouth. The overall share of hand-to-mouth households is quite stable across the four
largest euro area countries. Also its split between the two types is similar across countries, with
the exception of Spain where wealthy HtM are much more prevalent. This feature is explained
by home ownership rates: 83 percent of Spanish households are homeowners, twice as many as
in Germany.14
    We therefore confirm the finding of ? that in continental Europe the share of HtM households
is smaller than in the US. What accounts for this discrepancy is the share of the wealthy HtM
--around 20% in the US-- whereas the share of poor HtM is approximately the same.15
    The shares of the poor and the wealthy hand-to-mouth vary substantially with age (Fig-
   14 Also   in Italy homeownership is very high, but the majority of Italian households are outright owners without


                                                                    15
Figure 2: Net Liquid Assets and Net Wealth by Hand-to-Mouth Status, Median, EUR Thousands

                         (a) Net Liquid Assets                                                           (b) Net Wealth
Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The left panel shows net liquid wealth. Liquid assets consist of deposits, mutual funds, bonds and stock; liquid liabilities consist of
overdraft debt and credit card debt. The right panel shows net wealth which includes all real (including housing) and financial assets net of all
other liabilities. See section ?? for details.



ure ??(b)). For poor HtM, it is declining with age, from 15% for households below 35 to 7% for
households above 75. In contrast, the share of the wealthy HtM follows a hump-shaped profile,
peaking at 15% around age 50, and declining thereafter. This pattern is linked to home own-
ership: young home owners face regular large mortgage payments which absorb most of their
available liquid resources, and only after the age of 50 start accumulating savings again. Overall,
these facts imply that poor HtM are predominantly young, wealthy HtM mainly middle-aged,
and non-HtM chiefly older households. Thus, the effects of monetary policy we analyze below
can also be related to age.
     The three groups of households differ significantly in their holdings of liquid and illiquid
assets. As illustrated in Figure ??, the non HtM households hold substantial liquid and illiquid
wealth, the euro area medians being respectively EUR 11, 000 and 146, 000. By definition the
poor HtM households hold almost no net wealth. The wealthy HtM hold significant net illiquid
assets (their median in the euro area is EUR 90, 000) but virtually no liquid wealth.
     Because of these differences in portfolio composition, the marginal propensities to consume
for HtM households substantially exceed those for the remaining households. Next, we turn to
the measurement of these MPCs.


3.2      Evidence on heterogeneity in marginal propensities to consume out of
         income and wealth
The recent empirical evidence on the MPC exploits various methodologies (quasi-experimental
variation, covariance restrictions on longitudinal income and consumption data, self-reported
MPCs from household surveys). This body of evidence has uncovered (i) large values for the
average MPC out of transitory income and (ii) considerable cross-sectional heterogeneity. A
key dimension of this heterogeneity is holdings of liquid assets. While households that are in
some way `constrained' (e.g., have no saving and costly access to credit as well as to their illiq-
uid wealth, when they own some) are especially sensitive to transitory shocks and have high

much leftover mortgage debt.
   15 Institutional differences in access to credit or in the nature of income risk could be some of the culprits, but we
are not aware of a systematic investigation of this question in the literature.


                                                                     16
       Table 1: Calibration of Marginal Propensities to Consume out of Income and Wealth


                                                      Marginal Propensity to Consume
                                                                Collateral
    Household Type                   Transitory Income        Housing Wealth        Stock Market Wealth
    Poor Hand-to-Mouth                         0.50                     ­                             ­
    Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth                      0.50                  0.07                          0.07
    Non-Hand-to-Mouth                          0.05                  0.01                          0.01

Notes: The table shows the calibrated values of the marginal propensities to consume out of transitory income,
collateral / housing wealth and stock market wealth.


marginal propensities to consume out of income, households with adequate liquid assets are
well-insured and do not materially respond. See, e.g., the reviews of the empirical literature by
?, ? , Table 1, and ? , Table 1.16
    Based on this extensive evidence, an average annual MPC out of income windfalls of 20% for
the US economy appears to be a conservative choice.17 If we fix the MPC of the non HtM to 5%
and assume that the nondurable consumption share of HtM households is 0.25 (as documented
by ?), we obtain a value for the annual MPC for HtM households of 0.65. Once again, we stay on
the conservative side and choose a value of 0.50.18 Given the lack of systematic evidence for the
euro area, we adopt these estimates in our calculation (Table ??).
    To compute the formulas from Section ??, we also need MPCs out of housing and stock mar-
ket wealth. Estimates of the annual average MPC out of wealth tend to be an order of magnitude
smaller than estimates out of transitory income, typically around 5% for the US. Low-liquidity
households are those responsible for most of the effects for both housing and financial wealth
(for recent evidence, see ??).19 Stock market wealth tends to be more liquid than housing wealth
(which would imply higher MPCs), but also more volatile (which would imply lower MPCs).
Overall, the consumption response to stock market capital gains is estimated to be somewhat
smaller, but differences are seldom significant. The literature also finds that in continental Eu-
rope the consumption response to housing capital gains is smaller than in the US and the UK

  16 See  also, e.g., ?, ?, ?, ?, and ?.
  17 This  value refers to nondurable purchases. The literature (e.g., ??) also estimates MPCs for total consumption
and finds substantially larger values.
   18 We note that, in the stylized theoretical model above, the MPC for hand-to-mouth households is always equal

to 1, but that is simply because we wanted to draw a stark distinction between different types of households and
made assumptions that lead to that outcome.
   19 For housing, much of the literature emphasizes the importance of the housing collateral channel that also

features in our decomposition (?).


                                                       17
(?), possibly due to more rigid mortgage market institutions that make equity withdrawals more
costly. For example ? estimates an annual MPC out of wealth of 3% in the euro area.
    In light of these findings, we set the average MPC out of housing and stock-market wealth
for Europe to 0.025 (around half of the US estimate and in the low range of European estimates).
We set the MPC for non hand-to-mouth to 0.01. As a result, the MPC for the HtM (computed
residually as we did for income) must be around 7%.20
    We conclude by emphasizing that, even though here we treat the MPC as a parameter, we are
well aware that it is an endogenous object and, as such, it is not invariant to the macroeconomic
environment. Our approach is based on the presumption that the estimates in Table ?? represent
the current distribution of MPCs in these countries and that a small temporary shock to the
interest rate would not change the average MPC for these groups.


3.3    Intertemporal substitution and consumption­income ratios
We set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/, a parameter only relevant for non HtM
households, to 0.5 based on the extensive reviews of the literature by ? and ?.
    The decomposition in equation (??) for non HtM households needs an estimate of their con-
sumption­income ratio.21 Unfortunately, the HFCS has neither (complete) information on con-
sumption nor on saving flows. We therefore infer the consumption­income ratio for this group
of households by matching the aggregate consumption­income ratio from National Accounts
given that (i) we know their income shares from the HFCS and (ii) we also know that c = y for all
other constrained households. We arrive at nondurable consumption­income ratios around 70­
80% for the non HtM, depending on the country; see the top panel of Table ?? (and Appendix ??
for details).


3.4    VAR evidence on aggregate effects of monetary shocks
To identify monetary policy shocks, we adopt an approach which is closely related to the use
of high-frequency interest rate surprises as external instruments (?). The approach requires a
dataset of high-frequency financial-market surprises occurring after the policy announcements
following the meetings of the Governing Council of the ECB. We rely on the Euro Area Mone-
tary Policy Event Study Database constructed in ?, which reports changes in the median price of
various financial assets observed in a close interval around the monetary policy meetings. More

   20 Otheruseful references in the literature on wealth effects are, e.g., ?, ? and ? for the US, and ?, ?, ?, and ? for
European countries.
  21 Then, given their income which is available from the HFCS, we can compute y - c.



                                                          18
Table 2: Consumption­Income Ratios, Aggregate Responses to Monetary Policy Shock and Un-
equal Income Incidence


                                                                                          Country
 Variable                                                                 Germany        Spain     France     Italy
 Aggregate Personal Saving Rate (Percent)                                      16.7       9.2       14.0      11.0
 Aggregate Durables Consumption Share (Percent)                                11.2       5.4        8.0       6.9
 Implied Consumption­Income Ratios for Non-HtM Households
 Total Consumption (Percent)                          79.5                               89.0       83.7      87.2
 Nondurables Consumption (Percent)                    70.1                               84.2       77.0      81.2
 Summary of VAR Impulse Responses
 Initial Policy Interest Rate Change (b.p.)                                                -100
 Policy Interest Rate Change, Four-Quarter Average (b.p.)                                   -80
 Earnings (Percent)                                                             0.5       1.6    0.7           1.8
 House Prices (Percent)                                                         0.0       5.0    0.3           1.4
 Stock Prices (Percent)                                                        27.0      21.0   24.0          26.0
 Inflation (p.p.)                                                               0.1       0.6    0.3           0.1
 Sensitivity of Household Employment to Aggregate Employment by HtM Status
 Poor Hand-to-Mouth                                      1.7    2.7     1.6                                    2.1
 Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth                                   0.3    1.6     1.3                                    1.6
 Non Hand-to-Mouth                                       1.1    0.8     0.9                                    0.8

Notes: The table shows estimated responses of aggregate variables to a 100-bp cut in interest rates. The personal
saving rate and the share of nondurables consumption on total consumption average of years 2013­2015. The
bottom panel summarizes the estimates from Figure ??.


specifically, ? takes into account that two information releases take place on these days: at 13.45
Central European Time the ECB issues a press release providing a summary of the policy deci-
sion and at 14.30 there is a press conference where the President explains the rationale for the
decision.
    We interpret changes in financial asset prices as caused by monetary policy if they occur in
the time interval between the press release and the press conference, that is, in the window
going from 13.25­13.35 to 15.40­15.50.22 The underlying assumptions are that, within this time
interval, asset price changes are not systematically affected by other news and monetary policy
does not respond to asset price changes.23 The specific yield changes that we focus on in our

   22 ?rely on price observed over a certain interval rather than at a particular point in time to minimize the risk of
measurement error.
  23 ? also use more refined measures of policy shocks based on only the press release or only the press conference



                                                         19
paper refer to Overnight Index Swap (OIS) rates of 1, 3, 6-month and 1 to 10-year maturities. ?
report that intraday OIS data are very noisy in the first years of EMU. We therefore ignore 1999
data in estimation.
    In reality, monetary policy shocks may also include "forward guidance" information about
future changes in policy rates. To abstract from the latter shocks, we proceed following the
approach of ?. We estimate latent factors from changes in yields, select the first two factors, and
rotate them to ensure that the second one is orthogonal to the first and does not load on the
1-month OIS. We can therefore interpret the second factor as a forward guidance factor. In our
analysis, we focus on the first factor, which represents the current policy surprise.24 We sum all
the intra-day surprises (summarized by the first factor) that occur in given quarter to obtain a
quarterly indicator of monetary policy shocks, st .
    We introduce the indicator st directly in a quarterly VAR. The key restriction is that st is not
affected contemporaneously by shocks to any of the other VAR variables. This assumption is
justified because st is measured in a narrow time window.25
    Beyond the monetary policy surprise indicator, we include in the VAR the following vari-
ables: the 3-month nominal interest rate, a commodity price index and, for each of the four
countries that we consider in our analysis --Germany, France, Italy and Spain-- a house price
index, a consumer price index, real GDP, non-durable consumption, a stock price index, the em-
ployment rate, wages, the volume of bank lending and a measure of lending rates. The 3-month
interest rate, the employment rate and lending rates are measured in annualized percentage
terms. All other variables enter the VAR in log-levels.
    Given the large number of country-specific variables, we rely on Bayesian estimation meth-
ods and use the priors of ?. We generate draws from the posterior using the Gibbs sampler.
    Our sample period runs from 2000:Q1 to 2014:Q4. We stop in 2014:Q4 because the ECB started
its program of large-scale purchases of euro area government bonds in January 2015. As of 2015,
bond price changes around monetary policy announcements are less likely to be related to the
setting of standard policy rates, that are the object of interest for us. All in all, we are therefore
left with a short sample period. Our results should be interpreted as indicative of the likely
dynamics of selected macroeconomic variables in response to monetary policy shocks. They
could be revised and updated once longer time series of data become available.
    Figure ?? reports impulse responses of selected variables to an identified monetary policy
windows.
   24 Using directly the change in the 1-month OIS rate directly as the current policy surprise makes no substantive

difference.
   25 This approach to implement the high-frequency identification is also followed by ?. That paper also proposes

an alternative identification strategy capable of disentangling policy shocks proper from possible central bank in-
formation shocks. We abstract from this distinction in our analysis.


                                                       20
shock leading to a fall of the 3-month nominal interest rate by 100 basis points at impact. The
solid line shows median responses over 50,000 draws, the darker bands span the 16­84 per-
centiles of the draws distribution, the lighter bands cover the percentiles from 5 to 95. By and
large, impulse responses are only occasionally different from zero from a statistical viewpoint
(focusing on the 16­84 percentiles bands). This is to be expected, given our reliance on a high-
frequency identification scheme within a large VAR with quarterly data.
   There is no commonly agreed benchmark analysis of the effects of ECB monetary policy
shocks on individual euro area countries. The broad message from available multi-country
studies, where policy shocks are often identified through a Cholesky ordering, is that impulse
responses are quite heterogeneous across countries. This is also the gist of our results. For exam-
ple, employment rates rise in all countries, but in Spain more so than elsewhere. Similarly, after
an initial drop, house prices go up markedly in Spain, but they are much flatter in Germany. This
finding is in line with ?, ? and ?, who investigate the role of the `housing transmission channel'
and estimate that the monetary policy responses of house prices are stronger in countries where
households hold more mortgage debt and mortgage contracts are predominantly flexible rate,
such as Spain. ?, Figure 8 estimate a semi-elasticity of house prices to interest rates around -4
for Spain and ten times smaller for Germany, in line with our findings. We also uncover large
responses of stock prices to monetary policy shocks. For stock prices, the size of the estimates
reported in the literature varies substantially (see ?, for a survey).




                                                 21
                                      Figure 3: Impulse Responses to 100-bp Monetary Policy Easing




22
     Notes: Authors' calculations. P: harmonized CPI (HICP), E: employment rate, HP: house prices, SP: stock prices, W: wages, CND: nondurables
     consumption. The solid line shows median responses over 50,000 draws, the darker bands span the 16­84 percentiles of the draws distribution,
     the lighter bands cover the percentiles from 5 to 95.
    ?, Figure 7 also find that the reaction of stock prices to monetary policy is strong, with a
semi-elasticity to the interest rate around -20 for most countries. Nevertheless, we consider our
estimate for stock prices to be on the upper bound of the range estimated in the literature.
    In the rest of the paper we use the median responses of these variables after 1 year for our
back on the envelope computation. To mitigate the measurement error which could result from
the choice of a single horizon, we specifically focus on the average impulse response at horizons
3 to 5. Table ?? summarizes the estimated impulse responses of employment, consumer prices,
house prices and stock prices to a cut to the policy interest rate normalized to an initial size of
-100 basis points.
   We take into account that the policy rate returns towards the baseline after the initial shock.
Thus, to compute the intertemporal substitution and the interest rate exposure components, we
use its average response over the first year, which amounts to an average reduction of 80 basis
points.


3.5    Sensitivity of household eernings to aggregate earnings
From the VAR, we compute the effect of the policy shock on aggregate labor earnings by combin-
ing the response of employment and wages in each country. Here we describe how we estimate
the elasticity of household earnings to aggregate earnings for the three types of hand-to-mouth
households.
    We use the European Union Labour Force Survey (EU LFS).26 This dataset contains infor-
mation about the employment status and demographics of a large sample of households--more
than 100,000 individuals in each country (for ages 15­64).
    Even though we are forced to use employment status as a proxy for earnings, because the
latter are not reported in this dataset, we prefer this source to other surveys. The reason is that
since 2005 the data include the week of the interview. This piece of information allows us to
calculate employment rates at quarterly frequency and combine it with the quarterly time series
for aggregate employment.27
    We first impute the hand-to-mouth status to households in the LFS from the HFCS using a
Mincer-style Probit regression of the hand-to-mouth indicator on persistent household charac-
teristics: age, education, marital status, gender and sector of occupation. In the LFS, we use the
fitted probabilities of belonging to each group to distribute households into the hand-to-mouth

   26 The     EU Labour Force Survey is available at:            https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/microdata/
european-union-labour-force-survey; see the appendix in ? for a detailed description of the dataset.
   27 It is also well known that much of the variation of hours worked and total labor income over time is due to the

extensive margin.


                                                        23
groups and in doing so we respect, for each country, the shares of the total population in the
three groups estimated from the HFCS.
   We then estimate the employment `incidence function' by the hand-to-mouth status as fol-
lows. Denote eit (h) the employment status of reference person i in quarter t with hand-to-mouth
status h  {PHtM, WHtM, NHtM} (either 0 or 1) and Et the corresponding aggregate employ-
ment rate. The incidence regression has the form:

                               eit (h) =  0 (h) +  1 (h)t + (h) Et +   it .


   The estimated coefficients (h) across the three groups, the empirical counterpart of the elas-
ticities  y,Y in the model, are shown in Figure ?? and summarized in Table ??. Overall, the elastic-
ities tend to be large for the two hand-to-mouth groups, especially for the poor hand-to-mouth.
The pattern is particularly pronounced for Spain and Italy, less so for France. In Germany, the
poor hand-to-mouth have the highest elasticity, while the estimate of the elasticity of the wealth
hand-to-mouth is lower than the non-hand-to-mouth. This positive correlation between MPC
and exposure is a source of amplification of the shock compared to a representative agent model.
   The pattern of the incidence function by HtM status that we uncover is broadly consistent
with the results in ?, who combines estimated MPCs (instead of HtM status) by group of work-
ers with estimated incidence of aggregate fluctuations on the same groups and finds a positive
correlation. Other research has focused on the variation of household exposure across the per-
manent income distribution (not the hand-to-mouth status). Our estimates of elasticities tend to
decline with permanent and actual income, a finding consistent with ?, ? for the US, and with ?,
Chart C for large euro area countries.
   Our estimates of unequal incidence are unconditional. Separate work has investigated het-
erogeneous incidence conditional conditional on a monetary policy shock. ? estimate that ex-
pansionary monetary policy disproportionately stimulates incomes in the low tail of the distri-
bution, predominantly via transitions from unemployment to employment. Similarly, ? find
that employment rate in Germany in the bottom tail of the income distribution is particularly
sensitive to monetary policy shocks.


3.6   Measurement of households' exposures to interest rates, inflation and
      asset prices
This section documents how balance sheets of households differ in their exposures to interest
rates, inflation and assets prices.



                                                 24
Figure 4: Net Interest Rate Exposures and Net Nominal Positions (Inflation Exposures) by Hand-
to-Mouth Status, Mean, EUR Thousands

                  (a) Net Interest Rate Exposures                                 (b) Net Nominal Positions (Inflation Exposures)
Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The left panel shows net interest rate exposures defined, following ?, as saving + maturing assets - maturing liabilities. Maturing assets
are defined as: 25% of value of mutual funds, bonds, shares, managed accounts, money owed to households, other assets + 100% of deposits.
Regarding maturing liabilities, we assume a duration of one year for adjustable-rate mortgages. We also add 100% of the outstanding balance
of other noncollateralized debt. The flow of saving for non-hand-to-mouth households is calculated as the difference between their income
and spending. Hand-to-mouth households are assumed not to save. See section ?? for detailed definition. The right panel shows net nominal
positions defined, following ?, as their net nominal positions, consisting of nominal claims net of nominal liabilities and comprising items held
both directly and indirectly, via investment funds (see section ?? for details).



3.6.1     Net interest rate exposures

Following our decomposition (and the insight of ?), we defined the net interest rate exposure as
the difference between total maturing assets and liabilities plus the flow of saving (i.e. income
minus total consumption).28
     Net interest rate exposures differ substantially by household's hand-to-mouth status (Fig-
ure ??, left panel). At the euro area level, exposure is substantially negative for the wealthy
hand-to-mouth households (around EUR -17, 000) but only moderately so for the poor HtM,
since unsecured credit is not prevalent in Europe. Interest rate exposure is positive for non-hand-
to-mouth households (EUR 25,000). Therefore hand-to-mouth households will benefit from a re-
duction in interest rates through the direct channel. Non-hand-to-mouth households, in contrast,
are negatively affected by the easing shock through a loss of financial income.
     Net interest rate exposures vary considerably across the euro area countries. Flexible-rate
mortgage debt is crucial to understand this heterogeneity. Around 80 percent of mortgages in
Spain are adjustable-rate, while 90 percent of German mortgage contracts are fixed-rate.29 Cor-
respondingly, Figure ?? documents that wealthy hand-to-mouth households in Spain display
negative interest rate exposures over EUR -40, 000, while exposure for the corresponding group
in Germany is four times smaller. Moreover, German unconstrained households hold substantial
positive exposures (around EUR 40,000), while the exposures of the same class of households in
Spain are barely positive on average.
     Collectively, these facts imply that households in Spain tend benefit more from the direct
effect of an interest rate cut (via this channel) than those in Germany. France and Italy are in
   28 See Appendix ?? for detailed definitions. In short, maturing assets are defined as: 25% of value of mutual funds,
bonds, shares, managed accounts, money owed to households, other assets + 100% of deposits. For maturing
liabilities, we assume a duration of one year for adjustable-rate mortgages. We add 100% of the outstanding balance
of other non collateralized debt. The exposure also includes the flow of saving calculated for non-hand-to-mouth
households as the difference between their income and spending. Hand-to-mouth households are assumed not to
save (they consume their income, possibly net of interests on debt if borrowers).
   29 While adjustable-rate mortgages enter maturing liabilities, fixed-rate mortgages do not.



                                                                     25
Figure 5: Housing Wealth and Stock Market Wealth by Hand-to-Mouth Status, Mean, EUR
Thousands

                          (a) Housing Wealth                                                     (b) Stock Market Wealth
Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The left panel shows housing wealth consisting of real estate held as the household main residence and other real estate. The right panel
shows stock market wealth owned in directly held stocks (da2105). Both means are calculated as unconditional, i.e. households with no housing
or stock market wealth are included as holding EUR 0.



between these two extremes, but closer to Germany in this respect.


3.6.2     Inflation exposures (net nominal positions)

An established literature, at least since ?, has investigated how individual households are af-
fected by surprise changes in the price level. Exposures of households to inflation risk are sum-
marized by their net nominal positions, consisting of nominal claims net of nominal liabilities
and comprising items held both directly and indirectly, via investment funds (see section ?? for
details).
    Figure ??, right panel, shows how net nominal positions vary by group. Similar to net interest
rate exposures, they are negative for wealthy hand-to-mouth households, who tend to have more
mortgage debt than financial assets, and are positive for non-hand-to-mouth households, who
save in financial assets.
    Across countries, the major discrepancy in inflation exposures arises between Germany and
Spain. In the aggregate, German households hold positive nominal positions and Spanish ones
negative positions. The reason is that savings of German non hand-to-mouth households are
substantial (EUR 30,000), while those of Spanish non hand-to-mouth households are small.30 In
contrast, inflation exposures of wealthy HtM households in both countries are more comparable.
In fact, the median value of mortgage debt (conditional on holding a mortgage) is similar, around
EUR 70,000, in both countries.


3.6.3     Holdings of housing wealth and stock market wealth

Figure ??, left panel, confirms the well-known fact that housing is the key wealth component
of the wealthy hand-to-mouth households and non-hand-to-mouth households (between EUR
140,000­200,000 on average). What is remarkable is that their gross housing wealth is nearly as
large as that of the non hand-to-mouth ones.

   30 While the origin of this heterogeneity in portfolios is not strictly relevant for our exercise, we note that a possible

determinant of differences in current inflation exposures across countries seems to be experienced past inflation, as
documented by ? and ?.


                                                                    26
     Figure 6: Effects of an initial 100-bp Monetary Policy Easing on Consumption, Euro Area



Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The figure shows a decomposition of the effects of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption. The total consists of
six parts. The direct effect of intertemporal substitution (IES) and the net interest rate exposure (NIE), and the indirect effect due to labor income,
net nominal positions (Fisher), collateral / housing wealth and stock market wealth. Sizes of these effects vary depending on households'
hand-to-mouth status.



     Figure ??, right panel, shows that European households own little stock market wealth --
much less than US ones, for example. According to the HFCS, non hand-to-mouth households
hold only EUR 7,000 of stock market wealth (the remaining households tend to hold almost no
stocks at all).31
     When we aggregate the total value of equities across households in the survey, we conclude
that the HFCS covers about 70% of the total market value in each country (the coverage is es-
pecially low in Italy). We correct for this underreporting by boosting the stock wealth of the
non-HtM households so that it matches the aggregate stock market wealth held by the house-
hold sector reported in aggregate data (Financial Accounts/Flow of Funds). Even with this cor-
rection, financial wealth remains an order of magnitude smaller than housing wealth in Europe.
Thus, the effects of monetary policy via stock returns are bound to be minimal in the euro area.
     We conclude by noting that we have made the implicit assumption that the value of business
wealth does not respond to the monetary shock. In Appendix ?? we study the robustness of our
results to the opposite extreme assumption that it responds as much as the stock market.


4      Results
In this section we illustrate the quantitative implications of our decompositions once we adopt
the parameterization and the balance sheet structure described in the previous section. We start
from our findings for the aggregate of the four countries (which we call the euro area) and then
examine each country separately.


4.1      Direct effects and indirect effects
Figure ?? displays how the various individual channels we identified contribute to the changes
in consumption expenditures for the three groups of households. We begin with the two direct
    31 The
         figure only includes directly held stocks. In our calculations we do not include stock market wealth held
in pension funds. In Europe the bulk of pension insurance is public and the bulk of wealth in private pension
insurance is held in bonds and other assets, other than stocks.


                                                                        27
effects. The figure shows that for non-hand-to-mouth households the intertemporal substitution
channel (IES) accounts for the bulk of the stimulus and considerably affects aggregate consump-
tion (almost 0.4 p.p. out of the total effect of 0.55 p.p.). The interest rate exposure (NIE) raises
consumption of hand-to-mouth households via lower debt service (on adjustable-rate mortgages
and on other debt), but it slightly reduces consumption of the remaining households who tend to
hold positive net interest rate exposures/financial savings.32 In the aggregate, the NIE channel
depresses consumption because the household sector is a net creditor (with respect to the other
sectors), but its effect is small.
   The figure also illustrates that the indirect effects account for by far the largest part of the
consumption response for the two groups of hand-to-mouth households, 90% (or more) of the
total effect. The indirect labor income effect is of overwhelming importance to the poor hand-
to-mouth households. This channel and the housing wealth/collateral effect are the dominant
ones for the wealthy hand-mouth households. The Fisher effect via the nominal exposures, turns
out to be quantitatively moderate, except for the wealthy hand-to-mouth, mostly because of the
limited response of inflation to monetary policy easing, but also because of the small size of net
nominal positions. The stock market wealth effect is of little importance quantitatively. This is
not surprising given the modest size of stock holdings shown in Figure ??.
   Monetary policy shocks impact very differently the three hand-to-mouth groups, both quali-
tatively and quantitatively. Qualitatively, the indirect general equilibrium mechanisms are much
more important for the hand-to-mouth households, while the intertemporal substitution effect
is largest for the non-hand-to-mouth households. All in all, about 60 percent of the total increase
in aggregate consumption is due to the indirect income and house price channels even at the
aggregate level.
   Quantitatively, hand-to-mouth households adjust their consumption by considerably more
than the rest of the population after the shock. The initial 100 basis-point cut of interest rates re-
sults in an increase of consumption of 1.0 percent for the poor hand-to-mouth and of 1.8 percent
of the wealthy hand-to-mouth, while consumption of the non-hand-to-mouth households rises
by 0.5 percent. Given their disproportionate share in consumption (about 80%), the non-hand-
to-mouth households dominate the total consumption increase of 0.7 percent.


4.2    Cross-country differences
In comparing the results of our decomposition across the four countries, we focus our discussion
on Germany and Spain, two `polar' countries in terms of the homeownership rate, the prevalence
  32 Growing  empirical evidence documents this channel is mostly driven by the passthrough of interest rates to
disposable income via the debt service/cash flow channel. See ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?.


                                                      28
              Figure 7: Effects of an initial 100-bp Monetary Policy Easing on Consumption, Germany, Spain, France, Italy


                                              (a) Germany                                                                            (b) Spain




29
                                                (c) France                                                                           (d) Italy

     Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
     Note: The figure shows a decomposition of the effects of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption. The total effect consists of six parts; the direct effect of
     intertemporal substitution and the net interest rate exposure and the indirect effect due to income, net nominal positions (Fisher), collateral / housing wealth and stock market wealth.
     Sizes of these effects vary depending on households' hand-to-mouth status.
          Figure 8: Effects on Consumption: Aggregate Responses vs Household Portfolios



Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The figure shows a decomposition of the effects of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption. The baseline decom-
position with country-specific VAR impulse responses is compared to the decomposition which imposes the same, euro-area-average impulse
response across all countries.



of fixed- vs adjustable-rate mortgages and the volatility of the employment rate. Recall that gaps
in homeownership translate into differences in the share of hand-to-mouth households: over 17
percent of Spanish households are wealthy hand-to-mouth compared to less than 12 percent in
Germany. Figure ?? summarizes the results.
    The intertemporal substitution channel is similar across countries. Instead, the markedly dif-
ferent portfolio composition of Spanish and German households implies that the direct interest
rate exposure effect of a cut in the policy rate is large and positive in Spain, whereas it is slightly
negative in Germany because households are net savers. The Fisher effects are of modest size
for all households, except for wealthy hand-to-mouth households in Spain who benefit because
of their sizable nominal debt holdings.
    The indirect effects are largely shaped by differences in the aggregate impulse responses dis-
cussed in section ??. House prices and the employment rates respond much more strongly to
monetary policy in Spain than in Germany. As a consequence, both the indirect labor income
effects and the housing wealth/collateral effects in Spain considerably exceed their counterpart
in Germany. The housing wealth effect in Spain is stronger both because of higher gross housing
wealth (by roughly 40 percent, see Figure ??) and because house prices are much more sensitive
to monetary policy (Table ??).
    Adding up to obtain the composite effect, aggregate nondurable consumption responds very
strongly in Spain (1.8 percent) and only modestly in Germany (0.4 percent).
    Figure ?? shows that France and Italy are more similar to each other and the size of their con-
sumption response arising from our calculations is between the two extremes of Spain and Ger-
many. In Italy, like Spain, indirect equilibrium channels working through the labor and housing
market dominate the decomposition. France is more similar to Germany because house prices
and employment react little to monetary policy.33
    Figure ?? analyzes how the cross-country differences in consumption responses is determined
by the heterogeneity in the differential responsiveness of each economy to the common shock
(from the VAR estimates) vs. the heterogeneity in household portfolios. The baseline response of

   33 Figure ?? shows the decomposition for the four countries and for the euro area all together with the same scale.



                                                                    30
                     Figure 9: Effects on Consumption: VAR vs HANK Decomposition



Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The figure compares the effect of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption estimated using a structural VAR model
to the HA decomposition. The HA model decomposition is broken down into two parts: the intertemporal substitution channel of the RA model
and the remaining channels.



consumption (dark blue) is compared to a counterfactual where the VAR responses in all coun-
tries are set to be the same and equal to the average response (light blue). The fact that the latter
responses are less dispersed implies that a significant share of these cross-country differences in
consumption is driven by the heterogeneity in aggregate impulse responses.


4.3      Consumption response in HANK, RANK and VAR
Because our VAR includes nondurable consumption among its variables, we can investigate
how the consumption responses estimated by the VAR compare to those implied by our model
decomposition (Figure ??). This exercise can be thought of a validation of our HANK-based
back-of-the-envelope calculations.34
     The HA model performs well once the responses are aggregated to the euro area level, match-
ing almost exactly the VAR estimate. In addition, it captures the cross-country differences be-
tween the high-response (Spain, Italy) and low-response (Germany, France) countries. However,
it overestimates the consumption response in France and underestimates the one in Italy, relative
to the VAR.35
     The figure also decomposes the HANK consumption response into the part due to the IES
channel (the RANK response) and the remaining parts. The IES response is stable across coun-
tries at around 0.25 percent. Therefore, heterogeneity always amplifies the response of the RANK
models, in some countries very substantially. The main sources of amplification in the decompo-
sition are the large MPC and the positive cross-sectional correlation between the MPCs and the
increase in resources available to consume in the wake of a monetary easing.




                                                                     31
                               Figure 10: Effects on Consumption: The Top 10 Percent



Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The figure shows a decomposition of the effects of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption. The total consists of
six parts. The direct effect of intertemporal substitution (IES) and the net interest rate exposure (NIE), and the indirect effect due to labor income,
net nominal positions (Fisher), housing wealth and stock market wealth. Sizes of these effects vary depending on households' hand-to-mouth
status. The top 10 percent of households are defined as the 15% of richest households by net wealth among the non-hand-to-mouth (to account
for the fact that the non-HtM households make up roughly 2/3 of all households).



4.4      The top 10 percent
With our micro data it is easy to further decompose households into more groups. Given the
growing interest in the widening gap between the richest and the rest of the population we can,
for example, analyze how the consumption response to monetary policy shocks for the top 10
percent of the wealthiest households differs from that of the rest of the population.36
     The top 10 percent of households differ from the rest of the unconstrained households be-
cause of their portfolios and their income incidence (see Appendix ?? for details). In terms of
portfolios, the key discrepancy is in the amount of housing they own. While the rest of non-HtM
households own about EUR 120,000 worth of housing in the euro area, the top 10 percent own
over EUR 600,000 in housing. The two groups also differ in the holdings of stocks. The top 10
percent of households own about EUR 45,000 in equities, while the rest of the population owns
virtually no stocks (Figure ??). As for the earnings incidence function, our estimates imply that
the top 10 percent of households are somewhat more exposed to systematic fluctuations in in-
come than the other non-HtM households (except for Spain), a result in line with ? and ? (Figure
??).37
     The consumption response to monetary policy of the top 10 percent households is stronger
than the response of the other non-HtM households, but still weaker than the response of HtM
households (Figure ??). The key reason for this finding is that the top 10 percent gain substan-
tially from increases in asset prices, especially stocks, even though they have a low MPCs. Their
consumption responses are somewhat dampened by the losses via net interest rate exposures

   34 Another   approach, which we did not follow here, would be to use the consumption responses of the VAR as
target moments and calibrate the MPCs out of capital gains in each country (more likely to vary across countries
than the MPC out of income because of the institutional differences in restrictions to equity extraction) so that the
HANK decomposition matches the VAR responses exactly.
   35 At least in the case of France, it seems to be the VAR response that is too low (e.g., ? estimate that the consump-

tion response in France lies between those of Germany and Italy).
   36 Because of sample size, we focus on the top 10%. A smaller share would lead to very noisy outcomes.
   37 In all our calculations we assume that this group has the same MPCs as the other non-HtM households, i.e. an

annual MPC out of income 5% and out of capital gains of 1%.


                                                                        32
and the Fisher channel.


4.5   Accounting for Business Wealth
We conclude with a robustness exercise. Throughout the analysis, we abstracted from private
business wealth. More precisely, we have assumed its value does not react to the shock. Let us
now take the extreme opposite view that business wealth gets reevaluated as much as publicly
traded stocks ­recall that stocks react very strongly to an identified monetary easing in the VAR.
    Figure ?? in Appendix ?? shows that this assumption has important consequences for the
consumption response of the top 10 percent. This finding was expected in light of the well
known fact that many among the richest households are entrepreneurs. Under this alternative
assumption, their response more than doubles. What is more surprising is that also expenditures
of the wealthy hand-to-mouth group react substantially more. The reason is that, for many
households in this group, business equity is a large component of their illiquid wealth.
    Overall, in this exercise the share of indirect effects of monetary policy exceeds 70%, com-
pared to 60% in the baseline.


5     Conclusion
In this paper we formulated a back of the envelope approach to quantify the various transmis-
sion mechanisms of monetary policy to household consumption in the four largest countries in
the euro area. Our decomposition illustrates that these channels operate with different strength
across the distribution of households, depending on households' marginal propensity to con-
sume, portfolio composition, and exposure to aggregate fluctuations --all dimensions where
heterogeneity is sizable.
    We argued that a particularly helpful distinction, to summarize this large heterogeneity, is
one that groups households in three classes: non hand-to-mouth, wealthy hand-to-mouth and
poor hand-to-mouth based on their holdings of liquid and illiquid wealth.
    By combining cross-country micro data on income and household portfolios with estimates
from structural VARs on the impact of monetary policy on employment, inflation, and asset
prices, we obtained all the ingredients we need to quantify the channels of transmission.
    Our main finding is that the general equilibrium effects of an unexpected monetary easing
on households' labor income, through an expansion in aggregate demand and an increment
in house prices, are the principal determinants of the effect of monetary policy on aggregate
consumption across countries. This finding suggests that households with low liquidity account


                                               33
for the lion share of the consumption response to monetary policy shocks. We also uncovered
significant differences across countries: Germany displays the weakest response and Spain the
strongest one to a common monetary shock.
   Monitoring the composition of household balance sheets and the heterogeneous consequences
of monetary policy across the distribution is therefore important to gain a better understanding
of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
   While our analysis focuses on standard interest rate shocks, a similar approach can be taken to
analyze the effects on unconventional monetary policy instruments, such as quantitative easing.
For this set of measures, we would expect indirect general equilibrium effects to account for an
even larger share of the total effect because the key channels of transmissions are a boost in asset
prices and an expansion in aggregate demand. Who benefits more across the distribution will
depend on the relative strength of these two forces (and whether house prices react more or less
than stock prices).
   Our methodology can also be applied to firms to assess the mechanisms through which mon-
etary policy impacts aggregate investment. A quantitative literature which builds on traditional
firm dynamics models is developing in parallel to that on heterogeneous household (??), but
simple back of the envelope calculations of the type we did in this paper --that can give a pre-
liminary idea of the magnitudes without the need for solving complex dynamic equilibrium
models-- are so far missing from this literature.
   A limitation of the methodology implemented in this paper is that, because of the first-order
approach taken in the decomposition and the linearity of the VAR, we cannot address nonlin-
earities and asymmetries between positive and negative shocks, nor we can examine the role
of time-varying precautionary saving and hand-to-mouth status. The alternative approach fol-
lowed in the HANK literature, which quantifies the transmission channels of monetary policy
through richer calibrated or estimated DSGE models, is much more useful in this respect espe-
cially when globally solved nonlinearly. As discussed, ? and ? offer a compromise between these
two approaches.
   We think that the two methodologies should dialogue to best advance the HANK literature.
The main lesson we learned here is that incorporating into richer HANK models endogenous
mechanisms that lead to realistic fluctuations in individual earnings and asset prices is of first-
order importance. Progress in this direction is already being made. For example, ? integrates a
job ladder and ? heterogeneity in risk aversion into HANK models.




                                                34
A      Measurement of variables
A.1     Definition of hand-to-mouth households
This section classifies the three groups of households by their hand-to-mouth status. The variable names
refer to wave 2 of the Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS).
    Following ?, a household is considered as `hand-to-mouth' if:

    · Net liquid wealth  0 AND net liquid wealth  biweekly (net) income

      OR

    · Net liquid wealth < 0 AND net liquid wealth  biweekly (net) income - credit limit

A household is:

    1. `Poor hand-to-mouth' if it is hand-to-mouth AND net illiquid wealth  0,

    2. `Wealthy hand-to-mouth' if it is hand-to-mouth AND net illiquid wealth > 0,

    3. Non-hand-to-mouth if it is not hand-to-mouth.

There are two (small) differences to ?. First, we classify all hand-to-mouth households with some housing
assets (da1110 or da1120) as wealthy hand-to-mouth, including households `under water' whose mort-
gage exceeds the value of the house. Second, we classify all hand-to-mouth households with some self-
employment business wealth (da1140) as wealthy hand-to-mouth.
    The variables above are defined as follows:

    · Net liquid wealth = liquid assets - liquid liabilities

    · Liquid assets = sight and saving accounts (deposits), directly held mutual funds, bonds and stocks
       = da2101 + da2102 + da2103 + da2105

    · Liquid liabilities = overdraft debt and credit card debt = dl1210 + dl1220

    · Net illiquid wealth = illiquid assets - illiquid liabilities

    · Illiquid assets = illiquid real assets, value of household main residence and other properties and
      value of self-employment businesses = da1110 + da1120 + da1140 + total(pf0710) + da2109

    · Illiquid liabilities = amount of non-collateralized loans for household main residence and other
      properties, mortgage debt

Credit limit is assumed at one month of income.




                                                     35
                                     Figure 11: Marginal Income Tax Rates



Source: OECD Tax Database, https://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-policy/tax-database/; Household Finance and Consumption Survey
Note: The figure shows how (statutory) marginal tax rates depend on taxable household income.



A.2     After-tax income
After-tax income enters our calculation of saving (included as a part of net interest rates exposures) and
of consumption­income ratios of non-hand-to-mouth households. Except for Italy after-tax income is not
collected in the HFCS and needs to be approximated using marginal tax rates, as we describe below.
    For France, Germany and Spain we approximate after-tax income by applying marginal tax rates
available from the OECD on taxable income (variable di1100) + 2/3×self-employment income (di1200)
and adding nontaxable income. For Italy after-tax income is available directly in the HFCS. Figure ??
shows the tax rates.
    More specifically, for Germany we use the marginal tax rates as given by §32a of the 2014 EStG (Ger-
man income tax law). For Spain, we use tax brackets and marginal tax rates based on the 2014 OECD
data; the tables `Central government personal income tax rates and thresholds' and `Sub-central personal
income tax rates-progressive systems', http://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-policy/tax-database.htm#pit.
For France, we use French-Property.com, https://www.french-property.com/news/tax_france/income_
tax_bands_2014/. For Italy, the HFCS includes a variable on Income taxes and social contributions
(hnG0710) as a non-core variable; we calculated net income as the difference between gross income and
this variable.
    Nontaxable income consists of transfers, income from pensions, rental income from real estate prop-
erty, income from financial assets, income from private business other than self-employment, regular
social transfers (except pensions), regular private transfers and income from other sources.


A.3     Consumption­income ratios by hand-to-mouth status
Both groups of hand-to-mouth households are assumed to consume their income. Nondurable consump-
tion of non-hand-to-mouth households is calculated so that the aggregate saving in our economy matches
the aggregate saving rates (given in Table ??).
                                                                ~ (the complement to the aggregate
    In detail, denote aggregate consumption­income ratio C /Y = c




                                                            36
personal saving rate):

                                           C H + C NH   Y H + C NH
                                          ~ =
                                          c           =
                                               Y            Y
                                            H     NH
                                     ~×Y = Y +C
                                     c
                                      C NH      ~×Y -y
                                              = c       ~H × Y
                                      C NH      c~-y ~H
                                              =
                                      Y NH        ~ NH
                                                  y

      ~ H is the income share of HtM households (y
where y                                          ~ H = Y H /Y ).
    Assuming the share of nondurable on total consumption is the same for HtM and NHtM households,
we get for nondurable consumption:
                                                NH
                                              Cnd           ~-y
                                                            c    ~H
                                                   = ¯
                                                     c nd ×         ,
                                              Y NH            ~ NH
                                                              y
      ¯nd is the aggregate share of nondurables consumption to total consumption, c
where c                                                                           ¯nd = Cnd /C.


A.4     Net interest rate exposure
Net interest rate exposure is calculated following ? (see also ? and ?).

    · Interest rate exposure = Income - Total consumption + Maturing assets - Maturing liabilities.

    · Regarding the flow of saving (Income - Total consumption), we assume it is zero for hand-to-mouth
      households and its value for non-hand-to-mouth households is calculated so that it matches the
      aggregate saving rate (see ??).

    · Maturing assets = 25% of (mutual funds, bonds, shares, managed accounts, money owed, other
      assets) + 100% of deposits.

    · Maturing Liabilities = duration of 1 year for ARM + 100% Outstanding balance of non-mortgage
      debt38

    · Outstanding balance of non-mortgage debt is defined as outstanding balance of credit line/overdraft,
      credit card debt and other non-mortgage loans.


A.5     Inflation exposures (net nominal positions)
Net nominal position is calculated following ? and ?:

    · Household net nominal position = Net financial position - Indirect nominal position

  38 The duration of 1 year for ARMs is a conservative estimate for the euro area, estimated following ?. For the US
? estimates the duration of three quarters.


                                                       37
· Net financial position = Financial assets - Total debt

· Indirect nominal position = Value of mutual funds (da2102) + Non-self-employment private busi-
  ness (da2104) + Publicly traded shares (da2105)




                                               38
B       Additional results on the top 10 percent households

Figure 12: Housing Wealth and Stock Market Wealth for the Top 10 Percent, Mean, EUR Thou-
sands

                          (a) Housing Wealth                                                     (b) Stock Market Wealth
Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The left panel shows housing wealth consisting of real estate held as the household main residence and other real estate. The right panel
shows stock market wealth owned in directly held stocks (da2105). Both means are calculated as unconditional, i.e. households with no housing
or stock market wealth are included as holding EUR 0.




                                                                    39
                Figure 13: Elasticity of Household Employment to Aggregate Employment  y,Y by Hand-to-Mouth Status


                                            (a) Germany                                                                      (b) Spain




40
                                              (c) France                                                                      (d) Italy

     Source: EU Labour Force Survey, 2005­2018
     Note: The charts show estimated elasticities of household employment to aggregate employment  y,Y for the four groups of households. The ranges show the 95 percent confidence
     intervals.
C       Business wealth and other figures

 Figure 14: Effects on Consumption: Business Wealth Responds Proportionally to Stock Prices



Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
Note: The figure shows a decomposition of the effects of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption. The total consists of
six parts. The direct effect of intertemporal substitution (IES) and the net interest rate exposure (NIE), and the indirect effect due to labor income,
net nominal positions (Fisher), housing wealth and stock market wealth. Sizes of these effects vary depending on households' hand-to-mouth
status.




                                                                        41
                         Figure 15: Elasticity of Individual to Aggregate Employment  y,Y by Hand-to-Mouth Status


                                                       (a) Germany                                            (b) Spain




42
                                                         (c) France                                           (d) Italy

     Source: EU Labour Force Survey, 2005­2018
     Note: The charts show estimated elasticities of household employment to aggregate employment  y,Y for the three hand-to-mouth groups of households. The ranges show the 95
     percent confidence intervals.
             Figure 16: Effects of an initial 100-bp Monetary Policy Easing on Consumption, Germany, Spain, France, Italy




43
     Source: Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, wave 2
     Note: The figure shows a decomposition of the effects of an initial 100-basis-point shock to interest rates on consumption. The total effect consists of six parts; the direct effect of
     intertemporal substitution and the net interest rate exposure and the indirect effect due to income, net nominal positions (Fisher), housing wealth and stock market wealth. Sizes of
     these effects vary depending on households' hand-to-mouth status.
