                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DYNASTIC PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS

                                           Corina Boar

                                       Working Paper 26635
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26635


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Corina Boar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Dynastic Precautionary Savings
Corina Boar
NBER Working Paper No. 26635
January 2020
JEL No. E21

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper provides evidence that parents accumulate savings to insure their children against
income risk. I refer to this behavior as dynastic precautionary saving and quantify its extent using
matched parent-child pairs from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and exploiting variation in
income risk across age, industries and occupations. I then build a model of altruistically linked
overlapping generations, in which parents and children interact strategically, that is quantitatively
consistent with the empirical evidence. I argue that strategic interactions are important for
generating the observed dynastic precautionary behavior and use the model to show this
component of household savings is quantitatively important for wealth accumulation,
intergenerational transfers and consumption insurance.


Corina Boar
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
corina.boar@gmail.com
                          Dynastic Precautionary Savings
                                               Corina Boar
                                      Click here for the latest version

                                          December 29, 2019



                                                  Abstract

             This paper provides evidence that parents accumulate savings to insure their chil-
         dren against income risk. I refer to this behavior as dynastic precautionary saving and
         quantify its extent using matched parent-child pairs from the Panel Study of Income
         Dynamics and exploiting variation in income risk across age, industries and occupa-
         tions. I then build a model of altruistically linked overlapping generations, in which
         parents and children interact strategically, that is quantitatively consistent with the
         empirical evidence. I argue that strategic interactions are important for generating the
         observed dynastic precautionary behavior and use the model to show this component
         of household savings is quantitatively important for wealth accumulation, intergenera-
         tional transfers and consumption insurance.




1        Introduction
The extent of private consumption insurance against income shocks is a subject of great
importance for numerous reasons.1 First, the ability of households to absorb shocks to
their income has substantial implications for their welfare. Second, the value of government
    
       I am extremely grateful to my advisor Mark Bils for inspiration, encouragement and guidance throughout
this project, and to Yongsung Chang and Narayana Kocherlakota for their generous advice. For helpful com-
ments, I thank Mark Aguiar, George Alessandria, Yan Bai, Jay Hong, Marios Karabarbounis, Peter Klenow,
Mariacristina de Nardi, Romans Pancs, Yena Park, Ronni Pavan, Matthew Rognlie, Kjetil Storesletten,
Gianluca Violante, as well as numerous seminar participants.
   
     Department of Economics, New York University; email: corina.boar@gmail.com
   1
     Private consumption insurance encompasses all means (that go beyond government interventions)
through which households can smooth consumption in response to adverse events like income shocks.


                                                       1
provided insurance is highly dependent on the extent of consumption insurance that prevails
in the economy, and could be severely overstated if one fails to account for the crowding-out
effect it might have on private risk-sharing. Third, it serves as a tool for discriminating
between macroeconomic models in which imperfect consumption insurance against income
shocks is at play.
       This paper expands the existing knowledge on consumption insurance by providing evi-
dence that parents accumulate savings to insure their children against income risk. I refer to
this newly documented insurance channel as dynastic precautionary saving. The argument
follows from extending the theory of precautionary saving across generations: in the face
of uncertainty in children's income, altruistic parents postpone own current consumption
in favor of precautionary saving against bad income realizations children might be subject
to. Dynastic precautionary saving goes beyond self-insurance against income shocks, thus
contributing towards bridging the gap between consumption insurance in the data and in
standard life-cycle models.2 Additionally, the existence of this saving motive is relevant for
distinguishing between the two frameworks that are at the heart of essentially all macro
models: the infinitely-lived agents model and the life-cycle model, providing support for the
former. Finally, it provides much needed insight into the nature of the bequest motive and
expands the pool of determinants of wealth accumulation after retirement.
       In this paper, I present evidence on dynastic precautionary saving using parent-child pairs
from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). In particular, I examine how a parent's
consumption responds to the uncertainty of his child's permanent income. To that end, I
first propose a measure of permanent income uncertainty closely related to the theoretical
definition of permanent income. I then conduct a regression analysis of the effect of dynastic
uncertainty on parental consumption using the sample of parent-child pairs, and find a
negative and statistically significant relationship. Motivated by the empirical evidence, I
build a model of altruistically linked overlapping generations in which parents engage in
dynastic precautionary saving. I use the model to assess the contribution of this new saving
motive to wealth accumulation, intergenerational transfers and consumption insurance.
       The measure of income uncertainty considered in this paper is defined as the standard
deviation of the forecast error of permanent income. Intuitively, the higher the uncertainty,
the more difficult it is to forecast earnings accurately, which translates into a larger standard
deviation of the forecast error. Because of sample attrition and to minimize the effect of
   2
    Kaplan and Violante (2010) find a substantial gap between the amount of consumption insurance implicit
in a calibrated life-cycle model and the corresponding estimate from US data in Blundell, Pistaferri and
Preston (2008). This gap is particularly large for the young.


                                                    2
measurement error, I follow the tradition of the precautionary saving literature and focus
on properties of permanent income uncertainty that vary across age and work sectors (i.e.
industries and occupations).3 I find that permanent income uncertainty decreases with age.
On average, more than half is resolved by age 40. Moreover, there is substantial variation
across sectors, both in terms of the level of uncertainty and the speed at which it resolves
with age.
       Using this variation, I find that parental consumption responds negatively to the child's
permanent income uncertainty. In particular, the elasticity of parental consumption to dy-
nastic uncertainty is -0.076. This implies that parents of children younger than 40 consume
on average $2, 528 less per year because at that stage most of children's income uncertainty
is yet to be resolved. Building on the heterogeneity of permanent income risk across sectors,
the regression result implies that, holding everything else equal, the consumption of a parent
whose child is a construction worker is 2.5% lower than the consumption of a parent whose
child is a services worker because of the dynastic uncertainty difference.
       I take a number of steps to address several endogeneity concerns. Notably, I explore
the robustness of the results to (i) controlling for health status, as it may be the case that
health and mortality risk are correlated with the sector in which an individual works, and
(ii) addressing selection concerns that stem from children choosing to work in riskier sectors,
knowing their parents save. When simultaneously addressing these concerns, the estimated
consumption elasticity is approximately 1 percentage point lower than the baseline estimate,
but significant and not different from the baseline estimate in a statistical sense. Addi-
tionally, I verify the robustness of the results to a series of alternative specifications which
include controlling for heterogeneous bequest motives and using alternative consumption and
permanent income uncertainty measures.
       Motivated by the empirical evidence, I then explore the implications of dynastic pre-
cautionary saving for wealth accumulation, intergenerational transfers and consumption in-
surance in a partial equilibrium model of altruistically linked overlapping generations. The
class of models consistent with dynastic precautionary saving features three key ingredients:
income risk, incomplete markets, and altruism a
                                              ` la Barro (1974), with the parent valuing
the child's utility from consumption.4
   3
     Section 2.1 defines permanent income uncertainty at individual level and discusses in detail what are its
shortcomings in practice, as well as the extent to which my approach of projecting income uncertainty on
age, industry and occupation gets around these shortcomings.
   4
     The direction of altruism (i.e. from parent to child, from child to parent or two-sided) is not essential.
What matters is that the form of altruism considered extends the budget constraint across generations. Note
that models with warm-glow bequest do not generate dynastic precautionary saving behavior in response



                                                      3
   In light of existing evidence on imperfect risk-sharing within and between families, I model
the decision making process between parents and children as a non-cooperative game without
commitment. In my framework, individuals work in sectors characterized by different degrees
of permanent income uncertainty. Each period, parents and children decide individually and
sequentially how much to consume and save. In addition, altruistic parents can provide
monetary support to their children through explicit financial transfers while they are alive
and by leaving an inheritance upon their death. The allocations of interest are given by the
Markov-perfect equilibrium of the parent-child repeated game.
   I repeat the regression exercise with data generated from the calibrated model and find
that the response of parental consumption to both own and child's income risk is of similar
magnitude as in the data. In particular, the model estimates fall well within the 95%
confidence interval of the empirical estimates. The model with strategic interactions between
parents and children also accounts reasonably well for the age pattern of inter-vivos transfers.
I show that strategic interactions between parents and children are important for matching
the data by solving a version of the model in which they are absent ­ the unitary household
model. In this framework, the dynastic precautionary saving motive is more important than
the precautionary motive for parents, contrary to the empirical evidence.
   I use the model to assess the contribution of dynastic precautionary saving to wealth
accumulation, intergenerational transfers and consumption insurance. I find that in the
model 16.7% of total wealth is held for dynastic precautionary reasons, and that children's
income risk is the main driver of intergenerational transfers. The model predicts that parents'
dynastic precautionary savings account for one fourth of children's consumption insurance
against income shocks.

   Related literature This paper is related to three strands of literature. First, it adds
to the literature that analyzes the insurance role of the family, both from an empirical and
a quantitative perspective. Empirically, this literature has focused on examining the degree
of risk sharing within families and uncovering means through which risk sharing occurs.
The early work of Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1992) and Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff
(1996) rejects the hypothesis of perfect insurance within the extended family implied by the
unitary household model. Using more recent data, Choi, McGarry and Schoeni (2016) still
reject perfect insurance, but find evidence that the income of the extended family affects
one's consumption. Attanasio, Meghir and Mommaerts (2018) argue that the extended
to the child's income risk, as the parent only derives utility from the amount bequeathed. But dynastic
precautionary saving is embedded in virtually all models that feature the three elements enumerated above.



                                                    4
family has large insurance potential, but that no such insurance occurs on average as one's
consumption responds equally to shocks to own income and to the income of the extended
family.5 Notwithstanding the rejection of perfect risk sharing, the literature has documented
that parents do insure children by making inter-vivos transfers to less well-off children, as
found by Cox (1990), McGarry (1999), McGarry (2016) and in ongoing work by Ameriks
et al. (2016), or by allowing them to move back home around labor market events, as shown
by Kaplan (2012). I complement this line of work by documenting an additional channel
through which parents can insure children against labor market risk.
       Quantitatively, there has been a revived interest in studying dynamic models of families
and the insurance within, especially in settings that depart from the full commitment as-
sumption and are thus consistent with the aforementioned empirical evidence on imperfect
risk-sharing within the extended family.6 Early examples of such models are Laitner (1988)
and Lindbeck and Weibull (1988), which serve as building blocks for some of the subse-
quently enumerated papers, including this one. Most quantitative explorations of the role
of the family assume non-cooperation as the decision making process between parents and
children.7 Examples are Nishiyama (2002), Kaplan (2012), Barczyk and Kredler (2014a),
Barczyk (2016) and Barczyk and Kredler (2016). With the exception of Barczyk and Kredler
(2014a) and subsequent work of the author(s), these models often impose additional assump-
tions on behavior, such as an inability of both individuals to save. My framework allows for
savings by both the parent and the child, and results in a determinacy of the size and timing
of intergenerational transfers. It is thus methodologically closest to Barczyk and Kredler
(2014a), Barczyk (2016) and Barczyk and Kredler (2016). In Barczyk and Kredler (2014a),
parents and children make consumption, saving and transfer decisions simultaneously. The
authors bypass some of the complications that such a game poses by assuming the interaction
takes place in continuous time, thus making consumption and savings decisions independent
of the contemporaneous choices of the other player. My approach complements that of Bar-
   5
      My finding that parents engage in dynastic precautionary saving might appear surprising in light of this
work but, as will become apparent in Section 3, the model of the extended family that I propose is outside
of the class of models that forms the basis for the aforementioned tests of family risk sharing.
    6
      The earlier literature studying models of families generally worked in the context of full commitment,
as in Altig and Davis (1989), Altig and Davis (1992), Altig and Davis (1993), or assumed perfect two-
sided altruism, as in Laitner (1993), Laitner (1992), Fuster (1999), Fuster, Imrohoroglu and Imrohoroglu
(2007), Imrohoroglu and Zhao (2018). Importantly, and differently from this paper, the aforementioned
models have no predictions on the distribution of wealth within the family and nor on the size and timing
of intergenerational transfers. Luo (2016) is able to make predictions on transfers, but does so by assuming
that parents derive warm-glow utility both from bequests and from inter-vivos transfers.
    7
      An exception is Mommaerts (2015), who studies the role of family care in shaping the demand for
long-term care insurance in a cooperative framework with limited commitment.



                                                      5
czyk and Kredler (2014a), by maintaining the assumption of discrete time, but imposing an
assumption on the timing of the parent-child interaction.
        Second, this paper is related to the vast literature on precautionary savings from which
I borrow in the design of the empirical exercise. Some notable examples are Kimball (1990),
Carroll and Samwick (1997), Gourinchas and Parker (2002), Cagetti (2003), Kennickell and
Lusardi (2005) and Hurst et al. (2010).8
        Third, it complements the research aimed at understanding household consumption-
saving behavior over the life cycle, and especially at older age. This literature advances,
with no clear consensus, two main drivers of saving at older age: bequest motives and
precautionary saving motives for mortality and medical risk. Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes
(1995), Palumbo (1999), de Nardi, French and Jones (2010) or Kopecky and Koreshkova
(2014) find that given the significant medical spending risk faced by retirees, models without
bequest motives can match well the wealth dynamics of middle-class retirees. While this
suggests that bequest motives are relatively negligible, Kopczuk and Lupton (2007), Ameriks
et al. (2011), Lockwood (2014) and de Nardi, French and Jones (2016a) conclude that bequest
motives are important drivers of retirees' choices. The saving motive analyzed in this paper
falls under the umbrella of the bequest motive broadly defined but unlike the previously
mentioned papers, in which parental altruism can only manifest in the form of end-of-life
bequests and often takes the form of joy-of-giving, here it is microfounded and can result in
inter-vivos transfers.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains the empirical exercise
of the paper. Section 3 explores dynastic precautionary savings further, in a quantitative
model. Section 4 concludes and discusses several avenues for extending this work.


2         Evidence on Dynastic Precautionary Savings
In this section I provide empirical evidence on the existence of dynastic precautionary savings.
The empirical exercise is aimed at exploring whether the consumption of parents responds to
the resolution of their children's permanent income uncertainty. The argument derives from
the theory of precautionary saving: in the face of income uncertainty, individuals postpone
current consumption in favor of precautionary saving against bad income realizations.9
    8
    See Carroll and Kimball (2008) for a review of this literature.
    9
    I focus on income rather than consumption uncertainty for of two reasons. First, permanent consump-
tion uncertainty is endogenous to individuals' (dynastic) precautionary behavior. Specifically, high (dynastic)
precautionary savings translate not only in lower current consumption, but also in lower expected consump-
tion uncertainty. Second, due to the fact that consumption data is available for a shorter time horizon than


                                                      6
2.1     Measuring Permanent Income Uncertainty
I begin with the measure of permanent income uncertainty. In the life cycle framework, in-
dividuals maximize an intertemporal utility function subject to a lifetime budget constraint,
which links permanent consumption and permanent income. Uncertainty about an individ-
ual's own permanent income triggers the accumulation of precautionary wealth.10 When
the pure life cycle framework is enriched with altruism a
                                                        ` la Barro (1974) (i.e. the parent
values the child's utility from consumption), uncertainty about the permanent income of fu-
ture generations becomes relevant and triggers the accumulation of dynastic precautionary
wealth.11
    I define permanent income uncertainty as the standard deviation of the forecast error
of lifetime earnings. Intuitively, the higher the uncertainty the more difficult it is for an
individual to forecast earnings accurately, which translates into a larger standard deviation
of the forecast error. I only focus on the human capital component of permanent income,
since individual assets are known at the time the consumption-saving decision is made. For
simplicity, I abstract from the uncertainty associated to forecasting interest rates.

Income uncertainty at individual level
    I now describe the measure of permanent income risk of an individual i, who earns labor
income from age H to age H . At age h  [H, H ] the permanent income of the individual is
                                                    i                H
the discounted sum of his remaining income stream, yj                j =h
                                                                            , and it is equal to

                                          i      i          i                H         i
                                         yh +1  yh +2      yH                       yj
                         Yhi       i
                                  yh   +       + 2 + ... + H -h =                         ,                (1)
                                          R      R        R                 j =h
                                                                                   R j -h

where R is the gross risk-free interest rate fixed at population level (i.e. not individual
                                                                i
specific) and constant over time. Assuming that current income yh is observed at the be-
ginning of age h, the individual is uncertain about the income stream from age h + 1 on-
income data and is collected only every other year for half of this horizon, it is not possible to construct an
analog measure of permanent consumption uncertainty (i.e. one that refers to lifetime consumption). How-
ever, I do find that for ad-hoc forecast horizons there is a positive correlation between standard deviation of
the forecast error of labor income and that of consumption. For example, for 2 and 6-years-ahead forecast
horizons the correlation is 0.433 and 0.367, respectively.
  10
     Note that uncertainty about permanent income is still the relevant measure of uncertainty even if indi-
viduals are up against borrowing constraints. The presence of borrowing constraints breaks the relationship
between consumption and the level of permanent income, not the risk, and would show up empirically as
lack of precautionary savings.
  11
     A related argument is employed by Strawczynski (1994), who uses the term precautionary bequests in
an analysis of government tax-transfer policies in a model of subsequent, but not overlapping generations
that are subject to income risk.


                                                      7
       i      H
ward, yj      j =h+1
                       , which he forecasts using the information set available at age h, denoted
      i
by   Ih   (to be defined later).12 Let y i
                                       ^j,h      i i
                                            = E yj |Ih be the predicted labor earnings at age
                                                 i
j = h + 1, . . . , H , based on information set Ih . Labor earnings at age j are then equal to

                                             i      i i
                                            yj = E yj |Ih +ei
                                                            j,h ,                                             (2)
                                                       y i
                                                       ^j,h


where ei                                               i
       j,h is the forecast error and is orthogonal to Ih .
     The predicted lifetime labor income as of age h is the discounted sum of the predicted
income stream and it is equal to

                                         i          i                i         H       i
                                       ^h
                                       y   +1,h   y
                                                  ^h  +2,h         y^H,h             y^j,h
                         ^hi  y
                         Y      i
                              ^h,h +            +          + ... +       =                  ,                 (3)
                                           R         R2            RH -h      j =h
                                                                                     R j -h

        i       i
where y^h,h  yh   , by assumption. Therefore, the error in forecasting lifetime labor earnings
as of age h is the difference between realized and predicted permanent income, Y i - Y ^ i , and
                                                                                                      h   h
it is equal to
                                                                  H
                            i
                                 ei
                                  h+1,h   ei
                                           h+2,h         ei
                                                          H,h         ei
                                                                       j,h
                           Eh           +        + ... +      =             .                                 (4)
                                    R       R2           RH -h j =h+1 Rj -h
                                                                                   i
     The permanent income uncertainty for individual i at age h, denoted by Stdi (Eh ), is
defined as the standard deviation of this forecast error and is equal to
                                                                                                  1
                                 H                    H -1             H                          2
                   i
                                     Vari ei j,h            1               Covi ei       i
                                                                                   j,h ; ek,h
             Stdi Eh =                      -
                                                 +2                                                   .       (5)
                              j =h+1
                                      R 2(j   h)
                                                    j =h+1
                                                           R -h
                                                            j
                                                                     k=j +1
                                                                                R k -h

The derivation of this result can be found in Section A.1 of Appendix A. This is a direct
measure of permanent income uncertainty, that does not require imposing any restrictions
on the statistical process of the forecast errors and allows for arbitrarily complex processes
for income shocks.13
  12                         i
     The assumption that yh    is observed at the beginning of age h is analogous to the recursive formulation
of the life cycle model in which current labor income is a state variable.
  13
     Alternatively, it can be assumed, as it is often the case in the literature, that shocks to current income y
                                                                                                                ~h
can be decomposed into a permanent component zh (persistent or random walk) and a transitory component
h (usually iid) as follows:

                                              y
                                              ~h   =    zh + h
                                              zh   =    zh-1 + h ,
           2                                 2     2
with h  0,   and h  (0,  ). The parameters ,   and   can then be used to calculate the


                                                        8
Income uncertainty at sector level

    There are various obstacles in directly implementing the measure of uncertainty pre-
viously described, even in longitudinal datasets as the PSID. First, it requires observing
individuals over their entire career. This is not possible for respondents who have entered
the survey mid-career, respondents who are still working or respondents who drop out of the
survey. Second, even if one were to try to bypass this by estimating individual level income
processes like the one described in footnote 13, often times parameters would be estimated
based on a handful of observations per respondent, and thus very noisy. Lastly, the measure
is subject to attenuation bias as a consequence of measurement error in income, which is a
known problem of survey data like the PSID.
    Instead, I take an alternative route and project permanent income uncertainty on doubtlessly
influencing factors such as industry and occupation, following the tradition of the precau-
tionary saving literature.14 For example, Cubas and Silos (2017) and Cubas and Silos (2018)
provide evidence that the size of income shocks varies by industry and occupation, respec-
tively. Therefore, I construct the measure of income uncertainty previously described at
sector level, where a sector s is an industry-occupation pair. The permanent income uncer-
tainty for an individual of age h working in sector s is then equal to
                                                                                              1
                               H                     H -1           H                         2
                  i
                                   Vars ei  j,h            1             Covs ei      i
                                                                               j,h ; ek,h
            Stds Eh =                     -
                                                +2                                                ,      (6)
                            j =h+1
                                    R 2(j   h )
                                                   j =h+1
                                                          R -h
                                                           j
                                                                  k=j +1
                                                                             Rk-h

where the generic term Vars ei
                             j,h is the cross-sectional variance of the forecast errors of all
individuals of age h who are forecasting age j > h earnings and are in sector s at the time of
the forecast. Similarly, the generic term Covs ei      i
                                                j,h ; ek,h is the cross-sectional covariance of
the forecast errors of age j and age k earnings, made by age h individuals working in sector s
at the time of the forecast. Note that this measure allows for sector changes over the career.
What matters is the sector in which an individual is at the time the forecast is made.
    Projecting individual level uncertainty on sectors mitigates the bias introduced by poten-
standard deviation of the forecast error of lifetime earnings as I define it (see Carroll and Samwick (1997)
and Feigenbaum and Li (2012) for estimates of these parameters at individual level, and Guvenen (2007),
Karahan and Ozkan (2013) and Guvenen and Smith (2014), among others, for estimates at population level,
i.e. for certain demographic groups). In fact, this is the procedure I implement in the calibration of the
quantitative model in Section 3. Therefore, the measure of permanent income uncertainty that I define is
not to be confused with the standard deviation of the permanent component of current income,  . The
latter is only a component of the standard deviation of the forecast error of lifetime earnings.
   14
      Projecting income risk on industry and occupation is a practice often used in the precautionary savings
literature. Examples are Carroll and Samwick (1998) and Kennickell and Lusardi (2005), among many
others.


                                                     9
tial measurement error in earnings in the survey. If existent, measurement error ultimately
shows up in the forecast errors used to calculate the permanent income uncertainty, and
affects the distribution of permanent income risk across individuals of a given age, which
is one of the main sources of variation used to identify dynastic precautionary savings. If,
given age, measurement error is assumed to be independent and identically distributed across
sectors and uncorrelated with the true forecast error of labor earnings, then measuring per-
manent income uncertainty at sector level preserves the distribution of permanent income
uncertainty across sectors. The formal discussion of this argument is in Appendix A.2.

The content of the information set Ih

   To compute the forecast error of lifetime earnings a stand must be taken on the content
of the information set Ih used to predict labor earnings at ages j > h. I assume that
individuals' expectations make rational use of the same conditioning information available
to the econometrician and include in the information set characteristics of the individual that
are know with certainty at the time the future income stream is predicted. In particular, I
assume that age j labor earnings yj predicted by an individual i of age h = H, . . . , j - 1 and
working in sector s are given by

                               i
                              yj = 0 + g  1 , Xi          i
                                               h + 3 tj +ej,h ,                             (7)
                                              y
                                              ^j,h


where the function g is linear in the vector of observables Xi
                                                             h . The latter includes current
and lagged income, an age polynomial, dummies for current educational attainment, marital
                                                         i      i
status, race and family size. Current and lagged income yh and yh -1 are included to control
for the persistence of income over time. Omitting them would result in larger forecast errors,
as individuals on a steep income profile would mechanically translate high observed income
into a large forecast error. Finally, tj is a time trend for the year when the individual is of
age j and is meant to capture the effects of aggregate economic growth on future income.
I estimate equation (7) for each sector s and use the errors ei
                                                              j,h to compute the sector level
permanent income uncertainty as described in equation (6).
   I perform two robustness exercises. First, I acknowledge the possibility that households
may plan ahead and know more than the econometrician about their future self, especially
when the forecast horizon is small. To that end, I augment Ih with a vector of demograph-
ics Xi
     j that are available in the survey and could potentially be known in advance by the




                                               10
individual.15 These include marital status, family size and educational attainment at the
projection horizon j . Second, I build on the evidence in Guvenen (2009) that income growth
rates are individual specific. To the extent individuals learn about their specific slopes over
time, failing to account for this magnifies forecast errors. I attempt to control for the ef-
fect of individual specific growth rates by augmenting Ih with the last forecast error of an
individual.16


2.2       Data description
Having laid out the theoretical framework for measuring permanent income uncertainty, I
now turn to describing the data sets used in the analysis. The data are drawn from two
sources: PSID and CEX. I use the PSID to construct the sector level permanent income
risk measure previously described, and to form parent-child pairs for the main estimation.
I use the CEX to impute total consumption in the years in which the PSID only collected
information on food consumption and housing.

Sample selection.       The main data source is the PSID, which contains longitudinal infor-
mation on a representative sample of US individuals and families. The PSID started in 1968,
collecting information on a sample of approximately 5, 000 households. In the following years
both the original families and their splitoffs (children moving out of the parent household)
have been followed. This is the essential feature of the survey that makes it suitable for
the analysis in this paper. The PSID data were collected annually until 1996 and biennially
starting in 1997. However, retrospective information on labor income in the past two years
is collected in each of the biennial waves, so there are no gaps in labor income induced by
this change in survey frequency.
       To estimate the profile of income uncertainty I use information on the pre-tax labor
earnings of the head of the household from all the waves of the survey, from 1968 to 2013.
I apply fairly standard criteria when constructing the sample. First, I exclude households
from the Survey of Economic Opportunity sample (low-income supplemental sample) and
Latino sample to avoid any selection issues. Second, since the uncertainty measure pre-
viously defined refers to the human capital component of permanent income, I focus on
individuals of working age, so I restrict the sample to heads of age between 22 and 65 who
are either employed or not employed. Third, I exclude the observations with top coded an-
  15
    The likelihood of these being known in advance decreases as the forecast horizon increases.
  16
    For example, for an individual who is 23 and predicts age 24 income, the last forecast error he made
(and is aware of at the time of the forecast) was at 22, when predicting age 23 income.


                                                  11
nual labor earnings and I winsorize the earnings variable at the 99th percentile to minimize
the bias caused by outliers and measurement error. I express earnings in 1996 US dollars.
Fourth, a stand must be taken regarding the treatment of respondents with zero earnings.
Eliminating them would shut down the uncertainty that comes from the extensive margin,
thus underestimating the true uncertainty of permanent income. Instead, I impute labor
earnings for such observations based on an estimated government transfer function, which is
discussed in detail in Appendix A.3.17 Finally, I drop all entries with missing information in
labor earnings and any of the demographic characteristics used in estimating equation (7),
as well as all individuals with fewer than 3 observations. The resulting sample has 126, 476
observations corresponding to 9, 046 individuals.
    A sector s is defined as an industry-occupation pair, with the exception of the `unemploy-
ment sector' which includes all individuals that are not employed at the time of the income
forecast. Starting from 8 major industry groups, I expand along 5 major occupation groups.
I aggregate some occupations further, based on the distribution of annual labor earnings as
summarized by the coefficient of variation. The procedure yields a total of 17 sectors listed
in Table 7 in Appendix A.4.18 In forecasting permanent income, an individual is assigned
to a sector based on his industry and occupation at the time of the forecast. This allows for
transition between sectors over the course of a worker's career.19

Parent-child pairs.        I test for the existence of dynastic precautionary savings on a sample
of matched pairs of parents and children, constructed using the PSID Family Identification
Mapping System. If a parent has n > 1 children, I treat that as n parent-child pairs. This
might affect the estimation results via two channels. First, parents of multiple children
working in different sectors can hedge against dynastic uncertainty, biasing the estimates
downwards. In a later section I show that the strength of the dynastic precautionary motive
for any one child does not vary with the number of children. Second, errors might be
serially correlated between such pairs, contaminating the standard errors and implicitly the
inference. I account for this by clustering the standard errors at parent level.
  17
     I use the same estimated government transfer function to impute earnings for observations with positive
annual labor earnings smaller than $200, which are likely to be measured with error.
  18
     Tables 8 and 9 in Appendix A.4 report descriptive statistics regarding the sector size and distribution
of earnings. Because some sectors are smaller than others, there may be noise in estimating the variances
and covariances that enter the measure of permanent income risk. This poses a problem for the subse-
quent regression analysis, where permanent income risk enters as a generated regressor. I address this by
bootstrapping standard errors of regression coefficient estimates.
  19
     For example, if an individual works as a construction worker at 25, his forecast errors as of age 25 will
enter the measure of income uncertainty of construction workers of age 25. If at 26 he works as a trans-
portation worker, his forecast errors as of age 26 enter the measure of income uncertainty of transportation
workers of age 26.


                                                     12
       The analysis requires demographic and economic information for both parent and matched
child (e.g. parent and child income, parent and child sector, just to name a few). Therefore,
I restrict the sample to those pairs in which the child is a splitoff.20 In addition, given that
the income uncertainty measure constructed here refers to heads that are at least 22 years
old, I drop those pairs in which the splitoff child is not a head or is younger than 22. I also
drop those pairs for which the age difference between the parent and the child is lower than
20 years or which have fewer than 4 entries in the sample. The resulting sample has 1525
parent-child pairs observed between 4 and 21 times over the sample period. The oldest child
is 59 years old, while the age of parents ranges between 42 and 80 years old.

Consumption series.         The empirical exercise in this paper requires data on consumption
or savings. PSID collected information on household wealth across 11 interview waves. Re-
searchers who use this information define savings as the change in wealth net of debt between
two time periods (e.g. Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes (2004)). The measure is rather noisy and
limited to the existing wealth supplements. Instead, I choose to focus on consumption ex-
penditure.21 This decision is motivated both by the fact that consumption data is arguably
less noisy, and by the fact that in some models of dynastic precautionary saving the wealth
position of different generations is not identified.22
       With this approach, I face the problem that in the early waves of PSID information
about consumption is limited to spending on food and rent. To overcome this, I follow
the strategy of Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008), who use the CEX to estimate the
demand for food (available in both surveys) as a function of total consumption expenditure,
relative prices and household characteristics, and then invert it to obtain a measure of total
consumption expenditure in PSID. Since CEX data is only available starting 1980, I am able
to construct the PSID measure of total consumption from 1981 until 2003 (calendar years
1980-2002), with breaks in 1988 and 1989 when PSID did not collect any information of food
expenditure. The details of the procedure are discussed in Appendix A.5. For the survey
years 2005-2011, the consumption information in PSID is rich and consistent enough in
terms of categories covered to be used on its own. I aggregate these consumption categories
following the guidelines in Andreski et al. (2014).
  20
     A splitoff child is a child who moved out from the parent's house and established his own household.
Therefore, his demographic and economic information is collected separately from the parent's.
  21
     For robustness, I also verify how savings respond to permanent income risk. While the estimates are
qualitatively consistent with the presence of (dynastic) precautionary saving motives, the standard errors
are fairly large.
  22
     Examples of such models are in Becker (1974), Laitner (1992), Fuster, Imrohoroglu and Imrohoroglu
(2007), Imrohoroglu and Zhao (2018), among others. Other conceptual settings are summarized by Michel,
Thibault and Vidal (2006).


                                                   13
       I construct two measures of consumption expenditure. The first one includes only ex-
penditure on non-durable consumption goods and services (food, utilities, personal care,
transportation, health, education, etc.), and is the benchmark measure. The second mea-
sure of consumption also includes expenditure on durables (furniture, jewelry, cars, etc.). I
examine both measures because expenditure on durables might affect utility for more than
one period.


2.3       Uncertainty characterization
I now turn to characterizing the age profile of permanent income uncertainty. I compute the
permanent income uncertainty measure described in equation (6) using a gross interest rate R
of 1.04.23 Because this uncertainty measure is unit of measurement dependent (in particular,
       i
Stds (Eh ) is measured in US dollars), in what follows I report the standard deviation of the
forecast error divided by expected permanent income.24
       I begin by examining the income uncertainty estimated under the baseline information
set. The average age profile of income uncertainty, normalized by permanent income, is dis-
played in Figure 1. Permanent income uncertainty is high at young ages and declines during
the twenties and thirties. By the age of 40 approximately half of the relative uncertainty is
resolved. Afterwards, it decreases at a lower pace, with only an extra 15% being resolved
until mid fifties. As retirement age approaches, the resolution of uncertainty accelerates.
The figure implies that relative permanent income uncertainty is very high, with an average
over age and sectors of 56%. A similar magnitude is implied by a calibrated income process
with relatively standard parameter values, as will be shown in Section 3. The age profiles at
sector level are displayed in Figures 8-9 in Appendix A. The correlation between permanent
income uncertainty and permanent income across sectors is 0.61, meaning that sectors that
are subject to high risk also exhibit high levels of permanent income.
       The fact that uncertainty is downward sloping over age is not an artifact of a shorter
forecast horizon. Figure 2 shows, for each age, the relative standard deviation of the 1-
year-ahead to the 10-year-ahead forecast errors. Specifically, each line in the figure plots
                               Vars (ei )
the average over sectors s of E yi |Ij,h  , for a forecast horizon j - h  [1, 10] and a given
                               s( j h)
                                      i

age h  [22, 55]. The fact that each of the lines in the figure is upward sloping shows that
the longer the forecast horizon is, the less precise forecasts are. However, over age forecasts
  23
   In Section 2.4 I show that the estimates of dynastic (precautionary) savings are larger when R = 1.03.
  24
   Appendix A.6 contains additional details on the estimation of the projection equation (7) and the
measurement of expected permanent income.



                                                   14
                                                             1.6


                                                             1.4




                   S.d. of forecast error/permanent income
                                                             1.2


                                                              1


                                                             0.8


                                                             0.6


                                                             0.4


                                                             0.2


                                                              0
                                                                   20   25   30   35   40         45   50   55   60   65
                                                                                            Age

         Figure 1: Age Profile of Income Uncertainty Relative to Permanent Income

Notes: The average uncertainty profile is the average over the age profiles of uncertainty at sector level
weighted by the number of observations in each sector (Table 9 in Appendix A). The solid black line is
obtained by fitting a local linear regression with bandwidth equal to 2 to the thus constructed average
uncertainty. The dashed gray lines represent the 95% bootstrapped confidence interval.


become more precise, as implied by lower relative standard deviations.
   As previously stated, I explore robustness with respect to the information set on which
income forecasts are based by (i) assuming individuals have perfect knowledge of their future
educational attainment, marital status and family size at all horizons at the time at which
they make the forecast and (ii) using past forecast errors in forecasting future income to
capture the possibility of learning about individual specific slopes. I find the latter has
negligible effects on measured permanent income risk, but the former reduces measured
income uncertainty relative to permanent income, on average, by approximately 6%. The
difference is largest at young ages. This is, however, a rather extreme case as the likelihood of
individuals having the aforementioned information about their future selves decreases with
the forecast horizon.
   In the next section I exploit differences in uncertainty across age and sectors to estimate
the effect of own and dynastic uncertainty on parental consumption. This is a fruitful
strategy insofar as there is enough variation in the level of permanent income uncertainty
across sectors and in the speed at which it resolves over age. That is likely to be the case.
The coefficient of variation of the level of permanent income uncertainty averages at 36%


                                                                                       15
                    S.d. of 1 to 10-year ahead forecast error (rel. to income)
                                                                                 1.4




                                                                                 1.2




                                                                                  1




                                                                                 0.8




                                                                                 0.6




                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                       20   25   30   35   40         45   50   55   60   65
                                                                                                                Age

Figure 2: Relative Standard Deviation of the 1 to 10-years-ahead Income Forecast, by Age

Notes: Each line in the figure shows, for a given age, the relative standard deviation of the 1 to 10-years-
ahead labor income forecast. For example, the first line corresponds to the 1 to 10-years-ahead forecast made
at age 22, and the last line corresponds to the forecast made at age 55.


and that of the 1-year change in permanent income uncertainty (slope) averages at 22%. I
find little variation across sectors in the speed at which uncertainty resolves in the twenties,
suggesting that rapid resolution of uncertainty early in the career is a feature common to all
industries and occupations. See Figure 10 in Appendix A.6 for a visual depiction of these
results.


2.4        Empirical Estimation
I begin my analysis with an examination of the age profile of consumption expenditure of
parents. This serves purely as suggestive evidence for the existence of a dynastic precau-
tionary motive. Next, I test for dynastic precautionary saving directly, by building on the
standard precautionary saving argument that implies a negative consumption response to
uncertainty in permanent income. Extending this argument to include intergenerational
considerations of the type entailed by altruism a
                                                ` la Barro (1974) implies that parental con-
sumption responds negatively to uncertainty related to the child's permanent income. I test
for this in a regression setting.




                                                                                                           16
Life-cycle consumption patterns for parents

I construct the age profile of consumption by estimating the following specification on the
sample of respondents who are parents:25

                      cit = 0 +  age f (Ageit ) +  c Cohi + t Dt +  x Xit + it .                             (8)

In this specification, cit is the logarithm of the equivalized consumption expenditure of
household i in year t.26 The terms f (Ageit ) and Cohi are, respectively, a quartic polynomial
in age and a full vector of cohort dummies, both referring to the head of the household,
and Dt is a vector of normalized year dummies that capture cyclical fluctuations.27 Xit is
a vector of demographic and economic characteristics of the household head that includes
a college dummy, a race dummy, dummies for family size, and a dummy for whether the
head is working or not. The latter warrants some discussion. Aguiar and Hurst (2013) show
that work-related expenses account for the entire decline in non-durable expenditures after
middle age, coincident with the peak in market labor supply for the average household. Their
work implies that, upon conditioning on working status, consumption should not drop after
retirement. Later in this section, I compare the age profiles of consumption of parents and
non-parents. Controlling for working status eliminates differences between the two groups
in spending patterns over age that may result from different shares of work-related expenses
in total spending. Lastly, it is the residual term.
       Figure 3 displays the estimated age profile of parental consumption. Results are only
shown for consumption of non-durables and services, which includes health and education
expenses, but non-durable expenditure net of health and education as well as total con-
sumption expenditure exhibit a similar pattern, so results are not driven by realized medical
expenses. The consumption profile has the hump-shaped pattern over the working life that
has been previously documented, with the peak occurring in the late thirties. The new
feature is that parental consumption is backloaded late in life.28 This suggests that there
is a precautionary motive at play in this stage of the life cycle. The argument derives from
the theory of precautionary saving: in the face of income uncertainty, individuals postpone
  25
     A respondent is classified as parent if any of following criteria is met: (1) respondent has positive number
of total births, (2) respondent reported having a child under 18 living in the household in any wave of the
survey. All other respondents are classified as non-parents.
  26
     Equivalized consumption is obtained by dividing household consumption by the OECD equivalence
scale. The OECD equivalence scale is defined as ES = 1 + 0.7 × (number of adult members - 1) + 0.5 ×
number of children.
  27
     The normalization is as in Aguiar and Hurst (2013).
  28
     This also holds by working status.


                                                       17
current consumption in favor of precautionary saving against bad income realizations. As
uncertainty resolves, consumption increases, thus generating a consumption profile that is
backloaded over age. For parents in the data, the backloading postdates the resolution of
uncertainty in their own income stream, but coincides with times at which their children are
in the beginning or prime of their careers and still resolving their income risk.
                                                   11




                                                   10
                    Thousands of 1996 US dollars




                                                   9




                                                   8




                                                   7




                                                   6
                                                        25   35   45          55   65   75
                                                                        Age

                 Figure 3: Age Profile of Consumption Expenditure of Parents

Notes: The figure shows the age profile of consumption of non-durables and services for parents in the black
solid line, together with the 95% confidence interval in the gray dashed lines. The profiles are constructed
using the estimates of  age from equation (8). Gray circles are the non-parametric estimates. The sample
has 57, 980 observations.


    Naturally, risk in children's income is not the only type of uncertainty elderly face. Two
other sources that have been previously examined in the literature are uncertain medical
expenses and mortality risk (see de Nardi, French and Jones (2016b) for a survey). While
these too resolve with age, and are thus consistent with a backloaded consumption profile,
they affect all individuals, which means that the consumption of non-parents should exhibit
the same qualitative pattern. This is not the case. Figure 4 shows that the consumption
of non-parents continues to decline after retirement, albeit at a lower rate. Note, however,
that results for non-parents are noisier, especially at older age. This is a consequence of the
fact that the sample of non-parents is very small. In particular, the sample of parents is
7.5 times larger than the one of non-parents. Conditional on individuals being older than
60, there are 13 times more parents than non-parents. The small non-parent sample size


                                                                   18
together with the issue of selection into parenthood are among the main reasons why in the
following section I present an alternative identification approach.
                                                   17



                                                   15
                    Thousands of 1996 US dollars


                                                   13



                                                   11



                                                   9



                                                   7



                                                   5
                                                        25   35   45          55   65    75
                                                                        Age

              Figure 4: Age Profile of Consumption Expenditure of Non-Parents

Notes: The figure shows the age profile of consumption of non-durables and services for non-parents in
the black solid line, together with the 95% confidence interval in the gray dashed lines. The profiles are
constructed using the estimates of  age from equation (8). Gray circles are the non-parametric estimates.
The sample has 7, 730 observations.


   The difference between the consumption profiles of parents and non-parents late in life
could potentially be justified by increasing monetary transfers from children to their parents.
This is unlikely to be the sole, or even the main driver of the observed difference. Data
on monetary transfers between parents and their children from the PSID Family Rosters
and Transfers Module show that only 5.2% of respondents report having received monetary
transfers from their children. This fraction is increasing in age (albeit with large fluctuations)
but, conditional on positive transfers, there is no trend in the amount transfered.

Estimates exploiting age and sectoral differences

I now present the results of a regression analysis of the effect of dynastic uncertainty on
parental consumption. The baseline specification for exploring this effect is

                           p   p   p       p            p        p
                    cpit = 0 + t + 1 phs + 2 chs + Xpit 3 + Xcit 4 +                    pit ,         (9)



                                                                   19
where cpit is the logarithm of the consumption of parent household i in year t, phs is the
logarithm of the permanent income uncertainty (as defined in equation (6)) of the parent and
is assigned based on the age h and the sector s in which the head of the parent household i is in
year t, while chs is the logarithm of the permanent income uncertainty of the child, assigned
                                                                                       p
based on the age h and the sector s in which the child of the parent i is in year t.29 t are time
fixed effects, and Xpit and Xcit are vectors of demographic and economic controls included to
deal with various selection concerns. They contain, for both the parent and the child: a full
set of age dummies meant to capture consumption patterns that stem from pure life cycle
considerations, dummies for marital status, race, gender, educational attainment, family size,
as well as permanent income Y^hs (as defined in equation (17)) and wealth holdings.30 These
controls not only shape consumption, but are also potential determinants of occupation and
industry choices.
       There are three concerns regarding the implementation of this regression analysis. First,
permanent income uncertainty is a generated regressor. This yields consistent estimates
of the coefficients, but inconsistent estimates of their standard errors, as argued by Pagan
(1984) and Murphy and Topel (1985). To address this concern, I report bootstrap estimates
of the standard errors.31 Second, there is a measurement error concern regarding the con-
sumption variable on the left hand side due to the imputation procedure in the early years
of the survey, and potential misreporting of consumption in the later years. I assume that,
if present, measurement error in consumption is multiplicative in levels and uncorrelated
with the explanatory variables.32 Third, age and sector enter equation (9) in a restricted
way, through the measure of permanent income uncertainty in equation (6). An obvious
  29
     Note the assumption that permanent income risk varies by age h and by sector s, but not by time t.
The time-invariance assumption is dictated by data limitations, as the survey is not yet long enough to fully
observe two generations.
  30
     In the years that are not covered in the wealth supplement I impute household wealth holdings by using
a budget constraint equation and the series for consumption. Because 34.64% of children and 12.44% of
parents have zero or negative wealth, wealth controls are in levels. Taking logarithm would amount to
dropping 39.86% of the sample. For comparison, I also express permanent income in levels. I control for
permanent labor income and wealth to capture potential non-homotheticity of preferences. For robustness,
I also estimate equation (9) without wealth controls, as well as with controls for the slope of permanent
income. In both cases I obtain results that are not statistically different from those reported in the paper.
  31
     I employ the following two-step bootstrapping algorithm to compute standard errors. First, I draw a
random sample with replacement from the full sample of parents and non-parents and repeat the permanent
income uncertainty calculation described in Section 2.3. This yields a new value of permanent income
uncertainty. Second, within this sample, I match parents and children and then estimate equation (9) with
the new value of permanent income uncertainty. I store the OLS coefficients. I repeat this two-step procedure
500 times. The bootstrapped standard errors of the point estimates of the coefficients in equation (9) are the
corresponding standard deviations in the sample of 500 coefficient estimates resulting from this procedure.
  32
     Under this assumption the estimates are consistent, but the inference is subject to Type I error.



                                                     20
alternative is a statistical model in which they are not restricted by such a functional form.
I estimate such an unrestricted model, in which I add interaction terms between age and
sector dummies, for both the parent and the child, and perform a likelihood-ratio test. I fail
to reject the null of the restricted model in favor of the unrestricted one.33
       Because models of two-sided altruism, as well as various setups of models of one-sided
altruism, are expected to imply that child's consumption also responds to the parent's per-
manent income uncertainty (in addition to that of own income), I estimate the following
analogous specification for the child

                            c   c   c       c            c        c
                     ccit = 0 + t + 1 phs + 2 chs + Xpit 3 + Xcit 4 +             cit ,               (10)

where the dependent variable is the logarithm child's consumption ccit and the independent
variables are the same as in the parent's regression. The estimation results are presented
in Table 1. The first two columns display the estimated coefficients in regression equations
(9) and (10) when the dependent variable is consumption expenditure on non-durables and
services. The last two columns display the same results, but with consumption augmented
to include expenditure on durables, health and education.
                                                         p
       Of main interest in this paper is the estimate of 2 , which captures the strength of the
dynastic precautionary saving motive. Regardless of the consumption measure considered,
after controlling for an extensive set of covariates, the response of parental consumption
to the uncertainty in the child's permanent income is negative and statistically significant.
In particular, a 10% increase in dynastic uncertainty is associated with a 0.76% decrease
in parent's consumption of non-durables and services, and a 0.79% decrease of his total
consumption. A back of the envelope calculation suggest that parents of children younger
than 40 consume, on average, $2, 528 less per year because at that stage most of their
children's permanent income uncertainty is yet to be resolved. See Table 10 in Appendix
A.7 for a stratification of the results by permanent income.
       To better grasp the magnitude of the estimates of the dynastic precautionary motive,
consider the case of three identical parents whose children are also identical, except for the
sector in which they work.34 In particular, their respective children work, in increasing order
of the associated income risk, as a services worker, a construction worker and a financier.
The estimates imply that the annual consumption of the parent of the construction worker is
  33
     To perform the likelihood-ratio test, I estimate with maximum likelihood equation (9) and an augmented
equation in which I add interaction terms between age and sector dummies, for both the parent and the
child. The likelihood ratio is 1986.34 and the corresponding critical value at 5% is 1190.69.
  34
     Here, identical means fixing all elements of Xp and Xc .


                                                    21
            Table 1: Regression of Consumption on Permanent Income Uncertainty

                                 Non-durables and services                Total consumption

                                 Parent's           Child's           Parent's            Child's
                               consumption       consumption        consumption        consumption

                                 -0.089              -0.035            -0.082              -0.040
     Parent's uncertainty
                                  (0.042)           (0.038)            (0.044)            (0.039)
                                 -0.076             -0.151             -0.079            -0.147
     Child's uncertainty
                                  (0.038)            (0.059)            (0.037)           (0.059)
                Xp
                                 0.249               -0.021            0.258               -0.032
     Marital status
                                 (0.024)            (0.028)            (0.024)            (0.027)
                                 0.133               -0.014            0.136               -0.022
     Race
                                 (0.023)            (0.033)            (0.023)            (0.034)
                                 0.260              0.189            0.25747             0.178
     Educ: some college
                                 (0.015)            (0.015)            (0.015)           (0.015)
                                 0.278              0.056              0.271             0.083
     Educ: college degree
                                 (0.015)            (0.014)            (0.015)           (0.015)
                                 0.114              0.056              0.114             0.058
     Permanent income
                                 (0.015)            (0.011)            (0.015)           (0.011)
                                 0.036              0.012              0.036             0.012
     Asset holdings
                                 (0.002)            (0.001)            (0.002)           (0.001)
                Xc
                                 -0.058             0.163             -0.061             0.178
     Marital status
                                  (0.012)           (0.017)            (0.012)           (0.016)
                                  -0.023            0.300               -0.018           0.301
     Gender
                                  (0.014)           (0.019)            (0.014)           (0.019)
                                 0.101              0.108              0.097             0.105
     Educ: some college
                                 (0.013)            (0.017)            (0.013)           (0.017)
                                 0.171              0.183              0.166             0.179
     Educ: college degree
                                 (0.013)            (0.017)            (0.013)           (0.017)
                                  0.014             0.064             0.014               0.05
     Permanent income
                                  (0.005)           (0.011)            (0.005)            (0.011)
                                 0.010              0.046              0.010             0.046
     Asset holdings
                                 (0.002)            (0.003)            (0.002)           (0.003)
                                10.223             11.341             10.232             11.293
     Constant
                                 (0.431)            (0.671)            (0.428)            (0.674)

     R2                            0.304             0.286              0.295              0.287
     Sample size                  8, 851             8, 330             8, 861             8, 323

Notes: Table entries are coefficient estimates from equations (9)-(10). Omitted explanatory variables are
time fixed effects, full set age age and family size dummies (for both parent and child). Dummy variables
are equal to 1 if married, white and make. The omitted education groups is high-school degree. Bootstraped
standard errors clustered at parent and child level, respectively, are in parentheses.  significant at 10%; 
significant at 5%;  significant at 1%




                                                    22
between 4 and 1% lower that that of the parent of the services worker, and that the relative
consumption of the parent of the financier is even lower, with the gap fluctuating between 6
and 8.5%.35 Figure 12 in Appendix A.7 offers a visual depiction of this calculation.
                        p     c
       The estimates of 1 and 2 capture the strength of the precautionary saving motive from
one's own permanent income uncertainty and are both negative and statistically significant.
Note that precautionary saving appears to be stronger for the child than for the parent
(^p = -0.089 and  ^c = -0.151). The reason for this difference lies in the age composition
  1                2
of the two groups, as children in the sample are a younger group than the parents (22-59 vs.
42-80). Gourinchas and Parker (2002) show that buffer saving is particularly important early
                                                          c
in life, until about mid forties. Lastly, the estimate of 1 captures the response of child's
consumption to the parent's permanent income uncertainty. While negative, this effect is
not statistically significant.
       I now turn to discussing a few concerns regarding the results presented thus far, as well
as robustness of the findings to alternative specifications.

Health status and selection into risky sectors

There are two major concerns for identification. One is that working in certain occupations
and industries has consequences for workers' health risk and implicitly their life expectancy
(mortality risk). As previously discussed, such precautionary motives also depress consump-
tion. I address this issue by including controls for the self-reported health status of parents
and children, respectively, the assumption being that current health status is related to
health risk. Health status is classified as: (i) excellent or very good, (ii) good or fair, or (iii)
poor, the latter being the baseline group in the estimation.36
       Another concern is individuals' attitude towards risk, insofar it is not captured by covari-
ates. Individuals who are more risk tolerant may choose to work in riskier sectors and, at
the same time, hold less precautionary wealth. This would render consumption less respon-
sive to uncertainty resolution, meaning that the precautionary motive is even larger than
what I estimate. Similarly, children who know their parents accumulate savings may choose
to work in riskier sectors. This could be addressed by including child fixed effects in the
estimation, in which case changes in the child's sector should be followed by changes in the
parent's consumption. However, for a given parent-child pair, there are on average 3 sector
  35                                                                           i             i
    The relative parental consumption gap is given by -0.081 × ln Stds Eh        - ln Std15 Eh , s  {3, 11}.
  36
    This variable has been continuously collected since 1984. Another alternative for assessing health risk
is aggregating information on various diseases collected since 1999, but the limited time coverage of these
variables makes it unlikely to be able to distinguish anything statistically from the benchmark results.



                                                    23
transitions on the side of the child over the entire duration of the sample, which is not nearly
enough variation to pick up any effect.
       I perform two types of exercises to further address this concern. First, I estimate the
probability that a child moves from a low to a high risk sector conditional on his parent
being unemployed. The parent's employment status is arguably exogenous to the child's
sector assignment. Therefore, if children whose parents have lost their jobs are less likely to
move to riskier sectors, then this type of selection is indeed a concern. I find that, if anything,
children whose parents are unemployed are more likely to switch to a high risk sector.37 This
effect is however small and not statistically significant. Second, I estimate equation (9) by
simultaneously excluding from the sample the pairs in which the child is self-employed, a
group for which self-selection is presumably more likely to occur, and augmenting the vector
of covariates Xc with dummies for the child's initial sector, based on the presumption that a
child's first sector choice may be influenced by the parent's wealth and that all sector changes
a child goes through after the first sector choice are exogenous to the parent's consumption-
saving behavior.38
       Table 2 reports results for consumption of non-durables and services (see Table 11 in
Appendix A.7 for results for total consumption).39 Column (1) reproduces the baseline
estimates, to facilitate comparison. Columns (2) and (3) show estimates from separately
controlling for health risk and selection, and Column (4) shows estimates from simultaneously
addressing these two concerns. Point estimates of precautionary and dynastic precautionary
motives are a slightly smaller than the benchmark when factoring in health risk and selection,
but the difference is not statistically significant.
Other robustness tests

       The main results of the estimation are qualitatively and quantitatively robust to a wide
range of specifications. First, I consider the sensitivity of the results to controlling for the
  37
       The exact specification I estimate is:

                      Pr (switcht,t+1 |emp parentt , Xt ) =  +  × emp parentt +  (Xt  ) ,                  (11)

where switcht,t+1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if between two consecutive periods the child moved from
a low risk to a high risk sector, emp parentt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the parent is unemployed
at time t and Xt is a vector of controls for the child's age, marital status, educational attainment and family
size, as well as year dummies. I estimate equation (11) as a linear probability model, as well as a probit
model. Irrespective of the specification, the point estimate of  is actually positive, but very small and never
significantly different from zero. I also consider longer parental unemployment spells (i.e. control for both
emp parentt and emp parentt-1 ) and obtain simiar results.
   38
      There are 923 pairs with a self-employed child in the sample, representing 10% of the initial sample size.
   39
      For space considerations, in this and all subsequent robustness exercises, I only report the estimates of
interest for the discussion, but all regressions have the full set of controls enumerated in equation (9).


                                                      24
                                Table 2: Importance of Health and Selection

                                    Baseline         Only health     Only selection      Health and
                                                      controls         controls       selection controls
                                       (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)

                                     -0.089            -0.077           -0.074            -0.061
         Parent's uncertainty
                                      (0.042)           (0.037)          (0.036)           (0.031)
                                     -0.076             -0.059          -0.080             -0.065
         Child's uncertainty
                                      (0.038)          (0.039)           (0.034)           (0.037)

Notes: Table entries are estimates of the effect of permanent income uncertainty on parental consumption of
non-durables and services. Column (1) reproduces the estimates in Table 1. Column (2) reports the estimates
when the parent's and child's health status is included in the set of controls. Column (3) shows results
controlling for the child's initial sector and excluding self-employed children. Column (4) shows estimates
when simultaneously controlling for health status, initial sector and excluding self-employed children from
the sample. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at parent level are in parentheses.  significant at 10%;

   significant at 5%;  significant at 1%



heterogeneity of the bequest motive. If some parents are more altruistic than others and
their response to children's income risk is a reflection of a more general altruism rather than
a dynastic precautionary saving motive, this would bias upwards the coefficient of dynastic
risk. I address this by (i) examining whether the strength of the dynastic precautionary
saving motive varies with the number of children, a proxy often used in the literature to con-
trol for the strength of the bequest motive (see Hurd (1987) among the earlier papers, and
Lockwood (2012) more recently), and (ii) purposely introducing extreme bequest motive het-
erogeneity in the estimation by appending non-parents, for which the dynastic precautionary
motive is by construction zero, and examining to what extent this biases the coefficient up-
wards.40 Table 3 shows the results for consumption of non-durables and services (see Table
12 in Appendix A.7 for total consumption.) As before, Column (1) reproduces the baseline
estimates. Column (2) shows that the strength of the dynastic precautionary motive does
not vary substantially with the number of children (no two point estimates are statistically
different) and results in Column (3) show that extreme bequest heterogeneity introduces
negligible upward bias.
       Table 4 summarizes sensitivity results to alternative specifications. Columns (1) and
(2) examine the degree to which the consumption imputation procedure biases downwards
the estimates of (dynastic) precautionary motives by either estimating the elasticity of food
consumption to income uncertainty or by using in the estimation only the later years, in which
  40
       Specifically, for non-parents I set the regressor ch,s = 0.



                                                         25
                                Table 3: Importance of the Bequest Motive

                                           Baseline        Child's uncertainty ×      Append
                                                            Number of children      non-parents
                                             (1)                    (2)                 (3)

                                           -0.089                 -0.077              -0.097
         Parent's uncertainty
                                            (0.042)               (0.043)              (0.023)
                                           -0.076                                     -0.078
         Child's uncertainty                                       --
                                            (0.038)                                    (0.038)
                                                                  -0.072
         Child's uncertainty ×1{n=1}         --                                          --
                                                                  (0.037)
                                                                 -0.078
         Child's uncertainty ×1{n=2}         --                                          --
                                                                  (0.037)
                                                                 -0.079
         Child's uncertainty ×1{n=3}         --                                          --
                                                                  (0.037)
                                                                  -0.071
         Child's uncertainty ×1{n=4}         --                                          --
                                                                  (0.037)
                                                                 -0.097
         Child's uncertainty ×1{n5}          --                                          --
                                                                  (0.037)

Notes: Table entries are coefficient estimates of the effect of permanent income uncertainty on parent's
consumption of non-durables and services. Column (1) reproduces the estimates in Table 1. Column (2)
                       p         p
reports estimates of 1   and of 2  by number of children. Column (3) shows estimates when non-parents are
added to the baseline sample, allowing for different intercepts. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at
parent level are in parenthesis.  significant at 10%;  significant at 5%;  significant at 1%



PSID collected information on multiple consumption categories.41 I find a smaller effect on
food consumption and qualitatively consistent but noisier effects on total consumption in
the later years. In neither of these cases the estimates are statistically different from the
benchmark estimates.
       Columns (3) and (4) show that results are also robust to projecting income using infor-
mation about individuals' future selves, as discussed in Section 2.1 (the estimate is noisier
in this case, but not statistically different from the baseline value) and to using a different
interest rate in discounting future income.
  41
    Food consumption is a necessity, making it less likely to respond to income risk. In the early waves of
PSID, I impute consumption based on an inverted food demand equation, so imputed consumption might
inherit the inelastic properties of food. In the case in which I only use the later years in the estimation
( 2005) the sample size is halved.




                                                      26
                                   Table 4: Other Robustness Tests

                                 Food           PSID direct        Forecast w/ info       Discounting
                              consumption       consumption          about future        with R = 1.03
                                               (not imputed)
                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)                  (4)

                                 -0.030          -0.100                -0.074               -0.090
       Parent's uncertainty
                                (0.032)           (0.037)               (0.029)              (0.033)
                                 -0.029            -0.013                -0.053             -0.079
       Child's uncertainty
                                (0.025)           (0.029)               (0.034)              (0.034)

                                                   p     p
Notes: Table entries are coefficient estimates of 1  and 2 from equation (9). Consumption of non-durables
and services is the dependent variable in columns (3) and (4). Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at
parent level are in parenthesis.  significant at 10%;  significant at 5%;  significant at 1%



3       Model
In this section, I build a model of dynastic precautionary saving that is quantitatively con-
sistent with the empirics, which I then use it to evaluate the importance of dynastic pre-
cautionary saving for consumption insurance of the young and for wealth accumulation. In
the model, overlapping generations are altruistically linked and altruism is one-sided, from
the parent to his child.42 The parent and his child decide individually how much to con-
sume and save. In addition, the parent makes monetary transfers to the child. I model
the decision making process between the parent and the child as non-cooperative and with-
out commitment. This modeling choice is appealing because it enables clear predictions
regarding the wealth position of overlapping generations, as well as the size and timing of
inter-vivos transfers, both of which are relevant objects for the counterfactual experiments I
consider.43 It is worth noting that only three model ingredients are needed to qualitatively
generate dynastic precautionary behavior: income risk, incomplete markets, and altruism a
                                                                                        `
la Barro (1974), with the parent valuing the child's utility from consumption.44 This paper
proposes a framework that is also quantitatively consistent with the empirical evidence, and
  42
     This is largely motivated by the fact that only a small number of chilren make monetary transfers to their
parents (Attanasio, Meghir and Mommaerts (2018)) and that, as shown in the previous section, children's
consumption does not respond strongly to the parent's income risk. Later in the section I discuss the effect
that two sided altruism would have on the results.
  43
     This is a characteristic of this class of models that has been previously pointed out by Barczyk and
Kredler (2014a), Barczyk (2016) and Barczyk and Kredler (2016), and is absent in commitment models.
  44
     Dynastic precautionary saving is a force that is embedded in all quantitative models that feature the
aforementioned three elements. For example, it emerges in Nishiyama (2002), Fuster, Imrohoroglu and
Imrohoroglu (2007), Barczyk and Kredler (2014a) , Barczyk (2016), Barczyk and Kredler (2016), Mommaerts
(2015), Imrohoroglu and Zhao (2018), despite of it not being a focus of any of these papers.


                                                      27
contrasts it with the unitary household model ­ a classic framework in this literature.


3.1     Environment
Demographics.           Agents are economically active (i.e. earn income and make decisions)
from age of 22 until the end of age 79, when they die.45 Figure 5 shows the life cycle of two
overlapping generations. When an individual turns 29 his child is born. However, it is not
until the parent turns 51 that his child becomes economically active. At 65 an individual
retires. The generations overlap such that at every point in time only two generations are
economically active, represented by 29 parent-child pairs indexed by the age of the parent
and that of the child. A parent and his child overlap for 29 years.

                               his child  his parent dies         he dies with
                            becomes adult  with prob 1               prob 1
                                      dd
                                           
                                           
                                          ©                            c
           22      29                   51            65             79 E
                    T                                  T
                his child                            he retires
                 is born
                                        22      29                   51           65              79 E

                                  Figure 5: Life Cycle of Individuals


Altruism.        The parent is altruistic towards the child in the spirit of Barro (1974). In
particular, he places a weight  on the utility of the adult child. Upon the death of the
parent, the household wealth is bequeathed to the child. Altruism towards the young child
(younger than 22) is not explicitly modeled.

Household income and sources of uncertainty.                  Household members can earn labor and
asset income. An individual supplies labor inelastically to a sector s for the first 44 periods
of his economic life and earns stochastic labor income y . The sector s in which an individual
works evolves exogenously according to a Markov process. Labor earnings depend on age
and a sector and age specific Markov process. Individuals retire at the of age 65 and earn
constant pension benefit  (·) for the remaining of their life. As described in Section 3.2,
  45
     I introduce uncertain lifespans and medical expense risk in a later section, where I quantify the contri-
bution of dynastic precautionary wealth to total wealth, so the model ought to contain a rich description of
individuals' saving motives. I do not embed these sources of risk in the model from the beginning, nor model
the sector choice as endogenous, because the first goal of the quantitative exercise is to gain insights into
the nature of the parent-child interaction by comparing the empirical estimates of dynastic precautionary
saving (presumably purged of all confounding factors), with those coming from a "clean" environment that
is free of all the endogeneity concerns in the data.


                                                      28
pension income depends on the individuals last income realization prior to retirement in a
way that parsimoniously accounts for lifetime average earnings. Agents hold a single asset
(bond) a issued by the government and face a borrowing constraint. Their asset income
depends on the asset holdings and the gross interest rate R.

Government.         The government levies a proportional tax  on individuals' labor earnings.
The tax revenue and newly issued bonds B are used to finance government expenditure G,
which has no welfare enhancing role, to pay interest R on previously issued bonds B and to
finance retirees' pension income. The government runs a balanced budget:

                                                         ¯,
                                      G + SS + RB = B +  Y

      ¯ denotes aggregate labor earnings of working individuals and SS denotes aggregate
where Y
pension payments to retirees.

Timing.        I impose a particular extensive form of the parent-child stage game and focus
on the Markov-perfect equilibrium (MPE) of this sequential stage game.46 The timing of
the model is as follows: in the beginning of the period labor earnings shocks realize and are
known both to the parent and his child. In the first stage, the parent chooses his consumption
cp , next period wealth holdings ap , and the monetary transfer to the child gp . Given the
parent's choices, in the second stage the child makes his own consumption-saving decision
(cc , ac ). Given that it is unlikely that parents can force their adult children to adhere to a
particular consumption path beyond the influence induced by their choice of transfers, this
timing protocol could be an accurate description of how parent-child interactions take place
in reality.

State variables.      The state variables of a parent of age hp  {51, 52, . . . , 79} are: beginning
of period wealth of the parent ap  A and of the child ac  A, realized earnings for both
the parent and the child yp , yc  Y , as well as the sectors in which the two work sp , sc  S .
The value function of a parent household of age hp is denoted as Vhpp (~
                                                                       sp ), where s
                                                                                   ~p =
(ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ). The state variables of a child of age hc  {22, 23, . . . , 50} are: cash-on-
hand a             ~c = Rac + gp , where ac  A is own beginning of period wealth and gp
     ~c defined as a
is the parent's first stage choice of transfers gp , realized earnings for both the parent and
  46
    Without assumptions on the timing of the parent-child interaction, a setting like the one I consider can
have a large set of Markov equilibria. An illustrative two period example can be found in Lindbeck and
Weibull (1988). Barczyk and Kredler (2014a) maintain the assumption that altruistically linked players
make consumption-saving-transfer decisions simultaneously, but study the game in continuous time, which
greatly simplifies the characterization of equilibria by making consumption and savings decisions of a player
independent of the contemporaneous choices of the other agent whenever the player is unconstrained.


                                                     29
the child yp , yc  Y , the sectors of the two sp , sc  S , as well as the parent's first stage
choice of savings ap . The value function of a child of age hc is denoted as Vhcc (~
                                                                                   sc ), where
s
~c = a
     ~c , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc .

Decision problems

The problem of a working parent-child pair.                     In the second stage, given s
                                                                                           ~c = a
                                                                                                ~c , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc
the child of age hc solves

                                 Vhcc (~
                                       sc )     =    max u (cc ) +  EVhcc +1 (~
                                                                              sc |y, s)
                                                      cc ,ac

                                              s.t.   cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                            ~c
                                                     ac  Ahc ,

      ~c = Rac + gp , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc , s = (sp , sc ) and y = (yp , yc ). The next period's
where s
transfer gp and parental savings ap are equilibrium objects. Call the resulting optimal
policy function cc (hc , s
                         ~c ). In the first stage, given s
                                                         ~p = (ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ), the parent of
age hp solves

   Vhpp (~
         sp )    =       max u (cp ) + u cc hc , Rac + gp , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc            +  EVhpp +1 s
                                                                                                          ~p |y, s
                        cp ,ap ,gp

                s.t.    cp + ap + gp = (1 -  ) yp + Rap
                        ap  Ahp , gp  0,

      ~p = ap , ac hc , Rac + gp , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc , yp , yc , sp , sc . The expectation is taken
where s
over all possible sector and income transitions, for the parent and the child, as both of them
are in the labor market in the following year.
The problem of a retired parent-child pair.                     At the end of age Hret = 65 the parent retires
and starts earning constant income  (^
                                     yp ), which is a function of predicted career earnings.
In the second stage, given s
                           ~c = a
                                ~c , yc , y
                                          ^p , ap , s
                                                    ^p , sc , the child of age hc solves

                                Vhcc (~
                                      sc )     =     max u (cc ) +  EVhcc +1 (~
                                                                              sc |yc , sc )
                                                     cc ,ac

                                              s.t.   cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                            ~c
                                                     ac  Ahc ,

where s
      ~c = Rac + gp , yc , y
                           ^p , ap , s
                                     ^p , sc . Again, denote by cc (hc , s
                                                                         ~c ) the optimal consump-
tion policy function. In the first stage, given s
                                                ~p = (ap , ac , y
                                                                ^p , yc , s
                                                                          ^p , sc ), the problem of a

                                                               30
retired parent of age hp = Hret + 1, . . . , H - 1 is

  Vhpp (~
        sp )    =       max u (cp ) + u cc hc , Rac + gp , yc , y
                                                                ^p , ap , s
                                                                          ^p , sc         +  EVhpp +1 s
                                                                                                      ~p |yc , sc
                       cp ,ap ,gp

               s.t.    cp + ap + gp =  (^
                                        yp ) + Rap
                       ap  Ahp , gp  0,

where s
      ~p = ap , ac hc , Rac + gp , yc , y
                                        ^p , ap , s
                                                  ^p , sc , y
                                                            ^p , yc , s
                                                                      ^p , sc . Only the child is in the labor
force, so the expectation is taken only with respect to yc and sc .

The problem of a terminal parent-child pair.                          At the end of age H the parent dies. In the
following period his child becomes a parent and his own child starts earning income. The
second stage problem of the child is

                                       c                                  p
                                     V50 (~
                                          sc )    =     max u (cc ) +  EV51 ~p |y, s
                                                                            s
                                                        cc ,ac

                                                 s.t.   cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                               ~c
                                                        ac  Ahc ,

      ~p = ac + ap , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc , y = yc , yp and s = sc , sp . This allows for intergen-
where s
erational correlation in sectors and income processes. I assume that young adults (age 22)
have no assets. In the first stage, given s
                                          ~p = (ap , ac , y
                                                          ^p , yc , s
                                                                    ^p , sc ), the terminal parent solves

     p                                                                                           p
   V79 (~
        sp )     =        max u (cp ) + u cc hc , Rac + gp , yc , y         ^p , sc
                                                                  ^p , ap , s              +  EV51 ~p |y, s
                                                                                                   s
                        cp ,ap ,gp

                s.t.    cp + ap + gp =  (^
                                         yp ) + Rap
                        ap  Ahp , gp  0,

where s
      ~p = ap + ac hc , Rac + gp , yc , y
                                        ^p , ap , s
                                                  ^p , sc , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc .

Equilibrium definition and properties

A steady-state recursive equilibrium, which is also a Markov-Perfect equilibrium, is a collec-
tion of value functions Vhp (~
                             sp ) and Vhc (~
                                           sc ), policy functions cp (hp , s
                                                                           ~p ), ap (hp , s
                                                                                          ~p ), gp (hp , s
                                                                                                         ~p ),
cc (hc , s
         ~c ) and ac (hc , s
                           ~c ), measures of households f (hp , s
                                                                ~p ) and f (hc , s
                                                                                 ~p ), and aggregate bond
holdings B , such that: (i) given the payoff relevant state vectors, in each repetition of the
parent-child stage game the parent decides optimally how much to consume, save and trans-
fer to the child, after which the child makes an optimal consumption-saving choice of his


                                                                 31
own, (ii) the bond market clears, (iii) the government's budget is balanced and (iv) the
measure of households is invariant. Details on the computational algorithm are in Section
B.2 of Appendix B.
       Two properties of this setup are worth noting. First, it is an infinitely repeated game.
This means that, in spite of the assumption on timing which simplifies matters computa-
tionally, it need not be that the Markov-Perfect equilibrium is unique. I conjecture it is
and verify this computationally by experimenting with different initial guesses in the value
function iteration algorithm, and by also solving for the equlibrium that is the limit of a
finite-horizon game as in Klein, Krusell and Rios-Rull (2008).47 The equilibrium I find is
always the same. See Section B.1 in Appendix B for a characterization.
       Second, the setup features strategic behavior of the type encountered in the 'Samaritan's
dilemma', with the child pursuing a consumption plan that exploits the parent's altruism
through overconsumption (or undersaving).48 Since the parent makes the first move in the
stage game, he can limit the strategic behavior of the child through his transfer decision. I
solve for the equilibrium in which the parent makes transfers to the child only when the latter
is constrained.49 Intuitively, the parent would always want to set the transfer so that the
child achieves the level of consumption that the parent desires for him. Due to the fact that
the child engages in overconsumption, the only scenario in which the child's consumption is
below the parent's desired consumption for him is when the child is constrained.


3.2       Parameter values
Labor earnings.       Individuals can work in one of two sectors: a sector with low permanent
income risk and a sector with high permanent income risk. They can transition between
the two sectors over their career. To calibrate the transition probabilities, I aggregate the
17 sectors from Section 2 into two groups based on whether average income uncertainty
  47
      There may be other equilibria that depend crucially on the infinite-horizon assumption, such as the
wealth-pooling equilibrium found in an infinite-horizon altruistic gift-giving game studied by Barczyk and
Kredler (2014b).
   48
      In the steady state 1.57% of children are constrained. If the transfer option would be removed unantic-
ipatedly (i.e. every period the child thinks the parent will make a transfer and makes decisions accordingly,
but the transfer is exogenously set to zero), then 50.96% of children would find themselves constrained. This
shows that for children the constrained state is desirable, and that inter-vivos transfers distort children's
savings decision in favor of less savings.
   49
      This idea has been previously conjectured by Laitner (2001), Fuster, Imrohoroglu and Imrohoroglu
(2007), McGarry (1999), McGarry (2016), Nishiyama (2002), emerges as an endogenous outcome in Barczyk
and Kredler (2014a), and is also at play in Barczyk (2016). Numerically, I verify that the parent indeed
finds it optimal to set the transfer to zero if the child is not constrained in the absence of the transfer.




                                                     32
a specific sector is below or above the average uncertainty over all sectors.50 Transition
probabilities are given by the empirical switching rates between these aggregate sectors at
annual frequency and are equal to

                                        pll    plh         0.921 0.079
                               Ps =                   =                              .
                                        phl phh            0.113 0.887

In the matrix Ps the generic element pss , with s, s  {l, h}, is the probability of switching
to sector s if currently working in sector s. I allow for correlation between the sector of
a parent and that of his child. In particular, the sector a child first works in is correlated
with his parent's sector at the time the child enters the labor market. I use the sample of
parent-child pairs to estimate the probability that if the parent works in sector sp  {l, h},
the child works in sector sc  {l, h}.51 These probabilities are

                                         p
                                         ^ll    p
                                                ^lh            0.647 0.353
                               Pig
                                s =                    =                             ,
                                         p
                                         ^hl p
                                             ^hh               0.493 0.507

                          ^sp sc , with sp , sc  {l, h}, is the probability that if the parent
where the generic element p
works in sector sp then his 22 year old child begins his career in sector sc .
       I assume log labor earnings have two age-dependent components. The first is determin-
istic and is common to all individuals of age h, irrespective of the sector in which they work.
The second is idiosyncratic and captures labor income risk at sector level.52 Therefore, log
earnings of an individual i of age h  [22, 65] working in sector s are given by

                                       i                                   i
                                    lnyhs =       f (h)          +       y
                                                                         ~hs         .                     (12)
                                               deterministic         idiosyncratic


       The deterministic component is a quartic age polynomial obtained from reestimating
equation (8) with log annual labor income of the head as the dependent variable. Average
labor earnings are hump-shaped over the life cycle, increasing by 43% until they peak in the
forties, and then decreasing by 38% by retirement age.
       In what concerns the idiosyncratic component, the goal is to feed in the model the sector
  50
     The low income uncertainty group contains sectors {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16} and covers approxi-
mately 60% of the sample, while the high risk group includes sectors {0, 1, 8, 10, 12, 14}.
  51
     In constructing these probabilities I use all parent-child pairs. However, results are robust to only using
those observations for which the child is below age 35 (the difference is at the second and third decimal).
  52
     I assume that in the event of a switch of sector, the individual inherits the idiosyncratic component from
the previous sector.



                                                        33
level age profile of permanent income uncertainty estimated with the PSID data. To that
end, I assume that, for a given sector s, the idiosyncratic component of log earnings follows
an AR(1) process
                                  i       i          i               2
                                y
                                ~hs = s y
                                        ~h  -1,s +   hs ,   hs    0, hs ,                      (13)
                                                                        2
with sector specific persistence s and age and sector specific variance hs , h = 22, . . . , 65.53 I
                           2
calibrate parameters s and hs such that, for each sector, the relative permanent income risk
implied by the decomposition (12)-(13) matches the empirical profile of uncertainty relative
to permanent income. Since for each sector there are only 44 data moments, estimating
a fully non-parametric variance age profile is virtually impossible. Instead, I assume that
the variance of the idiosyncratic component is a cubic polynomial in age. Section B.3 in
Appendix B discusses the estimation procedure in detail.
       The left panel of Figure 6 displays the fit of the estimation, for each of the two sectors.
The right panel of the figure shows how the variance in each sector varies with age. The
average variance is 0.070 in the low risk sector and 0.087 in the high risk sector. The
estimated persistence parameters are 0.908 and 0.947, respectively. Both the persistence
and the variance of the income process are larger for the high risk sector. While these
parameters are estimated based on a different set of moments than it is common in the
literature, the resulting values are comparable to existing ones.

Pension benefits.         In a realistic analysis of retirement, pension benefits would be based
on career (lifetime) average earnings. In terms of modeling, that requires introducing a new
continuous state variable for each member of the family to what already is a large state space.
To avoid that, I set pension benefits as a function of predicted lifetime average earnings, as
in Guvenen et al. (2013). To that end, I first simulate the lifetime labor earnings profile of
10, 000 individuals and compute average earnings for each of them. I then regress average
earnings on earnings in the last period of working life and use the estimated coefficients to
predict the career average earnings of an individual, given earnings right before retirement.
Letting y
        ^ denote an individual's predicted lifetime average earnings and y
                                                                         ¯ denote average
earnings in the economy, the individual's pension benefit is determined as follows:

                                         (^
                                          y ) = ay
                                                 ¯ + by
                                                      ^

where a = 0.168 captures the insurance component of retirement income and b = 0.355
  53
    Karahan and Ozkan (2013) provide evidence for age dependence of income process parameters. While
such patterns are not very strong for the persistence parameter, they are for the variance.



                                                     34
                                                                   Panel A: Income uncertainty          Panel B: Variance of the income process
                                                            1.8                                        0.22
                                                                                  Data                               Low risk sector,  = 0.91
                                                                                  Model fit             0.2
                                                            1.6                                                      High risk sector,  = 0.95




                  S.d. of forecast error/permanent income
                                                                                                       0.18
                                                            1.4
                                                                                                       0.16
                                                            1.2
                                                                               High risk sector        0.14

                                                             1                                         0.12

                                                            0.8                                         0.1

                                                                                                       0.08
                                                            0.6
                                                                                                       0.06
                                                            0.4
                                                                                                       0.04
                                                            0.2         Low risk sector                0.02

                                                             0                                              0
                                                                  20     30     40   50           60            20   30    40   50       60
                                                                                 Age                                        Age

                Figure 6: Parameters of the Income Process and Uncertainty Fit

Notes: The figure shows the estimated parameters of the income processes for the two sectors in the right
panel and the fit of the estimation in the left panel. The variance is assumed to be a cubic polynomial in age:
  2            h        h 2        h 3
hs  = as + bs 10 + cs 10     + ds 10    , s  {l, h}. For the low income sector the coefficients are: al = 0.159,
bl = -0.051, cl = 10-5 , dl = 0.001. For the high income sector the coefficients are: ah = 0.190, bh = -0.061,
ch = 10-5 , dh = 0.002.


captures the private returns to lifetime earnings. The values of these two parameters are
taken from Guvenen et al. (2013), who use the information reported by OECD for the US
in "Pensions at a Glance 2007: Retirement Income Systems in OECD Countries".

Borrowing limit.                                                       I set the borrowing limit Ah to zero, but explore the sensitivity of
the results under the natural borrowing limit. Irrespective of the type of borrowing limit
considered, parents are not allowed to borrow against the income of future generations.

Preferences.                                                Household utility is CRRA with the relative risk aversion equal to 2. Fol-
lowing the literature on quantitative macroeconomic models with heterogeneous households
and incomplete markets, I set the discount factor  to 0.959 to match an average wealth to
average income ratio of 6.218.54 I calibrate the altruism coefficient  to target the average
ratio between parent's and child's consumption, as measured in the sample of parent-child
pairs used in the empirical analysis. A parent who makes positive transfers sets them such
   54
      This target is computed by averaging the respective ratios between 2001 and 2013, when the average
wealth to average income ratio has been relatively stable. The yearly ratios are calculated using moments
from the Survey of Consumer Finances reported on the Rios-Rull and Kuhn (2016) project webpage.



                                                                                                       35
that u (cp ) = u (cc ), so the ratio between the consumption of a parent and that of his
child is directly influenced by the weight that parents place on their children's utility.55 The
calibrated value for  is 0.201.

Government and interest rate.            The proportional tax rate is set to 24.6%, corresponding
to the net personal average tax rate for the US, as reported in the OECD Tax Database.56
Government spending is set such that in the steady state the interest rate is 4% annually.


3.3     Results
I now discuss the quantitative results. First, I examine the model's performance in matching
the empirical evidence on parental help, both from an ex-ante perspective via dynastic pre-
cautionary saving, and from an ex-post perspective through intergenerational transfers and
end-of-life bequest.57 Second, I quantify how much consumption insurance parents provide
to children through dynastic precautionary saving and transfers. Third, I highlight the quan-
titative importance of the strategic interactions between parents and children by comparing
the predictions of this model with the predictions of the unitary household model, which is
a classic framework with no strategic considerations. Fourth, I augment the model with two
additional sources of risk that are understood as being relevant at old age, medical expenses
risk and longevity risk, and use it to evaluate the contribution of dynastic precautionary
saving to aggregate wealth accumulation.

3.3.1    Model fit

Model regression. I repeat the regression analysis in Section 2 with model generated
data to determine the model implied elasticities of consumption with respect to permanent
income uncertainty. Precautionary and dynastic precautionary savings inform the choice of
behavioral parameters such as risk aversion and intergenerational altruism. The purpose of
this exercise is to verify whether standard calibration of these parameters is able to deliver
consumption responses to both own and child's income risk consistent with those documented
  55
      In particular, under the CRRA utility assumption with relative risk aversion  , the intra-temporal
                                                                                  c
optimality condition for positive transfers is c-
                                                p
                                                  
                                                    = c- c
                                                           
                                                             or, equivalently, ln cpc
                                                                                      = -1
                                                                                           ln  . The altruism
                                                               cp
parameter  is set such that the model implied average of ln cc matches its empirical counterpart, which is
equal to 0.171. The empirical moment is calculated based on the sample of parent-child pairs in which the
parent is older than 51 and the child is older than 22, as in the model.
   56
      Net personal average tax rate is the term used when the personal income tax and employee social
security contributions net of cash benefits are expressed as a percentage of gross wage earnings. The value
is an average over the 2000-2015 horizon.
   57
      Appendix B.4 reports other measures of the model fit (e.g. wealth distribution).


                                                     36
in the previous section. To that end, I simulate 10, 000 parent-child pairs from the steady
state of the model, and follow them for as long as the parent is alive. I then estimate the
following equation:

                           p     p        p             p         p
                    cpit = m 0 + m1 phs + m2 chs + Xpit m3 + Xcit m4 +                 pit ,              (14)

which is the model counterpart of equation (9) and where cpit is the logarithm of the consump-
tion of parent household i in year t, phs is the logarithm of permanent income uncertainty
of the parent and is assigned based on the age h  {51, . . . , 79} and the sector s  {l, h} in
which the parent i is in year t, while chs is the logarithm of permanent income uncertainty
of the child, assigned based on the age h  {22, . . . , 50} and the sector s  {l, h} in which
the child of parent i is in year t. Xpit and Xcit are vectors of controls for the parent and
child's permanent labor income and wealth holdings, as well as a full set of age dummies for
the parent.
       Table 5 reports the results. Panel A of the table reproduces the empirical elasticity
estimates for comparison. Panel B reports the corresponding estimates from the model
generated sample. The first row of Panel B corresponds to the baseline scenario with no
borrowing. As is the case in the data, parental consumption responds negatively to both
own and child's permanent income uncertainty. Moreover, the consumption response to own
income risk is stronger than the response to the child's income risk, albeit to a stronger
extent in the model than in the data. However, the model estimates fall well within the
95% confidence interval of the empirical estimates. The second row of Panel B explores the
sensitivity to the borrowing limit.58 The option of borrowing provides extra insurance for
young adults, reducing the parental response to dynastic uncertainty. However, the overall
effect of looser borrowing constraints is quantitatively small.

Inter-vivos transfers and bequest. Figure 7 shows the predictions of the model regard-
ing the size and timing of intergenerational transfers compared to the data. Though none
of these dimensions are targeted, the model matches them remarkably well. The top panel
shows the model implied inter-vivos transfers relative to parental wealth in black, and their
data counterpart in gray. The data moment is measured from the 2013 PSID Family Rosters
and Transfers Module and the dashed lines are the 95% confidence bands.59 The model
  58
     Following Kaplan and Violante (2014), I assume that in a given year working age individuals can borrow
up to 18.5% of average annual income and retired individuals cannot borrow.
  59
     Monetary transfers to children are directly reported by parents in the module. The average transfer-to-
parental wealth ratio is calculated for respondents with positive wealth, as the borrowing limit is set to zero
in the baseline.


                                                      37
                       Table 5: Regression Analysis with Model Generated Data

                                            Coefficient on parent's        Coefficient on child's
                                            permanent income risk         permanent income risk

                                               Panel A. Empirical estimates from Table 1

                                                     -0.089                       -0.076
         1. Non-durable consumption
                                                [-0.171 -0.007]              [-0.150 -0.014]
                                                     -0.082                       -0.079
         2. Total consumption
                                                [-0.168 0.004]               [-0.152 -0.006]

                                                         Panel B. Model estimates

                                                   -0.097                        -0.067
         1. Baseline
                                                    (0.012)                       (0.013)
                                                   -0.098                        -0.064
         2. Borrowing allowed
                                                    (0.012)                       (0.013)

Notes: Table entries are coefficient estimates of the effect of parent's and child's permanent income uncer-
tainty on parental consumption. Panel A reports results from estimating equation (9) with the PSID sample,
with the 95% bootstrapped confidence interval in parentheses. Panel B reports results from estimating equa-
tion (14) with model generated data with robust standard errors in parenthesis.  significant at 10%; 
significant at 5%;  significant at 1%



matches well the evolution over age of the transfer-to-parental wealth ratio. In particular,
the model implied average ratio is 3.06%, while the empirical counterpart is 3.01%. The
middle panel of the figure shows the fraction of parents making inter-vivos transfers to their
children. In the PSID 24.1% of all parents make inter-vivos transfers. When restricting
the sample to parents older than 51, in line with the age structure of the model, this share
becomes 39.73%, in comparison to 39.15% in the model. The bottom panel shows the av-
erage size of the transfers, measured in dollars and including zeros. Yearly tranfers made
by parents older than 51 average at $1871 in the data and $1495 in the model.60 A word
of caution is in order. In the data, transfers refer to the "the total amount of money that
Head/Wife/"Wife" gave to their child(ren) during 2012" and could, in principle, capture
transfers made for reasons that are outside the scope of this model, such as reducing college
debt, moving to a new location or helping with a home downpayment. In fact, while the
model matches well the fraction of parents making transfers, it underestimates the dollar
amount of transfers, potentially reflecting these additional transfer motives that are absent
from the model.
  60
       These dollar figures are expressed in 1996 US dollars.



                                                       38
    Lastly, the model predicted bequest-to-aggregate wealth ratio of 0.49% is roughly in line
with Gale and Scholz (1994), who estimate bequests to represent 0.88% of aggregate net
worth. Total intergenerational transfers (end-of-life bequest and inter-vivos transfers) are
1.87% of aggregate wealth. Gale and Scholz (1994) estimate intended transfers and bequest
to be 1.41% of aggregate net worth.


                                                  Panel A: Transfers as fraction of parental wealth
                                       20
                                                                   Data
                 Perc. (%)




                                       10                          Model

                                       0

                                -10
                                            50      55        60           65       70        75           80
                                                                   Age of parent
                                                   Panel B: Fraction of parents making transfers
                                       90
                                                                                                   Data
                    Perc. (%)




                                       60                                                          Model

                                       30

                                       0
                                            50      55        60           65       70        75           80
                                                                   Age of parent
                                                             Panel C: Average transfer
                      Thou. 1996 USD




                                       8
                                       4
                                       0
                                                                                                   Data
                                       -4
                                                                                                   Model
                                       -8
                                            50      55        60           65       70        75           80
                                                                    Age of parent



                                            Figure 7: Age Profile of Transfers: Data vs Model

Notes: The top panel of the figure shows the ratio between inter-vivos transfers and parental wealth in the
model (solid black line) and the 2013 PSID Family Rosters and Transfers Module (gray solid line). Dashed
gray lines are the 95% confidence interval for the data. The bottom panel shows the same objects for the
fraction of parents making transfers to their children.




3.3.2    How much insurance via dynastic precautionary savings?

For children, dynastic precautionary saving by parents is a form of private insurance against
labor market shocks that goes over and above self-insurance through borrowing and sav-




                                                                       39
ing.61 In this section, I assess the degree of additional consumption smoothing induced
by parents' dynastic precautionary saving by calculating consumption insurance coefficients
against income shocks.
       Following Kaplan and Violante (2010), I define the consumption insurance coefficient
against a persistent income shock as 1 - Cov( cih , ih )
                                           Var( ih )
                                                         , where cih denotes the log consumption
of individual i of age h,     ih   is the persistent income shock defined in equation (13), and the
variance and covariance are taken cross-sectionally over the simulated sample of individu-
als.62 The interpretation of the insurance coefficient is intuitive: it captures the share of the
(variance of the) persistent shock that does not translate into movements in consumption.
       I compare the consumption insurance coefficient for children implied by my model with
that predicted by a pure life-cycle model (i.e.  = 0). The difference between these two
insurance coefficients is informative on the extent of additional consumption insurance com-
ing from parent's dynastic precautionary savings. I find that 66% of labor income shocks
faced by children are insured when parents accumulate dynastic precautionary savings, in
comparison to only 49% otherwise.63 This means that, in the dynastic model, consump-
tion insurance through parents' dynastic precautionary savings accounts for a little over one
fourth of children's total consumption insurance. The rest is through children's own savings.

3.3.3      Comparison with the unitary household model

In this section I show that strategic interactions between parents and children are essential
for generating consumption responses to income risk that are in line with the data. I do this
by repeating the analysis in the context of the unitary household model, which is a workhorse
model of the family and notably lacks strategic interactions between family members.64 In
the unitary framework, parents and children pool their income and behave as a single decision
maker, maximizing the weighted sum of their utilities. A complete description of the unitary
model setup is in Appendix B.5. I normalize the weight on the parent's utility to 1 and
denote the weight on the child's utility by  . I use the same parameter values as in the
baseline framework, except for the discount factor  and the weight on the child's utility  ,
  61
     Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1996) call for future research to be directed at estimating the extent of
such insurance.
  62
     To be consistent with Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008) and Kaplan and Violante (2010), here log
consumption is defined as the residual from a quartic age profile.
  63
     It is worth pointing out, as a cross-check, that the insurance coefficient found in the life-cycle model is
of a similar magnitude to that found by Kaplan and Violante (2010) for the corresponding age group and
income shock persistence.
  64
     See Alderman et al. (1995) for a comprehensive discussion of this framework.



                                                      40
which I recalibrate to match the same moments as the model with strategic interactions.65
The calibrated values of  and  are 0.958 and 0.710, respectively.
       Table 6 reports the estimated consumption elasticities from the unitary household model
in the first column, from the model with strategic interactions in the second column and
from the PSID in the third column.66 The top panel of the table reports the effect of
permanent income risk on parental consumption, while the bottom panel reports the effect
of uncertainty on child's consumption.
       The unitary household model predicts (dynastic) precautionary saving behavior that is
at odds with the data in two dimensions. First, in the unitary model the effect of income
uncertainty on parent's and child's consumption is the same. This is a consequence of the
child's consumption being a constant fraction of the parent's consumption and therefore
holds irrespective of the parameterization of the model. Second, the effect of child's income
risk on parental consumption is stronger than the effect of parent's own income risk. To
understand why this is the case, recall that in the unitary model family labor income is the
sum of two components with different degrees of risk: parent's labor earnings and child's
labor earnings. The latter is more risky because of the age difference between parents and
children. When the riskiness in child's income decreases, the effect on the overall riskiness of
joint family income is larger than if the riskiness in parent's income would decrease by the
same magnitude, which translates into a stronger consumption adjustment.67
       In the model with strategic interactions, on the other hand, the relative importance of the
two saving motives is in line with that observed in the PSID. This is because the nature of
these strategic interactions is such that the child is pursuing a consumption plan that exploits
the parent's altruism. In particular, the child behaves recklessly by overconsuming, to induce
transfers from parents in the future.68 The parent is aware of this behavior and would want
the child to entertain a lower level of consumption than he actually does. This dampens
the parent's incentive to provide private insurance via dynastic precautionary savings. The
bottom panel of the table shows that in the setup with strategic interactions the child has to
compensate with stronger precautionary saving relative to the unitary setup. Additionally,
  65
     In the model without strategic interactions, child's consumption is always a constant fraction of the
parent's consumption, as dictated by the intra-temporal optimality condition u (cp ) = u (cc ).
  66
     Because the wealth holdings of parents and children are not separately identified, I estimate a slightly
modified version of equations (9) and (10), in which I control for joint asset holdings of the family.
  67
     This is a statistical property of the sum of two random variables and is true as long as the two income
streams are not perfectly correlated, a condition that is satisfied by the parametrization of the model.
Therefore, a different parameterization of preference and altruism parameters would yield similar qualitative
predictions.
  68
     Overconsumption is defined relative to the prevailing consumption in the unitary model.



                                                     41
he is subject to the parent's income risk insofar as it generates fluctuations in transfers, so
he mildly insures against that.
    The argument above could also be used to extrapolate the implications that the assump-
tions on the direction of altruism and the timing of the parent-child game have on the results.
If altruism were two-sided, this would dampen the child's overconsumption incentives, in-
creasing the relative importance of dynastic precautionary saving in the model. If the child
were the first mover in the parent-child stage game, then he would have even stronger incen-
tives to overconsume, further decreasing the relative importance of dynastic precautionary
saving for the parent.

             Table 6: Regression Analysis with Model Generated Data (comparison)

                                  Model without                   Model with               Data
                               strategic interactions        strategic interactions
                                      = 0.710                       = 0.201

                                 Panel A. Effect of uncertainty on parent's consumption

                                     -0.022                        -0.097                  -0.089
        Parent's uncertainty
                                      (0.009)                       (0.012)           [-0.171 -0.007]
                                     -0.062                        -0.067                  -0.076
        Child's uncertainty
                                      (0.009)                       (0.013)           [-0.150 -0.014]

                                  Panel B. Effect of uncertainty on child's consumption

                                     -0.022                         -0.019                 -0.035
        Parent's uncertainty
                                      (0.009)                       (0.011)           [-0.109 0.039]
                                     -0.062                        -0.181                  -0.151
        Child's uncertainty
                                      (0.009)                       (0.013)           [-0.267 -0.035]

Notes: Table entries are estimates of the effect of permanent income uncertainty on parent's consumption in
Panel A and child's consumption in Panel B. The first two columns show estimates from the model without
strategic interactions and the model with strategic interactions, respectively. Robust standard errors are in
parenthesis. The third column shows the estimates from the PSID sample, with the 95% confidence interval
in parentheses.  significant at 10%;  significant at 5% ;  significant at 1%




3.3.4     How much dynastic precautionary wealth in total wealth?

I now turn to quantifying the contribution of dynastic precautionary wealth to total wealth
in the model. To better capture individuals' saving motives, I augment the model with two
additional sources of risk that, in addition to bequest, are understood as important drivers
of late-in-life wealth accumulation: mortality risk and medical expenditure risk (de Nardi,


                                                        42
French and Jones (2010)). I briefly discuss below how I model these two types of risk and
defer to Appendix B.6 the complete description of the setup.
Mortality risk.         Once retired, individuals are subject to mortality risk. Age-specific
survival probabilities, hp , are taken from the 2014 National Vital Statistics Report.69
Medical expenditure risk.        Upon retirement, individuals also face uncertainty about med-
ical expenses. I model this as in Kopecky and Koreshkova (2014). In particular, medical
expenses evolve stochastically during retirement according to a function m
                                                                         ¯ (hp , m). Thus, in
each period a retiree's medical expenses depend on his current age hp and current expense
shock m. The medical expense shock m follows an age-invariant Markov process and the
initial distribution of medical expense shocks is independent of the individual's state. The
calibration of the process for medical expenses is taken from Kopecky and Koreshkova (2014)
and is discussed in detail in Appendix B.6.
       I evaluate the contribution of dynastic precautionary wealth to total wealth in the model
through a decomposition exercise inspired by Gourinchas and Parker (2002), who measure
precautionary wealth by comparing aggregate wealth in a pure life-cycle model with income
risk and in a counterfactual model without income risk. In the setting of this paper, a literal
application of this decomposition amounts to shutting down children's income risk in the
counterfactual model. This, however, has the unintended effect of also suppressing children's
precautionary saving motive, in addition to parents' dynastic precautionary saving motive.
As a consequence, in the counterfactual model parental wealth holding is significantly lower
(i.e.  67% lower) because (i) parents no longer hold dynastic precautionary wealth, which
is the effect of interest, and (ii) children enter parenthood with lower levels of wealth.
       To purge the second effect, I instead apply a two step decomposition. First, I solve a
counterfactual model in which I shut down income risk at all ages. The difference between
total wealth in the baseline model and in this counterfactual model represents precautionary
and dynastic precautionary wealth. Call this quantity WP S,DP S . Second, I measure pre-
cautionary wealth the same way Gourinchas and Parker (2002) do. Specifically, I solve a
model in which  = 0, which is in fact a pure life-cycle model, and measure precautionary
wealth as the difference between total wealth in the model with  = 0 and income risk and
total wealth in the model with  = 0 and no income risk. Call this quantity WP S . Lastly,
dynastic precautionary wealth is the difference between WP S,DP S and WP S . According to
this definition, dynastic precautionary wealth represents 16.71% of total wealth.70
  69
    I use the age-specific probabilities of dying reported in Table 1. Life table for the total population:
United States, 2014.
 70
    This decomposition is subject to the caveat that wealth components may be fungible, in which case the


                                                    43
    I now turn to analyzing the contribution of risk in children's income to intergenerational
transfers. To that end, I solve a counterfactual model in which children (i.e. individuals of
age 22-50), are not subject to income risk, but average income is the same as in the baseline
environment.71 I find that intergenerational transfers are primarily driven by incentives
to insure children against income risk. In particular, the dynastic precautionary motive
accounts for 97.07% of total intergenerational transfers. Decomposing this effect into the
effect of inter-vivos transfer and the effect on end-of-life bequest, I find that virtually all
inter-vivos transfers are dictated by dynastic precautionary considerations. This shows that
the primary role of such transfers is to provide insurance against bad income realizations,
as argued by McGarry (1999) and McGarry (2016). A slightly smaller share of end-of-life
bequest, 85.44%, is dictated by incentives to insure future generations against income risk.


4     Conclusion
In this paper I investigate, both empirically and in a quantitative model, the response of
parents' consumption to their children's permanent income uncertainty. I find a negative
relationship which I interpret as evidence for precautionary saving across generations and
refer to as dynastic precautionary saving.
    The first contribution of the paper is to document empirically that the consumption pro-
file of retired parents is backloaded, a feature consistent with precautionary behavior. I show
that this is a reflection of dynastic precautionary saving by regressing parental consumption
on child's income uncertainty in a sample of parent-child pairs from the PSID. For this, I
exploit variation in income uncertainty across age and industry-occupation groups.
    The second contribution of the paper is to build a quantitative model of dynastic precau-
tionary saving that can replicate the magnitude of the response of parental consumption to
child's permanent income risk observed in the data. I use the model to evaluate the effect of
dynastic uncertainty on parental wealth accumulation and intergenerational transfers, and
to quantify the consumption insurance provided by parents against it.
    In ongoing work, I explore the substitutability between private and social insurance and
the ensuing implications for wealth accumulation and consumption inequality, by examining
individuals' (dynastic) precautionary behavior in two environments that are fundamentally
result is a lower bound.
  71
     Note that there is residual dynastic uncertainty in the counterfactual model. When individuals turn 51
and become parents they are again subject to income risk. This is a consequence of the fact that in the
dynastic model every individual play every role. I conjecture this has a small quantitative effect, as most of
income risk is resolved by age 51.


                                                     44
different in terms of the prevailing social safety net: U.S. and Denmark. Going forward,
dynastic precautionary savings could potentially be important in explaining several empirical
puzzles: (i) It has repeatedly been documented that upon retirement wealth declines slower
than the life cycle model predicts, but the reason remains poorly understood; (ii) There
is substantial wealth heterogeneity at retirement, even after controlling for realized lifetime
income. These exercises could, in principle, be accommodated by variants of the model in
this paper. More broadly, this framework could also be used to study issues related to the
intergenerational mobility of wealth, income and consumption.




                                              45
References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2013. "Deconstructing Life Cycle Expenditure." Journal of
  Political Economy 121:437­492.
Alderman, Harold, Pierre-Andr´
                             e Chiappori, Lawrence Haddad, John Hoddinott and Ravi
  Kanbur. 1995. "Unitary versus Collective Models of the Household: Is It Time to Shift
  the Burden of Proof?" The World Bank Research Observer 10(1):1­19.
Altig, David and Steve J. Davis. 1989. "Government debt, redistributive fiscal policies, and
  the interaction between borrowing constraints and intergenerational altrusim." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 24(1):3 ­ 29.
Altig, David and Steven J. Davis. 1992. "The Timing of Intergenerational Transfers, Tax
  Policy, and Aggregate Savings." The American Economic Review 82(5):1199­1220.
Altig, David and Steven J. Davis. 1993. "Borrowing constraints and two-sided altruism with
  an application to social security." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17(3):467
  ­ 494.
Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi and Laurence Kotlikoff. 1996. "Risk-Sharing between and
  within Families." Econometrica 64(2):261­294.
Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1992. "Is the Extended Family
  Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data." The American Economic Review
  82(5):1177­1198.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2011. "The Joy
  of Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion
  from Bequest Motives." The Journal of Finance 66(2):519­561.
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Mi Luo, Matthew D. Shapiro and Christopher
  Tonetti. 2016. "Inter-generational Transfers and Precautionary Saving." Working Paper .
Andreski, Patricia, Geng Li, Mehmet Zahid Samancioglu and Robert Schoeni. 2014. "Es-
  timates of Annyal Consumption Expenditure and Its Major Components in the PSID in
  Comparison to the CEX." American Economic Review 104(5):132­35.
Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir and Corina Mommaerts. 2018. Insurance in extended
  family networks. Working paper.
Barczyk, Daniel. 2016. "Ricardian equivalence revisited: Deficits, gifts and bequests." Jour-
  nal of Economic Dynamics and Control 63:1 ­ 24.
Barczyk, Daniel and Matthias Kredler. 2014a. "Altruistically motivated transfers under
  uncertainty." Quantitative Economics 5(3):705­749.


                                             46
Barczyk, Daniel and Matthias Kredler. 2014b. "A dynamic model of altruistically-motivated
  transfers." Review of Economic Dynamics 17(2):303 ­ 328.
Barczyk, Daniel and Matthias Kredler. 2016. "Evaluating Long-Term-Care Policy Options,
  Taking the Family Seriously." Working Paper .
Barro, Robert J. 1974. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Economy
  82(6):1095­1117.
Becker, Gary S. 1974. "A Theory of Social Interactions." Journal of Political Economy
  82(6):1063­1093.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Ian Preston. 2008. "Consumption Inequality and
  Partial Insurance." American Economic Review 98(5):1887­1921.
Cagetti, Marco. 2003. "Wealth Accumulation over the Life Cycle and Precautionary Sav-
  ings." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 21(3):339­53.
Carroll, Christopher D. and Andrew A. Samwick. 1997. "The nature of precautionary
  wealth." Journal of Monetary Economics 40(1):41­71.
Carroll, Christopher D. and Andrew A. Samwick. 1998. "How Important is Precautionary
  Saving?" The Review of Economics and Statistics 80(3):pp. 410­419.
Carroll, Christopher D. and Miles S. Kimball. 2008. precautionary saving and precaution-
  ary wealth. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, ed. Steven N. Durlauf and
  Lawrence E. Blume. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Choi, HwaJung, Kathleen McGarry and Robert F. Schoeni. 2016. "Consumption and the
  extended family." Economics Letters 140:34 ­ 38.
Cox, Donald. 1990. "Intergenerational Transfers and Liquidity Constraints*." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 105(1):187­217.
Cubas, German and Pedro Silos. 2017. "Career choice and the risk premium in the labor
  market." Review of Economic Dynamics 26:1 ­ 18.
Cubas, German and Pedro Silos. 2018. Social Insurance and Occupational Mobility. DETU
  Working Papers 1802 Department of Economics, Temple University.
de Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French and John B. Jones. 2010. "Why Do the Elderly Save?
  The Role of Medical Expenses." Journal of Political Economy 118(1):pp. 39­75.
de Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French and John Bailey Jones. 2016a. "Medicaid Insurance in
  Old Age." American Economic Review 106(11):3480­3520.
de Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French and John Bailey Jones. 2016b. "Savings After Retire-
  ment: A Survey." Annual Review of Economics 8(1):177­204.
Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2004. "Do the Rich Save More?"

                                           47
  Journal of Political Economy 112(2):397­444.
Feigenbaum, James and Geng Li. 2012. "Life Cycle Dynamics of Income Uncertainty and
  Consumption." The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 12(1):1­49.
Fuster, Luisa. 1999. "Is Altruism Important for Understanding the Long-Run Effects of
  Social Security?" Review of Economic Dynamics 2(3):616 ­ 637.
Fuster, Luisa, Ayse Imrohoroglu and Selahattin Imrohoroglu. 2007. "Elimination of Social
  Security in a Dynastic Framework." The Review of Economic Studies 74(1):113­145.
Gale, William G. and John Karl Scholz. 1994. "Intergenerational Transfers and the Accu-
  mulation of Wealth." Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(4):145­160.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. "Consumption Over the Life
  Cycle." Econometrica 70(1):47­89.
Guvenen, Fatih. 2007. "Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very
  Persistent?" American Economic Review 97(3):687­712.
Guvenen, Fatih. 2009. "An empirical investigation of labor income processes." Review of
  Economic Dynamics 12(1):58­79.
Guvenen, Fatih and Anthony A. Smith. 2014. "Inferring Labor Income Risk and Partial
  Insurance From Economic Choices." Econometrica 82(6):2085­2129.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan and Jae Song. 2013. What Do Data on
  Millions of US Workers Say About Labor Income Risk? Technical report Working paper.
Hubbard, R Glenn, Jonathan Skinner and Stephen P Zeldes. 1995. "Precautionary Saving
  and Social Insurance." Journal of Political Economy 103(2):360­99.
Hurd, Michael D. 1987. "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests." The American
  Economic Review 77(3):pp. 298­312.
Hurst, Erik, Annamaria Lusardi, Arthur Kennickell and Francisco Torralba. 2010. "The
  Importance of Business Owners in Assessing the Size of Precautionary Savings." The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1):61­69.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse and Kai Zhao. 2018. "The chinese saving rate: Long-term care risks,
  family insurance, and demographics." Journal of Monetary Economics 96:33 ­ 52.
Kaplan, Greg. 2012. "Moving Back Home: Insurance against Labor Market Risk." Journal
  of Political Economy 120(3):446 ­ 512.
Kaplan, Greg and Gianluca Violante. 2010. "How Much Consumption Insurance Beyond
  Self-Insurance?" American Economic Journals: Macroeconomics 2:53­87.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response to
  Fiscal Stimulus Payments." Econometrica 82(4):1199­1239.

                                           48
Karahan, Fatih and Serdar Ozkan. 2013. "On the persistence of income shocks over the
  life cycle: Evidence, theory, and implications." Review of Economic Dynamics 16(3):452
  ­ 476.
Kennickell, Arthur and Annamaria Lusardi. 2005. Disentangling the importance of the
  precautionary saving motive. CFS Working Paper Series 2006/15 Center for Financial
  Studies (CFS).
Kimball, Miles S. 1990. "Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large." Econometrica
  58(1):53­73.
Klein, Paul, Per Krusell and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2008. "Time-Consistent Public Policy."
  The Review of Economic Studies 75(3):789­808.
Kopczuk, Wojciech and Joseph P. Lupton. 2007. "To Leave or Not to Leave: The Distribution
  of Bequest Motives." Review of Economic Studies 74(1):207­235.
Kopecky, Karen A. and Tatyana Koreshkova. 2014. "The Impact of Medical and Nursing
  Home Expenses on Savings." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(3):29­72.
Laitner, John. 1988. "Bequests, Gifts, and Social Security." The Review of Economic Studies
  55(2):275­299.
Laitner, John. 1992. "Random earnings differences, lifetime liquidity constraints, and altru-
  istic intergenerational transfers." Journal of Economic Theory 58(2):135 ­ 170.
Laitner, John. 1993. "Long-run equilibria with borrowing constraints and altruism." Journal
  of Economic Dynamics and Control 17(1):65 ­ 96.
Laitner, John. 2001. Wealth Accumulation in the U.S.: Do Inheritances and Bequests Play
  a Significant Role? Working Papers wp019 University of Michigan, Michigan Retirement
  Research Center.
Lindbeck, Assar and Jorgen W. Weibull. 1988. "Altruism and Time Consistency: The
  Economics of Fait Accompli." Journal of Political Economy 96(6):1165­1182.
Lockwood, Lee. 2014. "Incidental bequests: Bequest motives and the choice to self-insure
  late-life risks." Working Paper .
Lockwood, Lee M. 2012. "Bequest motives and the annuity puzzle." Review of Economic
  Dynamics 15(2):226 ­ 243.
Luo, Mi. 2016. "Unintended Effects of Estate Taxation on Wealth Inequality." Working
  Paper .
McGarry, Kathleen. 1999. "Inter vivos transfers and intended bequests." Journal of Public
  Economics 73(3):321­351.
McGarry, Kathleen. 2016. "Dynamic aspects of family transfers." Journal of Public Eco-

                                             49
  nomics 137(C):1­13.
Michel, Philippe, Emmanuel Thibault and Jean-Pierre Vidal. 2006. Chapter 15 Intergen-
  erational altruism and neoclassical growth models. In Applications, ed. Serge-Christophe
  Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier. Vol. 2 of Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism
  and Reciprocity Elsevier pp. 1055 ­ 1106.
Mommaerts, Corina. 2015. "Long-Term Care Insurance and the Family." Working Paper .
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 1985. "Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
  Econometric Models." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 3(4):370­379.
Nishiyama, Shinichi. 2002. "Bequests, Inter Vivos Transfers, and Wealth Distribution."
  Review of Economic Dynamics 5(4):892­931.
Pagan, Adrian. 1984. "Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated
  Regressors." International Economic Review 25(1):221­247.
Palumbo, Michael G. 1999. "Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving Near
  the End of the Life Cycle." The Review of Economic Studies 66(2):395­421.
Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor and Moritz Kuhn. 2016. "2013 Update on the U.S. Earnings, In-
  come, and Wealth Distributional Facts: A View from Macroeconomics." Quarterly Review
  (April):1­75.
Skinner, Jonathan. 1987. "A superior measure of consumption from the panel study of
  income dynamics." Economics Letters 23(2):213­216.
Strawczynski, Michael. 1994. "Government intervention as a bequest substitute." Journal of
  Public Economics 53(3):477­495.
Tauchen, George. 1986. "Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and vector
  autoregressions." Economics Letters 20(2):177­181.
Ziliak, James P. 1998. "Does the choice of consumption measure matter? An application to
  the permanent-income hypothesis." Journal of Monetary Economics 41(1):201 ­ 216.




                                              50
Appendices
A      Appendix for Empirical Analysis
                                                         i
A.1     Derivation of Permanent Income Uncertainty Stdi Eh
Permanent income uncertainty of individual i at age h is defined as
                                             1                                                     1
                            H                2
            i
                                 eij,h                           ei
                                                                  h+1,h   ei
                                                                           h+2,h         eiH,h
                                                                                                   2

      Stdi Eh = Vari               j -h
                                                 = Vari                 +        + ... +
                          j =h+1
                                 R                                  R       R2           R H -h

which is equal to the square root of the sum of all variance and covariance terms. The sum
of variances is
                                            H
                                                 Vari ei j,h
                                                  R 2(j -h)
                                          j =h+1

For h + 1 the covariance terms are

         2 Covi ei        i
                 h+1,h ; eh+2,h   Covi ei        i
                                        h+1,h ; eh+3,h           Covi ei        i
                                                                       h+1,h ; eH,h
                                +                      + · · · +
         R         R2                     R3                          RH -h

                                     2    H             (
                                                   Covi ei    ;e i
                                                         h+1,h k,h   )
                                     R    k=h+2          Rk-h



For h + 2 the covariance terms are

        2 Covi ei        i
                h+2,h ; eh+3,h   Covi ei        i
                                       h+2,h ; eh+4,h           Covi ei        i
                                                                      h+2,h ; eH,h
                               +                      + · · · +
        R2        R3                     R4                          RH -h

                                      2    H             (
                                                   Covi ei    ;e i
                                                         h+2,h k,h   )
                                     R2    k=h+3         Rk-h



and so on, with the number of covariance terms decreasing each time. For H - 1 there is
only one covariance term left

                                                                         H
                  2     Covi ei         i
                              H -1,h ; eH,h                  2               Covi ei         i
                                                                                   H -1,h ; ek,h
                                                    =
              RH -h-1        R H -h                      RH -h-1    k=H
                                                                                  Rk-h




                                                    51
Summing all of the above gives

                    H                    H                                                              H
         i
                      Vari ei  j,h   2       Covi ei        i
                                                   h+1,h ; ek,h   2                                       Covi ei        i
                                                                                                                h+2,h ; ek,h
 Vari   Eh   =                -
                                   +                   -
                                                                + 2
               j =h+1
                       R 2( j  h )   R k=h+2      R  k   h       R                                  k=h+3
                                                                                                               R k -h
                                              H                                                     H
                               2              Covi ei         i
                                                    H -2,h ; ek,h     2                                   Covi ei         i
                                                                                                                H -1,h ; ek,h
             + ··· +                                              + H -h-1
                           RH -h-2     k=H -1
                                                   R  k -h         R                               k=H
                                                                                                               R k -h
                    H                                 H -1              H
                          Vari ei  j,h                         1               Covi ei       i
                                                                                      j,h ; ek,h
             =                    -
                                              +2
                 j =h+1
                           R 2( j  h)
                                                     j =h+1
                                                              Rj -h   k=j +1
                                                                                   R k -h


A.2      Measurement Error
                  0,i
    ~i
Let e       i
     j,h = ej,h +ej,h be the measured forecast error made by the age h individual i in predicting
age j income. This is the sum of the true forecast error, ei
                                                           j,h , and the measurement error
e0 ,i
 j,h . Then the measured variance of the forecast error of permanent income is

                                                            2
                                                           =0 ,h by homoskedasticity                    =0 uncorr. with true error
                   H
                        Vars eij,h
                                        H
                                                                Vars e0 ,i
                                                                       j,h
                                                                                               H
                                                                                                            Covs ei      0,i
                                                                                                                  j,h , ej,h
~ s Ei
Var          =                     +                                                    +
     h
                 j =h+1
                         R2(j -h)    j =h+1
                                                                 R2(j -h)                    j =h+1
                                                                                                               R2(j -h)
                                                                                                          =0 uncorr. over time
                   H -1                                           H -1
                               1
                                       H
                                           Covs ei       i
                                                  j,h ; ek,h            1
                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                            Covs e0,i    0,i
                                                                                                                  j,h ; ek,h
             + 2                                             +2
                   j =h+1
                            Rj -h   k=j +1
                                               R k - h
                                                                j =h+1
                                                                       R -h
                                                                        j
                                                                                                k=j +1
                                                                                                                Rk-h
                                                  =0 uncorr. with true error                                     =0 uncorr. with true error
                   H -1                                                               H -1
                               1
                                       H
                                                    Covs e0 ,i    i
                                                           j,h ; ek,h                           1
                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                     Covs ei      0,i
                                                                                                                           j,h ; ek,h
             + 2                                                               +2
                   j =h+1
                          Rj -h     k=j +1
                                                        R k -h                       j =h+1
                                                                                              Rj -h     k=j +1
                                                                                                                         Rk-h
                   H                                 H                      H -1                H
                          Vars ei   j,h                     0 2
                                                               ,h                     1              Covs ei      i
                                                                                                           j,h ; ek,h
             =                    -
                                              +                       +2
                 j =h+1
                           R 2( j  h  )
                                                  j =h+1
                                                           R -h)
                                                            2(j
                                                                            j =h+1
                                                                                     Rj -h    k=j +1
                                                                                                         Rk-h
                                      H        2
                     i
                                            0   ,h
             = Vars Eh +                     2(j -h)
                                    j =h+1
                                           R

                                    0,h   2
                            H
   Since the term           j =h+1 R2(j -h)        is constant across sectors for a fixed h, the distribution
of variances of forecast errors of permanent income across sectors is unaffected by the mea-
                                                                                                            0,h  2
                                                                                                    H
surement error, except for the mean which increases by exactly                                      j =h+1 R2(j -h) .    However, it
is the variation across sectors, which is not affected, that is exploited in the main empirical
exercise of the paper.


                                                                 52
A.3       Zero Earnings Observations
To estimate government transfers as a function of labor income I first remove from (head
and wife total) government transfers the part that is predictable by demographics. To that
end I estimate the following specification on the pooled sample:

                           government transf er = 0 + 1 X + u

where X is a vector of observables including employment status, marital status, family size,
race, a cubic age polynomial and year dummies. I then project the residual u on labor
income:
                             u=~0 + ~ 1 × labor earnings +      t


and set annual labor earnings for zero earnings observations equal to ~ 0 . Additionally, I use
the results above to impute earnings for observations with positive annual earnings smaller
than $200, which are likely to be measured with error.


A.4       Sector Definition
A sector s is an industry-occupation pair. There are 8 industry groups displayed in the
first column of Table 7 and 5 occupation groups listed in the first row of the table. These
are aggregated based on the major industries and occupations Census classification. Since
the projection equation (7) estimates 13 parameters in its most general specification, there
must be at least 14 individuals of each age in each sector. This is why for some industries
such as construction or manufacturing occupation groups are aggregated even further. The
aggregation is based on the distribution of annual labor earnings as summarized by the
coefficient of variation. There is a total of 16 sectors in Table 7. An additional sector,
which is an exception from the industry-occupation pair rule, is the `unemployment sector',
containing all individuals that are unemployed at the time they make the income forecast.
   Table 8 summarizes some statistics at sector level. Sectors 5 and 12 are the largest, each
covering approximately 14% or the sample, while sectors 2 and 15 are the smallest with only
3% of respondents. In light of this discrepancy, it is worth pointing out that sector 12 is at
its maximum level of disaggregation, while an alternative disaggregation of sector 5 is not
supported by the `coefficient of variation' criterion. Annual labor earnings are highest in
sector 4 and, not surprisingly, lowest for the unemployed.
   Lastly, Table 9 reports the number of individuals in each age-sector cell.


                                              53
                                       Table 7: Sector definition

  Industry/Occupation           Executive       Technicians Sales and            Production        Farming,
                                   and             and       services             operators,       forestry
                               professional      admin.        occ.              fabricators,     and fishing
                              specialty occ.     support                           laborers          occ.
 Agriculture and Mining                                            Sector 1
 Construction                                  Sector 2                             Sector 3
 Manufacturing                    Sector 4          Sector 5       Sector 4         Sector 5
 Transp. and Utilities                  Sector 6                             Sector 7
 Trade                            Sector 8          Sector 9       Sector 10        Sector 9
 Finance                                                Sector 11
 Services                         Sector 12     Sector 13          Sector 14      Sector 15
 Public administration                                  Sector 16
  Notes: Table entries are labels allocated to each sector. The unemployment sector is labeled Sector 0.


                                       Table 8: Sector statistics

  Sector/Statistic    Percentage of       Average age          Average log annual       St. dev. of log annual
                       sample (%)                                labor earnings             labor earnings

      Sector 0             6.38                39                     7.92                      1.84
      Sector 1             4.47                41                     9.95                      1.12
      Sector 2             2.81                42                    10.49                      0.94
      Sector 3             5.91                38                    10.06                      0.93
      Sector 4             6.35                42                    10.87                      0.72
      Sector 5            14.01                40                    10.28                      0.71
      Sector 6             4.04                41                    10.69                      0.67
      Sector 7             4.90                41                    10.36                      0.81
      Sector 8             4.50                40                    10.46                      0.92
      Sector 9             4.80                39                    10.03                      0.79
      Sector 10            5.38                39                     9.97                      0.99
      Sector 11            5.03                41                    10.51                      0.91
      Sector 12           13.83                41                    10.55                      0.88
      Sector 13            3.97                39                    10.07                      0.79
      Sector 14            4.57                41                     9.63                      1.01
      Sector 15            2.98                40                     9.98                      0.89
      Sector 16            6.07                40                    10.52                      0.69



A.5      Consumption Imputation Procedure
I impute total consumption in the PSID by using the data available in the CEX. Variations
of this technique have been used several times in the literature (for example Skinner (1987)
and Ziliak (1998)). Here, I follow the strategy of Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008) who


                                                      54
                                   Table 9: Number of observations

Age/Sector   0        1     2     3     4      5     6     7     8      9    10    11     12   13    14    15    16

   22        191     76     14   154    33   317     45    61    64   133    187    58    96   97    124    63    63
   23        247     99     22   190    72   400     61    92    78   180    234   115   208   131   157    84   113
   24        295    134     41   225   111   479     83   123   106   202    262   156   318   167   162   100   153
   25        322    146     61   257   154   529     94   136   134   217    287   176   371   177   184   113   175
   26        305    154     70   269   186   563    116   146   146   246    259   185   443   187   191   120   188
   27        281    148     83   277   188   564    126   181   188   213    239   197   501   196   191   113   205
   28        274    173     85   286   197   565    138   192   190   208    218   201   541   203   199   126   207
   29        269    172     98   275   218   553    150   190   190   199    238   203   522   202   197   122   225
   30        262    167    113   270   230   571    140   213   193   210    197   208   527   184   191   117   242
   31        285    178    110   280   246   550    155   193   203   195    200   189   554   165   164   117   243
   32        263    169    109   274   246   580    167   195   209   188    193   184   579   150   157   103   250
   33        240    163    116   259   243   582    168   207   201   197    182   190   559   145   155   107   251
   34        244    154    117   237   252   541    166   201   177   196    203   188   532   135   169   126   256
   35        225    168    126   238   245   533    166   184   196   195    189   176   547   124   156   130   253
   36        220    154    138   221   255   510    159   201   200   184    182   182   534   135   152   101   247
   37        238    154    130   210   255   509    159   186   183   167    187   177   504   130   139   118   252
   38        211    155    107   226   249   499    170   174   171   163    179   162   530   136   135   110   260
   39        222    146    107   196   257   485    173   181   159   173    165   167   516   129   133   108   253
   40        196    151    120   183   257   490    162   183   167   167    157   167   514   123   130   112   251
   41        177    147    118   172   255   494    160   160   173   173    148   172   497   122   126   128   242
   42        176    151    108   198   254   470    158   167   164   162    147   164   493   113   125   113   230
   43        190    147     94   202   252   451    149   167   152   148    137   173   480    96   132   110   223
   44        175    139     97   193   257   438    144   178   148   138    133   175   478   106   122   102   218
   45        172    143    102   180   234   441    146   178   142   136    130   164   473   102   125    96   227
   46        169    141     95   175   235   438    136   168   152   131    141   164   470    95   126    78   212
   47        166    137     85   163   232   428    139   169   158   124    130   167   454    88   120    71   207
   48        158    138     88   148   214   421    139   159   148   127    135   158   429   100   121    74   201
   49        164    131     87   138   197   408    132   162   135   121    138   156   410   110   112    72   196
   50        137    118     88   152   205   392    127   154   119   104    129   139   415    95   126    66   194
   51        131    117     89   141   201   381    119   148   121   100    114   123   407    91   126    62   185
   52        132    119     84   130   195   364    113   153    98    95    124   119   385   97    107    59   166
   53        119    122     77   122   168   356    108   139    88    82    125   123   371   93    107    70   145
   54        135    117     74   113   163   325    104   121    87    85    128   126   350   84    100    65   130
   55        148    114     70   100   168   298     96   116   78    83     123   120   337   84    100   61    125
   56        126    115     62    89   153   274     91   109   70    84     119   113   328   74    114   59    117
   57        101    103     64    89   139   256     81   104   69    85     112   112   308   86    112   61    105
   58        85     103     59    89   123   243     78    86    73    77    107   108   282   84    111    53   101
   59        115     91     48    82   108   228     75    73    69    69    106   104   269   67    110    53    84
   60        105     91     47    74   100   201     62    62    60    73     88    89   240   66    104    49    82
   61        94     87     47    62    79    184    40    55    54    66      83    82   210   62     99   49    57
   62        88     68     34    49    74    149    37    47    57    51      79    70   160   61     79   42    57
   63        83     57     27    34    56    120    35    38    50    50      69    61   132   51     69   35    42
   64        76     52     25    32    45     84     28    28    43    42     59    55   118   44     63   31    28
   65        62     40     21    18    32     50     13    21    33    29     48    39    95    29    57    25    20

                   Notes: Table entries are number of observations in each age-sector cell.




                                                     55
                                  Sector 0                            Sector 1                      Sector 2
                                Unemployed                     Agriculture and Mining    Construction exec, admin, sales
                  5                                 1.5                                 1.5
                  4                                 1.2                                 1.2
                  3                                 0.9                                 0.9
                  2                                 0.6                                 0.6
                  1                                 0.3                                 0.3
                  0                                   0                                   0
                       20          40         60          20           40          60         20          40            60
                                    Age                              Age                              Age
                                  Sector 3                         Sector 4                         Sector 5
                            Construction workers           Manufacturing exec, sales      Manufacturing admin, workers
                 1.5                                1.5                                 1.5
                 1.2                                1.2                                 1.2
                 0.9                                0.9                                 0.9
                 0.6                                0.6                                 0.6
                 0.3                                0.3                                 0.3
                   0                                  0                                   0
                       20          40         60          20           40          60         20          40            60
                                   Age                             Age                                      Age
                                Sector 6                        Sector 7                                 Sector 8
                       Transportation exec, admin     Transportation sales, workers                  Trade executives
                 1.5                                1.5                                 1.5
                 1.2                                1.2                                 1.2
                 0.9                                0.9                                 0.9
                 0.6                                0.6                                 0.6
                 0.3                                0.3                                 0.3
                   0                                  0                                   0
                       20          40         60          20           40          60         20          40            60
                                    Age                                 Age                                Age




               Figure 8: Age Profile of Relative Income Uncertainty - by sector

Notes: The detailed definition of sectors is in Table 7 in Appendix A. In each graph, the solid black line
is the relative permanent income uncertainty in the secotor and the dashed gray lines represent the 95%
bootstrapped confidence interval.


estimate the demand for food (available in both surveys) as a function of total consumption,
relative prices and household characteristics using the data in CEX, and then invert it to
obtain a measure of total consumption in the PSID.
   The first step in the imputation procedure is the estimation of the food demand function
for individual i at time t:

                                          fi,t = Zi,t  + pt  +  (Di,t ) Ci,t +                     i,t



where f is the log of real food expenditure, Z is a set of household characteristics available
in both surveys (a quadratic term in age, education, region, cohort, number of children and
race dummies, family size), p is a set of prices (of food, alcohol and tobacco, transport,
fuel and utilities), C is the log of total consumption expenditure and                                                  is the error term.
The elasticity  (·) is allowed to vary with observed household characteristics. To account
for potential measurement error in total expenditure, the latter is instrumented with the

                                                                      56
                                   Sector 9                           Sector 10                        Sector 11
                            Trade admin, workers                     Trade sales                        Finance
                 1.5                                  2.4                                 1.5
                 1.2                                                                      1.2
                 0.9                                  1.6                                 0.9
                 0.6                                  0.8                                 0.6
                 0.3                                                                      0.3
                   0                                   0                                    0
                       20          40            60         20          40           60         20       40           60
                                    Age                                   Age                             Age
                                 Sector 12                             Sector 13                       Sector 14
                            Services executives                     Services admin                   Services sales
                 2.4                                  1.5                                 2.4
                                                      1.2
                 1.6                                  0.9                                 1.6
                 0.8                                  0.6                                 0.8
                                                      0.3
                  0                                     0                                  0
                       20          40            60         20          40           60         20       40           60
                                     Age                                  Age                             Age
                                  Sector 15                            Sector 16
                              Services workers                   Public administration
                 1.5                                  1.5
                 1.2                                  1.2
                 0.9                                  0.9
                 0.6                                  0.6
                 0.3                                  0.3
                   0                                    0
                       20          40            60         20          40           60
                                    Age                                  Age




           Figure 9: Age Profile of Relative Income Uncertainty - by sector (cont.)

Notes: The detailed definition of sectors is in Table 7 in Appendix A. In each graph, the solid black line
is the relative permanent income uncertainty in the secotor and the dashed gray lines represent the 95%
bootstrapped confidence interval.


average hourly wages of the husband and the wife by cohort, year and education level. In
both surveys food expenditure is the sum of annual expenditure on food at home and away
from home.
   In the second step of the imputation procedure, under the assumption of normality of
food demand, the function can be inverted to obtain a measure of non-durable and total
consumption in the PSID. The food demand is estimated with the sample of CEX male
heads with ages between 22 and 80, born between 1921 and 1970. The imputation is done
on a similarly constructed PSID sample, which does not include the SEO, immigrants and
Latino sub-sample. The latter are excluded to avoid selection issues and allow a one to one
mapping between the age profile of savings and the lifetime profile of income uncertainty
previously constructed. Since CEX data is only available starting 1980, I am able to construct
the PSID measure of total consumption from 1981 until 2003 (calendar years 1980-2002),
with breaks in 1988 and 1989 when PSID did not collect information of food expenditure.
When inverting the food demand equation, I set the constant term so that the average

                                                                       57
savings rate in the PSID matches the average savings rate reported in the NIPA Tables for
the same horizon of 8.2%.
    Savings are defined as after-tax income less consumption expenditure. After-tax income
is constructed as total family money income less federal income taxes. Total family money
income includes the taxable income and transfers of all members. The taxable income covers
labor and asset income. Transfers are not removed from family income because for part
of the survey years it is impossible to separate social security income from other forms of
transfers (e.g. children aid for unemployed parents). In constructing disposable income I
face the complication that PSID stopped determining taxes paid in 1991. To calculate taxes
owed for calendar years 1991 - 2010 (survey years 1992 - 2011) I use TAXSIM with PSID
variables as inputs.


A.6      Uncertainty estimation (extra)
I estimate the projection equation (7) at the sector level using log annual labor earnings of
the head as the dependent variable. That is, for each sector s and for all h < j I run the
following regression
                                         i
                                     ln yj =~0 + ~1 Xi + ~3 tj +i ,                                        (15)
                                                     h          j,h

                                                       ln y i
                                                          ^j,h


where the contents of Xi                                                   i
                       h and tj are as previously described. The residuals j,h are used to
construct the forecast errors ei
                               j,h from equation (7) according to
                                                                 72



                                  ei
                                   j,h = exp ln y
                                                  i
                                                ^j,h        exp i
                                                                j,h - 1 .                                  (16)

The forecast errors ei
                     j,h are then used to compute the permanent income uncertainty measure
as described in equation (6), using a gross interest rate R of 1.04 for discounting.
    Because the uncertainty measure defined in equation (6) is unit of measurement depen-
                            i
dent (in particular, Stds (Eh ) is measured in US dollars), I report the standard deviation of
the forecast error divided by expected permanent income, Y   ^h,s . Expected permanent income
is calculated as
                                             H          i i       H
                                                   Es yj |Ih            y^j,h
                                   ^h,s =
                                   Y                         =                 ,                           (17)
                                                     R h
                                                      j -               R j -h
                                            j =h                 j =h

where y
      ^j,h is defined in equation (7) and H is set to 80. Individuals between 66 and 80 years
  72
     If y = y                     ^ + , then e = y - y
              ^ + e and ln y = ln y                  ^ = exp (ln y ) - exp (ln y            ^ + ) - exp (ln y
                                                                               ^) = exp (ln y               ^) =
exp (ln y^) (exp () - 1).


                                                       58
old are treated as retired and thus not subject to labor income risk.73 Their income stream
is given by the social security income of the head.74
       Figure 10 displays the coefficient of variation across sectors, by age, of the level of per-
manent income uncertainty in gray and the 1-year change in permanent income uncertainty
in black for the baseline information set. Variation across sectors in the level of income risk
is roughly constant across age groups, averaging at 36% and suggesting that level differences
in risk between different sectors are an important source of identification at all ages. For the
slopes of the permanent income risk the average over age is 22%. There is little variation
across sectors in the speed at which uncertainty resolves in the twenties, suggesting that
rapid resolution of uncertainty early in the career is a feature common to all industries and
occupations.
                                           0.8
                                                                                               Level
                                                                                               Change


                                           0.6
                     C.v. of uncertainty




                                           0.4




                                           0.2




                                            0
                                                 20   25   30   35   40         45   50   55   60       65
                                                                          Age

         Figure 10: Coefficient of Variation of Income Uncertainty across Sectors, by Age

Notes: The gray bars represent the coefficient of variation of permanent income risk as defined in equation
(6) across the 17 sectors, by age. The black bars represent the coffiecient of variation of the 1-year change
in permanent income uncertainty calculated as the ratio between the permanent income risk at age h and
permanent income risk at age h - 1.


  73
     77% of the entries of age between 66 and 80 years old are retired. The rest of 23% are either employed
or unemployed.
  74
     A retired individual is assigned to the sector in which he last worked before retirement age.




                                                                     59
A.7      Additional Empirical Results
A.7.1     Age profile of consumption (extra)

                                                  18
                                                                                                     Not working
                                                                                                     Working
                   Thousands of 1996 US dollars   16


                                                  14


                                                  12


                                                  10


                                                  8


                                                  6


                                                  4


                                                  2
                                                       25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70    75      80
                                                                                  Age
                                                  22




                                                  18
                   Thousands of 1996 US dollars




                                                  14




                                                  10




                                                  6

                                                                                                     Not working
                                                                                                     Working
                                                  2
                                                       25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70    75      80
                                                                                  Age

                Figure 11: Age Profile of Consumption Expenditure of Parents

Notes: The figure shows the age profile of consumption of non-durables and services for employed parents
in the dark gray solid line and non-employed parents in the light gray solid line. The scatter plot is the
nonparametric profile.




                                                                                60
A.7.2    Back of the envelope calculation

The left panel of Figure 12 shows how dynastic uncertainty varies with the age of the child,
for three children: a services worker, a construction worker and a financier. Irrespective of
age, services workers have the lowest income risk among the three categories. Construction
workers face higher income uncertainty, but the speed of resolution is slightly higher than
that of services workers. Lastly, individuals in the finance sector have the highest level of
income risk and very little of it is resolved over time. The differences in parental consumption
(of non-durables and services) implied by the estimates in Table 1 are plotted in the right
panel of Figure 12. For every age of the child, the consumption of the parent of the services
worker is normalized to zero, and the consumption of the other two parents is expressed
relative to his consumption.
                             Panel A: Income uncertainty                                            Panel B: Parental consumption
                       14                                                                      0

                                               Finance sector                               -0.01

                      13.5                                                                  -0.02

                                                                                            -0.03
                                                                     Relative consumption




                       13                                                                   -0.04                 Construction workers
                                         Construction workers
                  c




                                                                                            -0.05                      Finance sector

                      12.5                                                                  -0.06

                                                                                            -0.07
                                  Services workers
                       12                                                                   -0.08

                                                                                            -0.09

                      11.5                                                                   -0.1
                             20         30           40         50                                  20       30           40        50
                                        Age of child                                                         Age of child

                        Figure 12: Regression Implied Consumption Gap



A.7.3    Response to income uncertainty by wealth

A natural question to ask, which has implications for issues like intergenerational mobility, is
whether dynastic precautionary saving occurs throughout the income distribution, or is it just
the rich parents who can provide such a security blanket for their children. To explore this,
I stratify children and parents in wealth quartiles, where (with a slight abuse of languange)
wealth is the sum between their permanent income (as defined in equation (17)) and wealth


                                                                 61
holdings. I then estimate a new version of equation (9), which includes interaction terms
between dynastic uncertainty and the parent's wealth quartile in columns (1)-(4) of Table
10 and between dynastic uncertainty and the child's wealth quartile in columns (5)-(8). The
strength of the dynastic precautionary saving motive is quite stable across both the parent
and the child's wealth distribution, with no two estimates being statistically different.

       Table 10: Response of Parental Consumption to Income Uncertainty by Wealth

                                    Parent's wealth quartile                            Child's wealth quartile

                               Q1             Q2         Q3          Q4        Q1           Q2          Q3          Q4

                                               -0.081                                            -0.088
      Parent's uncertainty
                                               (0.041)                                            (0.042)
                             -0.086      -0.075     -0.070         -0.070    -0.099       -0.098      -0.095      -0.089
      Child's uncertainty
                              (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.038)        (0.038)    (0.040)      (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.039)

Notes: Table entries are coefficient estimates from equation (9). The dependent variable is parental con-
sumption of non-durables and services. Wealth is defined as the sum of expected permanent income and
wealth holdings. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at parent level are in parenthesis.  significant at
10%;  significant at 5%;  significant at 1%




A.7.4     Robustness


Health status and selection into risky sectors

                             Table 11: Importance of Health and Selection

                                    Baseline             Only health          Only selection            Health and
                                                          controls              controls             selection controls
                                        (1)                  (2)                   (3)                       (4)

                                    -0.082                 -0.071                   -0.067                  -0.055
      Parent's uncertainty
                                    (0.044)                (0.039)                  (0.037)                 (0.032)
                                    -0.079                  -0.063               -0.085                     -0.073
      Child's uncertainty
                                     (0.037)               (0.039)                (0.034)                    (0.036)

Notes: Table entries are estimates of the effect of permanent income uncertainty on total parental consump-
tion. Column (1) reproduces the estimates in Table 1. Column (2) reports the estimates when the parent's
and child's health status is included in the set of controls. Column (3) shows results controlling for the child's
initial sector and excluding self-employed children. Column (4) shows estimates when simultaneously con-
trolling for health status, initial sector and excluding self-employed children from the sample. Bootstrapped
standard errors clustered at parent level are in parentheses.  significant at 10%;  significant at 5%; 
significant at 1%



                                                              62
Heterogeneity of the bequest motive

                             Table 12: Importance of the Bequest Motive

                                           Baseline        Child's uncertainty ×         Append
                                                            Number of children         non-parents
                                             (1)                    (2)                    (3)

                                           -0.082                  -0.072               -0.093
      Parent's uncertainty
                                           (0.044)                (0.045)                (0.023)
                                           -0.079                                        -0.081
      Child's uncertainty                                           --
                                            (0.037)                                       (0.038)
                                                                  -0.075
      Child's uncertainty ×1{n=1}            --                                            --
                                                                   (0.037)
                                                                  -0.080
      Child's uncertainty ×1{n=2}            --                                            --
                                                                   (0.037)
                                                                  -0.082
      Child's uncertainty ×1{n=3}            --                                            --
                                                                   (0.037)
                                                                  -0.074
      Child's uncertainty ×1{n=4}            --                                            --
                                                                   (0.037)
                                                                  -0.100
      Child's uncertainty ×1{n5}             --                                            --
                                                                   (0.037)

Notes: Table entries are coefficient estimates of the effect of permanent income uncertainty on parent's total
                                                                                                     p
consumption. Column (1) reproduces the estimates in Table 1. Column (2) reports estimates of 1         and of
 p
2 by number of children. Column (3) shows estimates when non-parents are added to the baseline sample,
allowing for different intercepts. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at parent level are in parenthesis.

  significant at 10%;  significant at 5%;  significant at 1%




B      Appendix for the Quantitative Model

B.1      Equilibrium of the model with strategic interactions
I discuss the equilibrium properties in a simplified version of the model in the main text,
in which parents and children overlap for two periods only, as in Figure 13. I focus the
discussion on interior solutions, at which first order conditions can be used to characterize
the optimum. For expositional purposes only, in I keep track of gp as a separate state variable
in the child's problem, but what matters for the child is cash-on-hand Rac + gp , and not its
origin. For added notational simplicity, assume there is no distiction between sectors. In the



                                                      63
full model, this acts towards adding more uncertainty (on top of income uncertainty), thus
smoothing payoff functions.


                                   3     4


                                   1     2      3        4


                                                1        2    3    4


                                 Figure 13: Simple Lifecycle Structure

   I now discuss the equations that characterize the decision problems of the two possible
parent-child pairs backwards: an age-4 parent with an age-2 child, and an age-3 parent with
an age-1 child.

   Age-4 parent with age-2 child

   In the parent's terminal period, the problem of the child (second stage) is:

              V c 2, ac , yc , gp , ap    =     max u (cc ) +  EV p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc     (1)
                                                cc ,ac

                                         s.t.   cc + ac = yc + Rac + gp                         (2)
                                                ac  0,                                          (3)

where E denotes the expectation operator over all possible future income realizations of yp
conditional on yc (next period the child becomes a parent) and of yc conditional on yp . The
first order condition is

                              u (cc ) =  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc + ac ,                    (4)

where ac  0 is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint and V2p denotes the derivative
of the value function with respect to its second argument. The optimal policy functions
are cc 2, ac , yc , gp , ap and ac 2, ac , yc , gp , ap . This is the standard condition that states
that savings are chosen to equate the marginal cost of forgone current consumption with the
marginal benefit of having an extra unit of resources available in the following period.




                                                         64
    In the first stage, the parent solves

              V p (4, ap , ac , yp , yc )     =      max u (cp ) + u cc 2, ac , yc , gp , ap
                                                    cp ,ap ,gp

                                              +      EV p 3, ap + ac 2, ac , yc , gp , ap , 0, yp , yc            (5)
                                             s.t.   cp + ap + gp = yp + Rap                                       (6)
                                                    ap  0, gp  0,                                                 (7)

given that the child sets u cc 2, ac , yc , gp , ap               =  EV2p 3, ap + ac 2, ac , yc , gp , ap , 0, yp , yc +
ac in the second stage. The resulting optimal policy functions are ap (4, ap , ac , yp , yc ),
gp (4, ap , ac , yp , yc ) and cp (4, ap , ac , yp , yc ).
    The first order condition with respect to ap is:

                                            cc                                                    ac
             u (cp ) = u (cc )                 +  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc             1+          + ap ,     (8)
                                            ap                                                    ap

where ap is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint. From the child's budget constraint
            cc
we have     ap
                 = - a
                     a
                       c
                         , so the above becomes
                          p



                         u (cp ) =  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc + ap
                                   c
                                 +  c u (cc ) -  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc                      .              (9)
                                   ap
                                                         standard optimality condition of child


In the terminal period, the parent sets the size of the bequest to equate the marginal cost
from lower consumption with the marginal benefit from providing the child with an extra
unit of resources in the beginning of parenthood. If the child is unconstrained, then the term
in the brackets of equation (9) vanishes, and the standard optimality condition for savings
(here bequest) holds. If the child is constrained, then there is an additional benefit from
higher parental bequest that measures the net marginal utility for the parent when the child
increases current consumption in response to higher parental savings in the current period.
    The first order condition with respect to gp is:

                                                cc                                 ac
                   u (cp ) = u (cc )               +  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc    + g ,                      (10)
                                                gp                                 gp

where gp is the multiplier on the non-negativity of transfers constraint. From the child's




                                                                 65
                                    cc               ac
budget constraint we have           gp
                                           =1-       gp
                                                          , so the above becomes

                                             ac
              u (cp ) = u (cc ) -               u (cc ) -  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc                +g .    (11)
                                             gp
                                                            standard optimality condition of child


The properties of the parent's transfer function are discussed after characterizing the equi-
librium allocation for the pair in which the parent is age 3 and the child is age 1.

    Age-3 parent with age-1 child

    In the first period, the problem of the child (second stage) is:

    V c 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp    =      max u (cc )
                                            cc ,ac

                                     +       EV c 2, ac , yc , gp 4, ap , ac , yp , yc , ap 4, ap , ac , yp , yc (12)
                                    s.t.    cc + ac = yc + Rac + gp                                            (13)
                                            ac  0,                                                             (14)

where E denotes the expectation operator over all possible future income realizations of yp
conditional on yp and of yc conditional on yc . The first order condition is

                                                                            gp                             ap
u (cc ) =  EV2c 2, ac , yc , gp , ap + EV4c 2, ac , yc , gp , ap               + EV5c 2, ac , yc , gp , ap    +ac ,
                                                                            ac                             ac
                                                                                                              (15)
                                                                c
where ac  0 is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint and Vn  denotes the derivative of
the child's value function with respect to its nth argument. At an interior solution, this can
be further written as

                                                           gp                                 ap
           u (cc ) = REu (cc ) +  Eu (cc )                    +  EV2p 3, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc    .             (16)
                                                           ac                                 ac
                                                taxation of child savings by parent/disincentive to save


The term in the brackets of equation (16) illustrates the strategic interactions that appear
in this setting: the parent "taxes" savings of children by reducing inter-vivos transfers and
own saving when the child saves more. This decreases the marginal benefit of saving for the
child and induces him to over-consume relative to a setting with full commitment (i.e. a
setting without the term in the brackets of equation (16)).




                                                             66
       In the first stage, the age 3 parent solves

                V p (3, ap , ac , yp , yc )    =         max u (cp ) + u cc 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp
                                                     cp ,ap ,gp

                                               +      EV p 4, ap , ac 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp , yp , yc   (17)
                                              s.t.   cp + ap + gp = yp + Rap                                (18)
                                                     ap  0, gp  0,                                          (19)

given that cc 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp and ac 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp satisfy the child's first order con-
dition and budget constraint previously discussed.
       The first order condition with respect to ap is:

                                       cc
                u (cp ) = u (cc )           +  EV2p 4, ap , ac 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp , yp , yc
                                       ap
                                                                                       ac
                                 + EV3p 4, ap , ac 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp , yp , yc    + ap ,            (20)
                                                                                       ap

                                                             p
where ap is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint and Vn  denotes the derivative of the
parent's value function with respect to its nth argument. At an interior solution, this can be
further written as75

                                                                      cc
                            u (cp ) = REu cp +                           [u (cc ) - REu (cc )] .            (21)
                                                                      ap
                                                                             standard EE of child


If no transfers occur in the following period and the parent is constrained, then the standard
Euler Equation of the child holds, and the parent's choice of savings in characterized by
the standard trade-off between the marginal cost of forgone consumption and the marginal
benefit of additional resources in the future. With positive transfers, the term in the brackets
of equation (21) does not vanish. The first part of this term measures the marginal utility
for the parent when the child increases current consumption in response to higher parental
savings in the current period due to consumption smoothing. It enters the Euler Equation
with a positive sign and is therefore an additional benefit for the parent from saving. Since
the child consumes more in response to an increase in parental wealth, he will have less
wealth in the following period. This enters the parent's Euler Equation with a negative sign
  75
       This step uses three intermediate results: (i) the envelope condition in the problem of the age-4 parent
                                                c    a
V2p    4, ap , ac , yp , yc = Ru cp , (ii) that ac + ac = 0, which follows from the child's budget constraint
                                                     p            p

and (iii) that V3p 4, ap , ac , yp , yc = Ru (cc ).



                                                                      67
and therefore represents for the parent a disincentive to save.
   The parent's first order condition with respect to gp is:

                             cc                                                        ac
       u (cp ) = u (cc )        +  EV3p 4, ap , ac 1, ac , yc , gp , ap , yp , yp , yc    + g ,    (22)
                             gp                                                        gp

                                                                                                  cc
where gp is the multiplier on the non-negativity of transfers constraint. Using that              gp
                                                                                                       =
     ac
1-   gp
          , at an interior solution, this can be further written as

                                                ac
                          u (cp ) = u (cc ) -       [u (cc ) -  Eu (cc )] .                        (23)
                                                gp
                                                        standard EE of child


The properties of the parent's transfer function are discussed in the following subsection.

   A heuristic discussion of the properties of the transfer function

   Equations (11) and (23) show that as long as the child's savings respond to the parent's
                                                               ac
transfer (i.e. the child is not borrowing constrained and      gp
                                                                     = 0), then the parent's transfer
decision is distorted relative to the first best setup with full commitment (and no strategic
interactions). Since the parent makes the first move in the stage game, he can limit the
strategic behavior of the child by setting the transfer according to u (cp ) = u (cc ), as he
would in a setup without the strategic interactions that are operative here.
                                                                                             ac
   In terms of equations (11) and (23), this amounts to the parent wanting to set            gp
                                                                                                  = 0.
In other words, the parent would want to set the transfer such that the child consumes it all
and achieves the level of consumption that the parent desires for him. Due to the fact that
the child engages in over-consumption, as savings are taxed by the parent through lower
future transfers, in this model the only scenario in which the child's consumption is below
the parent's desired level of consumption for him is when the child is constrained. Otherwise
the child consumes at least as much as the parent would want him to consume, so there is
no scope for positive transfers.
   Therefore, the parent sets transfers as follows. If in the absence of transfers the child
is unconstrained, i.e. ac ·, ac , yc , 0, ap > 0, then transfers are set to zero (in this case, if
the parent were to transfer another dollar, part of it would be saved). If in the absence of
transfers the child is constrained, i.e. ac ·, ac , yc , 0, ap = 0, then set gp to satisfy u (cp ) =
u cc ·, ac , yc , gp , ap . Numerically, I verify that the parent indeed finds it optimal to set
the transfer to zero if the child is not constrained in the absence of the transfer.



                                                  68
  B.2        Computational Algorithm
  The algorithm to compute a steady-state equilibrium amounts to finding the value functions
  and the associated decision rules, as well as the stationary measure of households of different
  ages. The two steps are now further detailed. The algorithm is written for the general case
  in which the child's age runs from 1 to Hc , the parent's age runs from Hc + 1 to H and there
  is a d periods age difference between parents and children.

  Finding the policy functions

  I solve the model using value function iteration with linear interpolation.                           This is be-
  cause in a setting like this one ex-ante there are concerns about multiplicity of equilib-
  ria and non-smooth policy functions, and one cannot rely merely on Euler Equations for
  solving for the optimal policy functions. The algorithm for finding the optimal policy
  functions for the parent ap (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ), gp (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) and the child
  ac hc , a                                   ~c = ac + gp , hp = Hc + 1, . . . , H and hc = hp - d is as
          ~c , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc , where a
  follows:

Step 1. Place a grid on the asset, labor income and sector spaces spaces. Let N A be the number
         of notes in the asset space, N Y be the number of nodes in the income space and N S
         the number of sectors. This means the state space has d × N A2 × N Y 2 × N S 2 nodes.
         The labor income grid and the corresponding age specific transition probabilities are
         approximated using the algorithm in Tauchen (1986).

Step 2. Initialize the value function V0p (Hc + 1, ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ), for all ap , ac = 1, . . . , N A,
         yp , yc = 1, . . . , N Y and sp , sc = 1, . . . , N S .

Step 3. Starting from this guess, iterate backwards over all parent-child age pairs (hp , hc ) 
         {(H, Hc ) , (H - 1, Hc - 1) , . . . , (Hc + 1, 1)} to update the initial guess to
         V1p (Hc + 1, ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ). To that end, for each parent child pair solve the two-
         stage game backwards, as follows:

    Step 3.1 Solve the child's optimization problem to get the policy functions
                cc hc , a
                        ~c , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc and ac hc , a
                                                                ~c , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc . The child's optimization
                problem is solved by value function iteration with linear interpolation. In partic-




                                                           69
             ular, for hc = Hc , I solve

                     V1c Hc , a
                              ~c , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc = max u ((1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                                ~ c - ac )
                                                                          ac
                                                          s             s         y
                     +                                    H c +1
                                                                 sp |sc ch sc |sp H c +1
                                                                                         yp |yc , sp ch yc |yp , sc
                           sp        sc    yp        yc

                     ×V0p Hc + 1, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc                .

                                                                76
             For hc = Hc - 1, . . . , 1, I solve

                   V1c hc , a
                            ~c , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc = max u ((1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                              ~ c - ac )
                                                                     ac
                                                      s                s             y                     y
                   +                                  h c +1
                                                             (sc |sc ) h p +1
                                                                              sp |sp h c +1
                                                                                            (yc |yc , sc ) h p +1
                                                                                                                  yp |yp , sp
                         sp     sc        yp    yc

                   ×V1c hc + 1, Rac + gp , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc                .


 Step 3.2 At each step of the backward iteration, given the child's policy function, solve the
             parent's optimization problem to get policy functions cp (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ),
             gp (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) and ap (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) in two steps, as described
             below.
             First, solve for the optimal transfer gp , conditional on ap . As discussed in the pre-
             vious section, given ap , the transfer gp is set as follows: (i) if ac hc , Rac + 0, yc , ap , yp , sp , sc >
             Ahc , then gp hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc , ap = 0 and (ii) if ac hc , Rac + 0, yc , ap , yp , sp , sc =
             Ahc , then gp hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc , ap = max {0, g
                                                                           ^p }, where g
                                                                                       ^p solves

                      u yp + Rap - ap - gp - u cc hc , Rac + gp , yc , ap , yp , sp , sc                          = 0.


             Second, solve for the optimal savings ap that maximize the parent's value function.
             This step is also solved by value function iteration with linear interpolation. In
  76
     For hc at which parent is retired the transition probabilities are adjusted to reflect the absence of income
risk.




                                                                     70
              particular, for hp = Hp I solve

                      V1p (Hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) = max u (1 -  ) yp + Rap - gp - ap
                                                                              ap

                                                                   s             s         y
                      +                                            H c +1
                                                                          sp |sc ch sc |sp H c +1
                                                                                                  yp |yc , sp ch yc |yp , sc
                                sp        sc        yp        yc

                      ×V0p Hc + 1, ap + ac , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc                      .

              For hp = Hp - 1, . . . , Hc + 1, I solve

                     V1p (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) = max u (1 -  ) yp + Rap - gp - ap
                                                                            ap

                                                              s                s             y                     y
                     +                                        h c +1
                                                                     (sc |sc ) h p +1
                                                                                      sp |sp h c +1
                                                                                                    (yc |yc , sc ) h p +1
                                                                                                                          yp |yp , sp
                           sp        sc        yp        yc

                     ×V1p hp + 1, ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc                      .

              Let ap (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) denote the optimal parental savings. Additionally,
                  ¯p (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) = gp hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc , ap (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc )
              let g
              denote the implied optimal transfer. Then, the child's consumption and savings
              defined on the same state space as the parent's can be backed out by interpolation.
              For example, consumption is

                   cc (hc , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) =
                   cc hc , Rac + gp (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) , yc , ap (hp , ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) , yp , sp , sc .


Step 4. If V0 and V1 are close enough for all grid points, the value and policy functions are
        found. Otherwise, set V0p (Hc + 1, ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ) = V1p (Hc + 1, ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc )
        and go back to Step 3.

  Finding the stationary distribution

  Let A = [-a, a
               ¯], Y =               y, y¯ and S = [s, s ¯] be the asset, labor efficiency and sector
  space, respectively. Define S          ~  A2 × Y 2 × S 2 as the state space with the generic ele-
  ment s~ = (ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ). Denote as S~ the Borel  -algebra of the state space, with
  typical subset A2 × Y 2 × S 2 . Let fh (~    s) be a probability measure defined over S,~ S
                                                                                            ~ . fh (~
                                                                                                    s)
  denotes the measure of households of age h which have state variable s. Denote as Fh (~
                                                                                        s) the
  corresponding cumulative distribution function. In a stationary (partial) equilibrium, the


                                                                            71
  invariant measures for this economy need to satisfy the consistency conditions enumerated
  below.
     The consistency condition for a child household of age hc = 1 is:

                                                                             s             s
                  f1 (~
                      s) =           1                  a
                                                            H
                                                               s)
                                                              (~    1{ac =0} H c +1
                                                                                    sp |sc ch sc |sp
                                 ~
                                 S       ap =aHc (~
                                                  s)+        n

                                y
                                H c +1
                                       yp |yc , sp ch yc |yp , sc dFHc (~
                                                                        s) ,

  and that for child households of age hc = 2, . . . , Hc is:

                                                                                  s         s
                       s) =
                  fhc (~
                                 ~
                                 S
                                     1               s)
                                         ap =ahp -1 (~
                                                             1{ac =a
                                                                       hc -1 (~
                                                                              s)} hp sp |sp hc (sc |sc )
                                 y                   y
                                 hp      yp |yp , sp h c
                                                         (yc |yc , sc ) dFhc -1 (~
                                                                                 s) .

     Since every parent household has one child, the measure of parent households of age
  hp = Hc + 1, . . . , H is fhp (~
                                 s ) = fhc (~
                                            s ).


  B.3      Parameters of the income process
  The permanent income uncertainty profiles for the low and high risk sectors are constructed
  by averaging over the uncertainty profiles of the component sectors, weighted by the number
  of observations in each component sector. The variance of the idiosyncratic component of
  earnings is assumed to be a cubic polynomial in age:

                                                                            2               3
                               2               h                     h                 h
                               hs    = as + b s + c s                           + ds
                                               10                    10                10
  Parameters s , as , bs , cs , ds are estimated by minimizing, for each sector, the weighted
  distance between the empirical age profile of income risk relative to permanent income and
  that implied by the decomposition (12)-(13) and the polynomial assumption. I use the
  identity matrix as the weighting matrix. The steps to construct the permanent income risk
  implied by the parametric assumptions in the model are as follows:

Step 1. Discretize the idiosyncratic component of income using the Tauchen (1986) method.

Step 2. Simulate the earnings path of 5, 000 individuals.

Step 3. Compute forecast errors for the simulated individuals as difference between realized
        earnings and expected earnings.


                                                                72
Step 4. Use these forecast errors to compute permanent income risk in sector s according to
        equation (6) and then divide by expected permanent income using gross discount rate
        R = 1.04.


  B.4     Model fit (extra)
  I begin with examining the model implied age profile of consumption, displayed in Figure 14.
  Qualitatively, consumption over the life-cycle displays similar patterns as those documented
  in Figure 3 in terms of the backloading after retirement. In the model, this is solely a reflec-
  tion of dynastic precautionary savings. After retirement, which occurs at age 65, parents'
  income is no longer subject to risk, but their children's income still is. The resolution of
  children's permanent income stimulates parental consumption and generates the backloaded
  consumption profile. Note however that, while the model matches the level of average con-
  sumption over the life-cycle ($7,929 in the model versus $7,998 in the data), it understates
  the consumption of the young and overstates the consumption of the old.
                                                   14




                                                   12
                    Thousands of 1996 US dollars




                                                   10




                                                   8




                                                   6




                                                   4
                                                        20   30   40     50   60      70      80
                                                                        Age

                                            Figure 14: Model Implied Age Profile of Consumption

  Notes: The figure shows the model implied average age profile of consumption, obtained by estimating
  equation (8) with model generated data.


     Since the model is meant to capture various motives for which individuals hold wealth,
  it is desirable that it generates a distribution of wealth that resembles the US data. This
  is largely the case, as shown in Table 13, which compares quintiles of cross-sectional wealth

                                                                       73
and after-tax income found in the model and in the data, and in Figure 15, which plots the
wealth shares of 5 wealth quintiles for different age groups. The data moments are calculated
based on the pooled PSID sample.

               Table 13: Characteristics of the Wealth and Income Distribution

                                                                                                                  Quintiles

                                                                   Q1              Q2                                  Q3             Q4          Q5

        Wealth distribution
        US data                                                    0.57           2.73                              6.97          16.50          73.23
        Model                                                      0.59           1.73                              5.68          17.81          74.19

        Income distribution
        US data                                                    4.93           10.84                            16.77          24.09          43.37
        Model                                                      4.56           9.96                             12.98          20.93          51.57




                                                            <= 35                                                             36-50
                                         80                                                                  80
             Share wealth held (%)




                                                                                     Share wealth held (%)




                                                       Data
                                         60            Model                                                 60

                                         40                                                                  40

                                         20                                                                  20

                                             0                                                               0
                                                  Q1   Q2     Q3        Q4   Q5                                   Q1    Q2     Q3      Q4   Q5
                                                            Quintiles                                                        Quintiles
                                                             51-65                                                             65+
                                             80                                                              80
                     Share wealth held (%)




                                                                                     Share wealth held (%)




                                             60                                                              60

                                             40                                                              40

                                             20                                                              20

                                             0                                                               0
                                                  Q1   Q2     Q3      Q4     Q5                                   Q1    Q2     Q3      Q4   Q5
                                                            Quintiles                                                        Quintiles


                                                       Figure 15: Wealth Distribution, By Age




                                                                                    74
B.5      Unitary household model
In the unitary model, given s
                            ~ = (a, yp , yc , sp , sc ), a non-terminal parent of age hp solves

                     Vhpp (~
                           sp )     =      max u (cp ) + u (cc ) +  EVhpp +1 (~
                                                                              s |y, s)
                                          cp ,cc ,a

                                  s.t.    cp + cc + a = (1 -  ) (yp + yc ) + Ra
                                          a  Ahp  0,

      ~ = a , yp , yc , sp , sc . The expectation is taken over all possible sector and income
where s
transitions, for the parent and the child. Note that if the parent is retired his net income is
 (^
  yp , s
       ^p ), and the expectation is taken only over possible sector and income transitions for
the child. A terminal parent with state variables s
                                                  ~ = (a, y
                                                          ^p , yc , sp , sc ) solves

                       p                                               p
                     V79 (~
                          sp )      =      max u (cp ) + u (cc ) +  EV51 ~p |y, s
                                                                         s
                                          cp ,cc ,a

                                  s.t.                    yp ) + (1 -  ) yc + Ra
                                          cp + cc + a =  (^
                                          a  Ahp  0,

where s
      ~ = a , yp , yc , sp , sc .


B.6      Model with mortality and medical expenditure risk
Assume retired individuals, who are always parents, face survival probability hp and uncer-
tain health status m which determines their medical spending m
                                                             ¯ (hp , m). Below is the model
with medical expenditure and mortality risk.

Decision problems

The problem of a working parent-child pair.                         There is no change in this probem with re-
spect to the baseline case without mortality risk. In the second stage, given s
                                                                              ~c = a
                                                                                   ~c , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc
the child of age hc solves

                            Vhcc (~
                                  sc )    =           max u (cc ) +  EVhcc +1 (~
                                                                               sc |y, s)
                                                      cc ,ac

                                         s.t.         cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                             ~c
                                                      ac  Ahc




                                                               75
where s
      ~c = Rac + gp , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc , s = (sp , sc ) and y = (yp , yc ). The next period's
transfer gp and parental savings ap are equilibrium objects. Call the resulting optimal
policy function cc (hc , s
                         ~c ). In the first stage, given s
                                                         ~p = (ap , ac , yp , yc , sp , sc ), the parent of
age hp solves

     Vhpp (~
           sp )     =     max u (cp ) + u cc hc , ac , yc , yp , gp , ap , sp , sc   +  EVhpp +1 s
                                                                                                 ~p |y, s
                         cp ,ap ,gp

                  s.t.   cp + ap + gp = (1 -  ) yp + Rap
                         ap  Ahp , gp  0

where s
      ~p = ap , ac hc , Rac + gp , yc , yp , ap , sp , sc , yp , yc , sp , sc . The expectation is taken
over all possible sector and income transitions, for the parent and the child, as both of them
are in the labor market in the following year.

The problem of a retired parent-child pair.                     At the end of age Hret = 65 the parent
retires and starts earning constant income  (^
                                             yp ), which is a function of predicted career
earnings. Retired parents face uncertainty about survival and medical expenses. Medical
expenses evolve stochastically during retirement according to the function m
                                                                           ¯ (hp , m). Thus,
in each period a retiree's medical expenses depends on current age hp and current expense
shock m. At the end of each period, the parent dies with probability 1 - hp , in which
case the child inherits his parent's end of period assets. In the second stage, given s
                                                                                      ~c =
 a         ^p , ap , s
 ~c , yc , y         ^p , sc , m , the child of age hc whose parent is alive solves

     Vhcc (~             max u (cc ) + hp EVhcc +1 (~                           ¯ c (¯
                                                    sc |yc , sc , m) +  1 - hp EV
           sc )    =                                                             hc +1 sc |yc , sc )
                         cc ,ac

                  s.t.   cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + a
                                                ~c
                         ac  Ahc

where s
      ~c = ac , yc , y
                     ^p , gp , ap , s
                                    ^p , sc , m     and s
                                                        ¯c = ac + ap , yc , sc . Call the resulting optimal
policy function cc (hc , s
                         ~c ).
    A child whose parent is no longer alive solves:

                              ¯hc (¯
                              V    sc )    =                      ¯hc +1 (¯
                                                  max u (cc ) +  EV       sc |yc , sc )
                                 c                                   c
                                                  cc ,ac

                                          s.t.    cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + Rac
                                                  ac  Ahc ,

where s
      ¯c = (ac , yp , sc ).

                                                           76
    In the first stage, given s
                              ~p = (ap , ac , y
                                              ^p , yc , s
                                                        ^p , sc , m), the problem of a retired parent of
age hp = Hret + 1, . . . , H - 1 is

           Vhpp (~
                 sp )    =      max u (cp ) + u cc hc , Rac + gp , yc , y
                                                                        ^p , ap , s
                                                                                  ^p , sc , m
                               cp ,ap ,gp

                               hp EVhpp +1 s                           ¯ c (¯
                                           ~p |yc , sc , m +  1 - hp  EV
                         +                                              hc +1 sc |yc , sc )

                        s.t.   cp + ap + gp + m
                                              ¯ =  (^
                                                    yp ) + Rap
                               ap  Ahp , gp  0

      ~p = ap , ac hc , Rac + gp , yc , y
where s                                 ^p , ap , s             ^p , yc , s
                                                  ^p , sc , m , y         ^p , sc , m   and s
                                                                                            ¯c is as previously
defined. Only the child is in the labor force, so the expectation is taken only with respect
to yc and sc .

The problem of a terminal parent-child pair.                     At the end of age H the parent dies with
probability one. In the following period his child becomes a parent and his own child starts
earning income. Given s
                      ~c = a         ^p , ap , s
                           ~c , yc , y         ^p , sc , m , the second stage problem of a child
whose parent is alive is:



                                 c                                   p
                               V50 (~
                                    sc )     =     max u (cc ) +  EV51 ~p |y, s
                                                                       s
                                                   cc ,ac

                                            s.t.   cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + a
                                                                          ~c
                                                   ac  Ahc

      ~p = ac + ap , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc , y = yc , yp and s = sc , sp . This allows for intergen-
where s
erational correlation in sectors and income processes. I assume that young adults (age 22)
have no assets. The problem of a child whose parent is dead is:

                               ¯50
                               V c
                                   (¯
                                    sc )     =                       p
                                                   max u (cc ) +  EV51 ~p |y, s
                                                                       s
                                                   cc ,ac

                                            s.t.   cc + ac = (1 -  ) yc + Rac
                                                   ac  Ahc

where s
      ~p = ac , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc .




                                                            77
    In the first stage, given s
                              ~p = (ap , ac , y
                                              ^p , yc , s
                                                        ^p , sc , m), the terminal parent solves

   p                                                                                           p
 V79 (~
      sp )     =       max u (cp ) + u cc hc , Rac + gp , yc , y         ^p , sc , m
                                                               ^p , ap , s               +  EV51 ~p |y, s
                                                                                                 s
                      cp ,ap ,gp

              s.t.    c p + ap + g p + m
                                       ¯ =  (^
                                             yp ) + Rap
                      ap  Ahp , gp  0

where s
      ~p = ap + ac hc , Rac + gp , yc , y
                                        ^p , ap , s
                                                  ^p , sc , m , 0, yp , yc , sp , sc .

Calibration of the medical expense process

The calibration is taken from Kopecky and Koreshkova (2014), who assume that medical
expenses can be decomposed into a deterministic age component and a stochastic component,
as follows:
                        ¯ (hp , m) = m,0 + m,1 hp + m,2 h2
                     ln m                                         3        4
                                                         p + m,3 hp + m,4 hp + m,


where m  {m1 , m2 , m3 , m4 } follows a finite state Markov chain with probability transition
matrix mm and initial distribution m . The coefficients of the age polynomial are: m,0 =
91.56, m,1 = -5.08, m,2 = 0.103, m,0 = -9.16 × 10-4 , m,0 = 3.01 × 10-6 . The grid for the
medical shock is m  {0, 2, 3.5, 6} and the initial distribution is m = [0.2, 0.16, 0.61, 0.03].
Lastly, the probability transition matrix for the medical shock is:
                                                                                  
                                            0.7165 0.1894 0.0783 0.0158
                                                                                  
                                          0.1746 0.5130 0.2901 0.0224             
                                   mm   = 0.0772 0.2784 0.6233 0.0211
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          0.0633 0.3851 0.4576 0.0940




                                                       78
