                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE STRUCTURE OF ECONOMIC NEWS

                                          Leland Bybee
                                          Bryan T. Kelly
                                           Asaf Manela
                                           Dacheng Xiu

                                       Working Paper 26648
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26648


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We benefitted from discussions with Rob Engle, Will Goetzmann, Toby Moskowitz, Lasse
Pedersen, Jesse Shapiro, Bob Shiller, and seminar and conference participants at AQR, Chicago,
NYU, and Yale. Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of AQR Capital Management, its affiliates, or its employees; do
not constitute an offer, solicitation of an offer, or any advice or recommendation, to purchase any
securities or other financial instruments, and may not be construed as such, nor do they
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26648.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Leland Bybee, Bryan T. Kelly, Asaf Manela, and Dacheng Xiu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Structure of Economic News
Leland Bybee, Bryan T. Kelly, Asaf Manela, and Dacheng Xiu
NBER Working Paper No. 26648
January 2020
JEL No. C43,C55,C58,C82,E0,E17,E32,G0,G1

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose an approach to measuring the state of the economy via textual analysis of business
news. From the full text content of 800,000 Wall Street Journal articles for 1984{2017, we
estimate a topic model that summarizes business news as easily interpretable topical themes and
quantifies the proportion of news attention allocated to each theme at each point in time. We then
use our news attention estimates as inputs into statistical models of numerical economic time
series. We demonstrate that these text-based inputs accurately track a wide range of economic
activity measures and that they have incremental forecasting power for macroeconomic
outcomes, above and beyond standard numerical predictors. Finally, we use our model to retrieve
the news-based narratives that underly "shocks" in numerical economic data.


Leland Bybee                                    Asaf Manela
Yale University                                 Washington University in St. Louis,
165 Whitney                                     Olin Business School,
New Haven, CT 06511                             Campus Box 1133
leland.bybee@yale.edu                           One Brookings Drive
                                                St. Louis, MO 63130
Bryan T. Kelly                                  amanela@wustl.edu
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave.                                Dacheng Xiu
New Haven, CT 06511                             Booth School of Business
and NBER                                        University of Chicago
bryan.kelly@yale.edu                            5807 South Woodlaswn Avenue
                                                Chicago, IL 60637
                                                dachxiu@chicagobooth.edu




Data and analysis are available at structureofnews.com
1       Introduction
One of the primary functions of the economics profession is measuring the state of the economy
and developing models that link these measurements to distributions of future outcomes. This arms
consumers, investors, and policymakers with the information and structural context necessary to
allocate resources efficiently. But the economy is a complex system whose current state defies simple
measurement. Vast resources, both public and private, are devoted to measuring the many facets
of economic activity. For example, the BEA maintains detailed national accounts for income and
spending at the aggregate and industry level, while the BLS specializes in measuring employment,
wages, and general price levels. In addition, equity and debt markets provide a barometer for
economic conditions facing the corporate sector. And academic researchers maintain and distribute
indices of economic volatility (Engle, 2019) and recession probabilities (Chauvet and Piger, 2008),
to name a few. Together, these comprise an overlapping ecosystem of numerical business cycle
indicators. Ascertaining the nature and evolution of the state of the economy from these data is a
notoriously difficult task.
    In this paper, we offer a new approach to measuring the state of the economy via textual analysis
of business news. The media sector, as a central information intermediary in society, continually
transforms perceptions of economic events into a verbal description that we call "news." This
transformation involves describing events, interpreting their meaning and impact, and inferring their
causes. The information disseminated by news media is an equilibrium outcome determined by the
confluence of consumer preferences, news production technologies, and the competitive landscape of
the news industry (Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005). As such, news text is a mirror of the prevailing
economic issues that are important to both news consumers and producers. News text is a one-
stop shop for simultaneously understanding many facets of the state of the economy and how they
interact with each other. It uses the richness of narrative, derived from human understanding and
interpretation of complex contexts.
    Despite the fact that news media reflects information that consumers rely on to make allocation
and consumption choices in an evolving environment, little work has directly studied the structure
of news. We focus our analysis on the full text of the The Wall Street Journal (WSJ ), consisting
of approximately 800,000 articles from 1984­2017. We summarize this dense verbal description of
the state of the economy via a topic model. Topic models are a popular dimension reduction tech-
nique from the fields of machine learning and natural language processing.1 They have two essential
elements. Just as principal component analysis condenses large data matrices into a comparatively
low number of common factors, a topic model's first element reduces an inherently ultra-high di-
mension representation of a text corpus into a relatively low-dimensional set of common "topics."
The formation of topics is unsupervised--they are estimated as clusters of terms that are most likely
to co-occur in the same article. Those clusters are optimized so that relatively few clusters (many
    1
     Topic models have only recently begun to be explored in empirical economics research. The earliest example we
are aware of is Hansen et al. (2017). While we use LDA, contemporaneous work of Cong et al. (2018) use unsupervised
methods for WSJ text based on the word2vec approach of Mikolov et al. (2013), and while we analyze full text of all
WSJ articles, they analyze headlines and abstracts of front page articles (as in Manela and Moreira, 2017).


                                                        2
fewer than the number of distinct terms in the data set) preserve as much of the meaning in original
corpus as possible, by best explaining the variation in term usage across articles.
   A topic model's second main element estimates for each article, the proportion of text dedicated
to each topic. These proportions are a valuable map from the common topics to the individual,
article-level narratives that invoke those topics. But more importantly, they quantify the amount of
news attention allocated to each topic. This makes it possible, for example, to analyze the interaction
between news and economic activity. In short, our topic model accomplishes two important estima-
tion tasks of 1) summarizing dominant themes throughout the history of the WSJ, and 2) tracking
how media attention to news topics evolves. From this, we provide a new quantitative description of
the state of the economy.
   Our main empirical findings are the following. First, we characterize the topical structure in
business news. WSJ news decomposes into easily interpretable topics with intuitive time series
patterns. A model with 180 topics is a statistically optimal specification according to a Bayes factor
criterion. Models with fewer topics tend to mix news themes into overly broad clusters, while more
topics use more parameters than are warranted by the gain in fit.
   Almost all topics exhibit strong time series persistence. A long open question in financial research
is why do asset returns exhibit such strong volatility clustering. A leading hypothesis for this fact
(e.g., Engle et al., 1990) is that volatility is driven by news arrivals, and that news itself arrives in
clusters. The persistence in attention paid to a particular news topic supports at least part of this
hypothesis. For example, the prevalence of news associated with the "oil drilling" {key terms: exxon
mobil, cubic feet, drill rig, offshore oil} and "oil market" {key terms: opec, nonopec, oil minister, oil
demand} topics in the WSJ closely coincide with the volatility of crude oil prices.
   We find that news is a combination of recurrent, seasonal, and episodic topics. Recurrent topics
are those garnering media attention consistently throughout the sample. For example, the "Federal
Reserve" topic, whose key terms include {greenspan, yellen, federalfunds rate, fomc}, is regularly
active throughout the sample. As is the "health insurance" topic {key terms: hmo, health plan,
health coverage, blue cross}, which becomes highly prevalent during debate of the Clinton Health
Plan proposal (peaking around President Clinton's speech to Congress in September 1993), the pro-
posal and passage of Obamacare in 2008­2010, and the Obamacare repeal debate around the 2016
presidential election. Seasonal topics include "presidential elections" {key terms: obama, romney,
dukakis, campaign finance}, whose prevalence has a clockwork seasonal pattern peaking every four
years, and "earnings forecasts" {key terms: analyst poll, earn forecast, earningspershare, earn expec-
tation} which spikes ahead of each earnings announcement season. Episodic topics are dormant for
much of the sample, then spike around particular events. For example, the "terrorism" topic {key
terms: taliban, queda, suicide bomber, osama} is a prototypical regime shift: It has a prevalence near
zero for the first half of our sample, spikes dramatically at 9/11, and remains high henceforth. Sim-
ilarly, the "natural disasters" topic {key terms: katrina, quake, tsunami, hurricane} has a very low
proportion during most of the sample, but rises sharply in August 2005 (Hurricane Katrina), then
reverts but remains slightly elevated for much of the remaining sample, presumably due to increased
news attention on the effects of climate change (Engle et al., 2019). These examples illustrate the


                                                   3
fact that many topics describe subjects of the news (elections, the Fed, earnings), and do not assign
an obvious value of assessment of good news versus bad news. For other topics, the subject itself
carries a value assignment (terrorism, recession, natural disasters). And there are a small number of
sentimental topics, such as the "concerns" topic {key terms: raise concern, major concern, express
concern, increase concern}, that provide directional color to the subject topics with which co-occur
in a given article.
   We draw on a number of additional tools from the machine learning literature that help us further
understand the rich structure of text. One is a machine learning graphing tool known as stochastic
nearest neighbor embedding (t-SNE, Maaten and Hinton, 2008) which helps us visualize WSJ news
in two-dimensional space. In a topic model, a news article is a mixture of themes, which can be
interpreted as a news-based snapshot of the state of the economy. The t-SNE plots help digest the
high-dimensionality and complexity of news events, illustrating their intuitive underlying structure
as recurring constellations of topics. Another machine learning tool that we use is hierarchical
agglomerative clustering (Murtagh and Legendre, 2014), which we use to group topics together based
on their thematic similarities. We recursively combine our 180 base topics into a tree structure of
gradually broadening metatopics. In doing so, we establish a complete taxonomy of business news.
We find that the proportion of attention paid to high-level metatopics (like "markets," "government,"
and "technology") is roughly constant over time. Instead, it is at finer resolutions where we find
often dramatic time variation in attention. That is, news churn occurs as rapid shifts in attention to
specific sub-topics within broad and stable metatopics.
   Our main contribution is to show that the text of business news summarizes wide ranging facets of
the state of the economy. Similar to the oil volatility example, we report a variety of validation checks
showing that economic topics identified from WSJ text coincide with closely conceptually related
measures of specific economic activities. For many data series, ranging from output and employment
to financing activity, asset prices, and uncertainty, we find that a small subset of thematically related
news topics provide a close match to the paths of the numerical macro series.
   One example of economic activity that we study is financing volume. We find that the volume
of leveraged buyout (LBO) transactions is most significantly associated with the "takeovers" topic
{key terms: poison pill, hostile takeover, share tender, higher offer} and "control stakes" topic {key
terms: control stake, majority stake, minority shareholder, acquire stake}, which help explain 58%
of the variation in LBO activity. Similarly, the time series behavior of IPO volume is closely tracked
by news attention to the "IPO" topic {key terms: ipo market, ipo price, roadshow, lockup} and
"venture capital" topic {key terms: joint venture, venture capitalist, venture fund}. The key term
lists of statistically related topics offer an immediate narrative for each numerical time series that
we study. These are not causal narratives. In some cases they may reflect proximate causes, and
in others they may represent anticipated impacts. But they outline how discussion of prevailing
economic topics helps understand realized macroeconomic fluctuations.
   Contemporaneous correlation between news narratives and macroeconomic fluctuations is a use-
ful validation that text can be productively converted into a summary of the state of the economy.
This, however, has little to say about whether news text contains distinct or incremental information


                                                   4
versus standard numerical indicators. To investigate this directly, we study news attention within an
otherwise standard macroeconomic vector autoregression (VAR). We find that attention to recession
news has economically large and highly significant predictive power for future output and employ-
ment. For example, one conservative variant of our analysis shows that a standard deviation impulse
in recession attention associates with a decline in industrial production of 1.7% after twelve months,
after controlling for a variety of common VAR components such as stock market returns, interest
rates, and measures of economic uncertainty. That is, news coverage of recession risk captures useful
information about future economic outcomes above and beyond commonly used indicators. Taken
together, our results highlight fascinating possibilities for using textual data in problems such as
macroeconomic forecasting, which tend to rely exclusively on numerical data sources, and modeling
the role of information transmission and media in the macroeconomy.2
    Modeling economic activity in terms of news-based topics offers economists a new set of tools for
understanding shocks. For example, in a standard macroeconomic VAR, shock interpretation often
boils down to a choice of rotation for the error covariance matrix. But with news-based models,
fluctuations can be directly mapped to textual narratives of economic conditions. We describe an
approach to narrative retrieval in a macroeconomic forecasting application. In a first step, we forecast
industrial production growth (after controlling for past growth) using news attention and identify
the most predictive topics. To understand a specific shock to expected growth within the model,
we examine which of the influential topics experienced a coincident shift in news attention. Next,
the estimated topic model traces these specific shifts in topic attention back to the original news
articles that most closely associate with topic coverage at the time of the shift. For example, we
find that the largest shifts in industrial production growth expectations are associated with news
article headlines, including "Survey Finds Sharp Drop in Consumer Confidence," "Slower Growth in
Manufacturing Raises Concerns," and "Gasoline Prices Fall as Imports Rise and Demand Drops."
Using the topic model as a narrative retrieval device, the researcher can map any shock of interest to
a nuanced verbal interpretation of economic events (i.e., news articles) that are statistically closest to
the shock. In essence, the estimated model flags articles that the researcher should read throughly,
alleviating the need to manually read every article in the history of the WSJ corpus. By combining
macroeconomic analysis with topic modeling, the researcher achieves the hitherto unmanageable task
of drawing on vast written texts to better understand quantitative economic phenomena.
    We end the paper with brief explorations of extensions that highlight the fascinating possibilities
for text-based approaches to economic modeling. First, because news data arrives daily, we can
estimate the state of economy at a higher frequency than most macroeconomic series allow. We show
how the time-varying correlation of high frequency financial frictions measures with our news topics
provides a narrative understanding of episodes such as financial crises in which events impacting the
macroeconomy unfold rapidly--inbetween monthly or quarterly macro announcements.
    We also show that the slew of economic policy uncertainty indices developed by (Baker et al.,
2016, BBD) are closely related to our estimated topics. For example, their government spending
   2
   See Kelly et al. (2019) for an alternative approach to incorporating textual data into macroeconomic forecasting
models.


                                                        5
and fiscal policy uncertainty index has a 66% correlation with our "government budget" topic {key
terms: spend cut, deficit reduction, grammrudman, federal budget, balance budget}. And the BBD
sovereign debt and currency crises uncertainty index looks like a combination of our "European debt"
and "Southeast Asia" {key terms: jakarta, thailand, southeast asia, rupiah} topics, which combine
to explain more than 40% of the variation in their BBD counterpart. What is impressive about this
comparison is that our topics are estimated in an entirely unsupervised manner.3
     Section 2 briefly discusses our model structure and estimation. Section 3 describes the estimated
structure of economic news underlying WSJ text. Finally, Section 4 analyzes the connection between
news text and numerical economic data, and Section 5 concludes.


2        Topic Model and Estimation
Our model for the structure of economic news text follows the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
topic modeling approach of Blei et al. (2003). We provide a brief summary of the model and its
estimation, and refer interested readers to the original paper for additional detail.
     We study the WSJ text corpus in its "bag-of-words" form, represented numerically as the article-
term matrix, w. This is a T × V matrix where row indices correspond to the list of T different
articles in the corpus, and column indices correspond to the vocabulary of V unique terms in the
corpus. Its individual elements, wt,v , count the number of times that the v th term appears in article
t.

2.1      Model
While the bag-of-words representation is a dramatic reduction in complexity compared to the raw
text, it remains an extraordinarily high-dimensional object. LDA seeks a tractable thematic summary
of w that reduces the dimensionality of the historical WSJ to a scale that can be digested and
interpreted by a human reader in one sitting. To achieve this summary, it 1) imposes explicit
parametric assumptions on the distribution of term counts and 2) imposes a factor structure on term
counts. In particular, LDA assumes that the V -dimensional vector of term counts for a given article
t, denoted wt , are distributed according to a multinomial distribution:

                                              wt  Mult( t , Nt ),                                                (1)

where Nt is the total number of terms in article t and thus governs the scale (or number of trials) of the
multinomial distribution. In other words, expected term counts are summarized by a comparatively
low dimension set of parameters, t and  = [1 , ..., K ] . The k th "topic" in the text is defined by
the V -dimensional parameter vector k , where k,v  0 for all v and                   v   k,v = 1. That is, a news
topic is a probability distribution over terms. The set of terms that take especially high probabilities
     3
     In related work, Hassan et al. (Forthcoming) present a text-based approach to measuring political risk, in their
case at the individual firm level.




                                                         6
in k convey the thematic content of the topic. The model's dimension reduction is achieved by
setting the total number of topics K much smaller than the size of the vocabulary.
    While the topics, k , describes the common themes in the corpus as a whole, LDA treats an
individual article as a mixture of topics. The article-specific parameter vector t = (t,1 , ..., t,K ) is
also a probability vector, with t,k  0 for all k and               k t,k   = 1. That is, LDA views articles as a
distribution over topics. It determines how article t allocates its attention to themes associated with
each topic. A brief inspection of (1) discerns a factor structure embedded in LDA, in which topics
(k ) serve common factors and t captures articles-specific exposure to those factors. At an intuitive
level, LDA achieves its dimension reduction by trading off two goals. First, for a given topic k , it
assigns high probabilities to as few terms as possible. Second, for any article, LDA tries to allocate
words in the article to as few topics as possible. This tradeoff is optimized by identifying a relatively
small number of word clusters that tend to frequently co-occur in news articles.4

2.2    Estimation
In principle, one could estimate  and  via maximum likelihood according to (1). However, in most
text applications this is computationally unrealistic. Instead, we use Bayesian methods and approach
estimation with the Gibbs sampler proposed by Griffiths and Steyvers (2004).5
    The intuition behind the estimation procedure can be understood with minimal technical over-
head. First, note that model (1) can be equivalently represented as a "generative" model; that is, as
a set of sampling rules. Taking model parameters k and t as given,6 we can conceptualize writing
an article in the context of the model. Consider the tth article with Nt total words. How does the
model "write" the first term in the article? First, it draws a topic at random from the list of all
topics, where the probabilities of drawing each topic are given by the K × 1 vector t . That is, the
topic assignment of that first term, call it zt,1 , is distributed as a unit multinomial (i.e., categorical)
with parameter t . Suppose we happened to draw topic k for the first term's topic. To then draw
the first term itself, we randomly choose from the vocabulary of all terms, where the probability of
drawing any given term is given by the V × 1 vector k , which is the topic-specific term probability
distribution. Call this first term xt,1 , which is distributed as a unit multinomial with parameter k .
This process is repeated for each subsequent term in the article, a total of Nt times, at which point
the model has authored the complete article and stops. In distribution notation, each term i in the
article is given by
                                    xt,i  Mult(zt,i , 1),      zt,i  Mult(t , 1).

The Gibbs sampling estimation procedure searches for parameter values k and t that simulate
articles most similar to those found in our news data set.7
   4
      Paraphrased from Blei (2013).
   5
      We refer interested readers to Steyvers and Griffiths (2007) for an especially transparent description of their LDA
Gibbs sampler. Asuncion et al. (2009) review and compare alternative estimation approaches such as variational Bayes
and maximum a posteriori estimation. They conclude that, with proper hyperparameter tuning, all estimators perform
similarly in terms of model fit.
    6
      These are drawn in a preliminary step from the Dirichlet priors, t  Dir() and k  Dir( ).
    7
      We take 300 iterations of the Gibbs sampler over the entire corpus, and use hyperparameters of  = 1 and  = 1.


                                                           7
   The estimated attention that article t allocates to topic k can be represented as the frequency
with which its terms are assigned to k

                                                                   Nt
                                             ^t,k =                i=1 I(^
                                                                         zt,i = k )
                                                               K      Nt
                                                                                           ,                                     (2)
                                                               q =1   i=1 I(^zt,i =   q)

where z
      ^t,i are topic assignments from the estimated model. Likewise, estimates of the topics them-
selves are determined by the number of times each term v in the vocabulary is assigned to topic k
(aggregated over all articles):8

                                                   T          Nt
                                 ^k,v =            t=1        i=1 I(xt,i = v )I(^
                                                                                zt,i = k )
                                              V            T     Nt
                                                                                                             .                   (3)
                                              m=1          t=1   i=1 I(xt,i = m)I(^  zt,i =             k)

   Finally, while ^t describes the allocation of news attention to each topic in article t, we are often
interested in characterizing how attention allocation of the WSJ as a whole varies through time. We
measure the overall news attention at a point in time  (e.g., a given day or month) by aggregating
topic attention over all articles at that time. Thus, WSJ attention allocation to, say, topic k in
month  is
                                                                       Nt
                                         ^,k =                 t       i=1 I(^
                                                                             zt,i = k )
                                                                   K      Nt
                                                                                                    .                            (4)
                                                           t       q =1   i=1 I(^zt,i =        q)

   Our reportage below focuses on estimates of the topics, ^k , and allocation of news attention
across topics, ^t .


2.3     The Wall Street Journal Data Set
The data set we use is among the most extensive text corpora of business news studied in the
economics literature to date. It consists of all articles published in WSJ from January 1984 through
June 2017, purchased from the Dow Jones Historical News Archive. This represents the longest
history of full text articles in digital text format available for purchase from Dow Jones & Company.
As a comparison, Manela and Moreira (2017) extract a news-based analogue to the VIX index using
the WSJ over a long sample, but their data only includes abstracts of front page articles. Baker et al.
(2016) study a large collection of newspapers, but restrict their analysis to counting occurrences of
a small, pre-defined key term list. In contrast, our analysis leverages the richness of full newspaper
text.
   We take a number of steps to homogenize the data sample and reduce confounding effects of
organizational changes to the WSJ over time. First, the Dow Jones Historical News Archive contains
data as far back as 1979, but data prior to 1984 is limited to article abstracts. We therefore omit
   8
    As shown in (2) and (3), we choose to not incorporate priors in our  and  estimates. Griffiths and Steyvers
(2004) show that priors can be easily incorporated as
                           Nt                                                  T     Nt
           ^t,k =          i=1 I(^
                                 zt,i = k) +               ^k,v =              t=1   i=1 I(xt,i = v )I(^
                                                                                                       zt,i = k) + 
                    K        Nt
                                                       ,                 V       T     Nt
                                                                                                                             .
                    q =1     i=1 I(^zt,i = q ) +   K                     m=1     t=1   i=1 I ( xt,i = m )I(^
                                                                                                           zt,i = k) +   V




                                                                     8
pre-1984 data to maintain consistency in the definition of what constitutes an article throughout our
sample. Next, over its history, WSJ has initiated (and sometimes later abandoned) a number of non-
core sections such as "Personal Journal" (initiated 2002), "Weekend Journal" (initiated 2005), and
"Off Duty" (initiated 2012). To help maintain consistency in topical content over time, we exclude
articles appearing in sections other than the three core sections ("Section One," "Marketplace," and
"Money and Investing") that are available over our full sample. Because our interest is in economic
news, we also exclude articles with subject tags corresponding with predominantly non-economic
content such as sports, leisure, books, and arts, and exclude articles that contain regular data tables
with little supporting text.
    Next, we transform the dataset from a collection of raw article text files into numerical term
counts for statistical modeling. We arrange term counts in an article-term matrix, w. As described
in the model section, columns of w correspond to unique terms in our dataset and rows correspond
to individual articles. Our vocabulary includes all uni-grams and bi-grams occurring in our data set
after applying a mild set of term filters and lemmatization of derivative words.
    Appendix A describes in step-by-step detail all data processing and filtering steps we take to
transform raw article text into numerical counts that we use in our empirical analysis. Our final
data set consists of 763,887 articles with a vocabulary of 18,432 unique terms. The left panel of
Figure 1 conveys how the size of the data set varies over time, reporting the number of articles
published each month and total term counts aggregated over those articles. The structure of the
topic model absorbs some of the secular changes in news production by essentially modeling news
term proportions rather than term count levels. But it is important to bear in mind that, our
homogenization efforts notwithstanding, the WSJ is an evolving product that undergoes structural
shifts over the course of our sample.

2.4    Topic Model Specification Choice
LDA is an unsupervised machine learning technique that requires the econometrician to choose only
two inputs: The term count data set and the number of topics, K . We take a data-driven approach
to select K . In particular, we estimate a variety of models with K ranging from 50 to 250 topics in
increments of ten. We select the model specification from this set as the one with the highest Bayes
factor.9 As a complementary analysis, we also examine model selection based on ten-fold cross-
validation. In particular, we partition the WSJ sample into ten validation samples, each having
an equal number of articles. For the ith model specification, we re-estimate the Ki -topic model on
the data ten times, one time excluding each of the ten validation samples, then evaluate its fit on
the left-out sample. We calculate an aggregate goodness-of-fit for each model as the average log
likelihood value over the ten validation samples.
    The right panel of Figure 1 plots goodness-of-fit across candidate specifications. Bayes factor
    9
      The Bayes factor is the ratio of posterior probabilities for the alternative model versus the null model. When
selecting among topic models with different K , we compare all models to the same null model so that the denominator
is constant across K . Thus, our Bayes factor criterion is equivalent to selecting the model with the highest posterior
probability.



                                                          9
                                     Figure 1: WSJ Observation Counts and Model Selection


                             Word and Article Counts                                                                         Model Selection

                                           Monthly Counts
            700000
                                                                              Terms                                                                          Cross-Validation
                                                                              Articles   2600                                                                Bayes-Factor
            650000
                                                                                         2400
            600000

            550000                                                                       2200

                                                                                         2000




                                                                                                Articles
    Terms




            500000

            450000                                                                       1800

            400000                                                                       1600

            350000                                                                       1400

            300000                                                                       1200
                     1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017                  100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
                                                                                                                                  Number of Topics (K)



Note. The left panel plots the final filtered article count each month (red line) and the total term counts aggregated
over all articles in each month (blue line). The right panel plots the cross-validated model fit (average log likelihood
over the validation samples) and Bayes factor for topic models with K ranging from 50 to 250 in increments of 10.


and cross-validation analyses indicate that a 170­180 topic specification approximately optimizes
our specification criteria. Manual inspection of estimates for various choices of K also indicates
that K = 180 is a sensible choice. A model with many fewer topics (e.g., 50) produces mixed
topics that contain multiple separate themes. A very large model (e.g., 250 topics) delivers similar
interpretability as that for the 180-topic model, but with a number of overly specific topics that
capture one-off events. Finally, all models in the neighborhood of K = 180 look very similar in their
topic decomposition.


3       The Structure of Economic News
In this section we dissect the model representation of economic and financial news from the WSJ.
The topic model estimates reported below focus on the 180-topic specification and are based on a
single estimation using the full data sample. Note that, unlike other dimension reduction techniques
such as principal component analysis, LDA does not provide a natural ordering of topics, thus our
presentation of topics is based on expositional convenience. It is also important to recognize that
due to the richness of information contained in news text, our 180-topic model is higher dimensional
than typical economic models, and it is impossible to report the full scope of estimates in this article.
To give readers the ability to explore all facets of our model in detail, we have built an interactive
website, www.structureofnews.com, to allow users to visualize and inspect a wide variety of features
from our estimated model.




                                                                                         10
3.1    Topic Key Terms
First, we present estimates for each term cluster--that is, the V × 1 term probability vector k --that
defines a given topic k . The most common terms in the vocabulary appear with high frequency in
many topics, and this is naturally reflected in LDA estimates. In order to best identify the unique
semantic content of each topic, we calculate scaled topic-term weights:

                                                       ^k,v
                                           ~k,v =
                                                              .
                                                      K ^
                                                      q =1q,v

This scaling emphasizes terms that have an unusually large weight in topic k (terms like "pharma-
ceutical" or "iron ore") and downplays words that are common to many topics (terms like "price"
and "company"). Sorting the elements of ~k identifies the terms that are most diagnostic of thematic
content of topic k .
    Table 7 lists the key terms for each topic k , defined as the top ten vocabulary items based on
the sorted ~k vector. These key terms are entirely unsupervised as they are estimated from the data
without any guidance from article labels or from the researcher. We manually assign a label to each
topic based on our reading of the key term lists. Topic labels serve as a shorthand for referencing
topics throughout the paper.
   There are several features of the key term lists that stand out. First, they show that topics
represent coherent concepts with clear interpretability. For example, the first key term list from the
table is

      bonus, base salary, total compensation, pay package, compensation package, compensation
      committee, restrict stock, tyco, executive compensation, bonuses.

This list is easily recognized as an "executive pay" topic. The list is un-mixed; each term has a
direct narrative link to the topic label. The purity of the topic extends beyond the top ten terms.
For example, key terms 11-25 for this topic are

      stockoption, executive pay, stock option, compensation, annual salary, tyco international,
      exercise option, severance package, severance payment, exercise price, salary, retention,
      vest, proxy statement, severance.

This term purity is representative of our estimated model very broadly. There are no topics that
appear to mix topics. To draw a contrast, when we estimate a smaller model with K = 50 topics,
we find articles that begin to lump multiple concepts together. For example, the 50-topic model
generates the following key term list for one of its topics:

      creditor lawsuit, unsecured creditor, ual corps, chapter company, texas air, bankruptcy
      court, federal bankruptcy, bankruptcy code, continental airline, usair, load factor, flight at-
      tendant, reorganization plan, american airline, northwest airline, chapter file, amr corps,
      bankruptcy protection, major airline, corps unit, airline unit, pilot association, chapter
      bankruptcy, world airways, twa.

                                                    11
Evidently, this topic combines two distinct topics--"airlines" and "bankruptcy"--that we identify in
the K = 180 specification. While this mixing is understandable given the string of airline bankrupt-
cies in our sample period, mixing confounds the model's ability to identify important non-bankruptcy
airline news such as sharp drops in flight demand following terrorist events. Examples like this abound
in smaller models.10 The general absence of mixing in the K = 180 specification is a validation that
the larger model achieves a successful separation of distinct subjects.
    Second, we see that most topics represent news subjects, as opposed to appraisals of good versus
bad news for a given subject. Examples of appraisal-free subject topics include "airlines," "Federal
Reserve," and "China." Some subject topics carry an implicit appraisal, usually of bad news, such
as "terrorism," "natural disasters," and "recession." A small number of sentimental topics are inter-
pretable as good versus bad news and include topics labeled "problems," "concerns," and "positive
  10
       Another example in the K = 50 specification is a topic with key terms
        ipo market, sachs group, ipo, csfb, stearns cos, berkshire, buffett, berkshire hathaway, suisse group, ipo
        price, brother hold, investmentbanking business, stanley group, goldman, hathaway, group credit, firstday,
        weill, witter discover, investmentbanking, stanley dean, goldman sachs, sachs, warren buffett, credit suisse,
which is a mixture of the "IPO," "investment banking," and "Buffett" topics in the K = 180 model.


                                 Figure 2: Hierarchical Taxonomy of WSJ News

                                                Banks

                               Financial
                               Intermediaries     Asset Managers
                                                  & I-Banks


                                                     Buyouts &
                                                     Bankruptcy



                                  Financial
                                  Markets



                                        Corporate
                                        Earnings


                                                    Economic
                                                    Growth
         Economy
                                                    Oil &
                                                    Mining


                                                Technology




                                                Industry




                                                               12
                                                        Negotiations

                                    Announcements
                                                         Activism/
                                                         Language


                       Culture/                      Science/
                       Language                      Language


                                                               Challenges



                                                        Social/
                                   Science &            Cultural
                                   Arts
         Politics &
         Culture                                           Entertainment


                                                        International
                                                        Affairs
                                    International
                                    Relations
                                                               Terrorism/
                                                               Mideast

                       Politics
                                             Leaders

                                               Courts


                                  National
                                  Politics      Government




                                                    Trans/
                                                    Retail/
                                                    Local
                                                    Politics


                                                     Management

                                                       Labor/
                                                       Income




Note. Hierarchical agglomerative clustering dendrogram based on ^k similarity among the 180 topics listed on the
right.


sentiment." We interpret these as "modifier" topics that, when combined in a news article with a
given subject topic, convey a signed/directional appraisal of the subject's current events.11
    A larger K results in more specific subject categories. An advantage of having fine-grained topics
   11
      There is also a very small number of topics that represent shifts in language usage over time, but do not have
any economic meaning. For example, there is a "corrections/amplifications" topic {key terms: article correction,
amplifications, incorrect, misstated} and a "news conference" topic {key terms: press conference, told reporter, apology,
issue statement}. Both of these have a clear positive time trend. Language topics are valuable for de-noising news text
by absorbing common variation in language that is distinct from genuine news content, and that would otherwise be
absorbed into a content topic and act as a source of noise in our subsequent analysis.



                                                                     13
is that, if a broader notion of a topic is desired, finer topics can be agglomeratized into broader
metatopics. In fact, we find that our 180 topics cluster into an intuitive hierarchy of increasingly
broad metatopics. Figure 2 illustrates the topical hierarchy in our model in the form of a dendrogram.
We estimate this hierarchy with recursive agglomeration (Murtagh and Legendre, 2014) based on the
semantic distance between topics, defined as the distance in their ^k vectors. Like the estimation of
topics themselves, the connectivity of topics in the dendrogram is entirely data driven, and we only
supply metatopic labels based on our manual read of the estimated clusters.
    Figure 2 provides a full taxonomy of WSJ news. At the broadest level, news is classified into
either "economy" topics (top half of the dendrogram) or "politics and culture" (bottom half) top-
ics. Within "economy," topics split into the broad metatopics such as "financial intermediaries,"
"economic growth," and "industry." The "politics and culture" branch includes topic clusters such
as "international relations," "national politics," and "science and arts." As emphasized by Quinn
et al. (2010), an intuitive metatopic hierarchy is a useful check on the semantic validity of a model.
Furthermore, it gives us the ability to analyze attention to news topics at various levels of granularity.

3.2     Quantifying News Attention
With an understanding of the topic structure in place, we turn to the second main output of the
model--its estimate of news attention paid to each topic. Attention allocation is a convenient
quantitative transformation of news composition that can serve as numerical input to subsequent
empirical investigations of economic hypotheses. Our estimates describe how allocation of media
attention across topics evolves over time.

3.2.1    News Attention by Month

In the model, topic attention proportions are estimated at the article level but can be summed to any
level of aggregation according to equation (4). Throughout this section we focus on aggregate WSJ
topic attention at the monthly frequency by collating article-level attention estimates for all articles
published in the same calendar month. Figure 3 shows the time series variation in attention for a
subset of six illustrative topics.12 The black line, corresponding to the left vertical axis, shows the
attention to a given topic as a percent of total monthly WSJ news production. More specifically, it
reports the fraction of total terms published in a given month that the model infers are drawn from
that topic. The right vertical axis lists the key terms, and the blue line shows the weight of each
term in the topic (scaled by the maximum term weight within that topic), corresponding to the top
horizontal axis. The topic attention plots highlight a number of stylized facts about the composition
of business news.
    News consists of a combination of recurrent, seasonal, and episodic topics. Recurrent topics re-
appear consistently throughout the sample. For example, the "Federal Reserve" topic is regularly
active throughout the sample. As is the "health insurance" topic, which becomes highly prevalent
   12
     Appendix Figure 15 plots an additional 24 illustrative topic attention time series, and the website for this research
project, www.structureofnews.com, includes time series plots for all 180 topics.



                                                           14
                                                                                                                          Figure 3: Topic Attention Proportions


                                                                                Federal Reserve                                                                                                                                           Health Insurance
                                                                            Key term scaled weight
                                         1.00    0.99     0.98      0.96     0.95      0.94          0.93     0.91      0.90       0.89       0.88                                                                                     Key term scaled weight
                                       1.8                                                                                                       KEY TERMS:                                       1.00    1.00     0.99      0.99      0.98       0.98       0.97         0.97           0.97           0.96           0.96
                                                                                                                                                 greenspan                                      2.5                                                                                                                       KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                 alan greenspan                                                                                                                                                           hmo
                                       1.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                health plan
                                                                                                                                                 yellen
                                                                                                                                                 federalfunds rate                                                                                                                                                        health coverage
                                                                                                                                                                                                2.0                                                                                                                       health care
                                       1.4                                                                                                       federalfunds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          manage care
                                                                                                                                                 fomc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          blue cross
                                                                                                                                                 chairman alan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          health insurance
                                       1.2                                                                                                       raise rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          care act
                                                                                                                                                 janet yellen                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          blue shield
                                                                                                                                                 inflation expectation
                                       1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                healthcare system
                                                                                                                                                 reserve chairman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          health maintenance
                                                                                                                                                 quarterpoint                                                                                                                                                             humana
                                       0.8                                                                                                       policy meet                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          affordable care
                                                                                                                                                 market committee




                Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nurse home




                                                                                                                                                                         Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                 target rate                                                                                                                                                              medical cost
                                       0.6                                                                                                       federal open                                                                                                                                                             healthmaintenance
                                                                                                                                                 bernanke                                       0.5                                                                                                                       medicaid program
                                                                                                                                                 cut rate                                                                                                                                                                 health insurer
                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                 rate hike                                                                                                                                                                maintenance organization
                                                                                                                                                 raise interest                                                                                                                                                           health system
                                       0.2                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                       198401   198705   199009   199401   199705    200009     200401      200705     201009    201401     201705                                              198401   198705   199009    199401    199705     200009     200401       200705         201009      201401         201705
                                                                                       Date                                                                                                                                                       Date

                                                                                      Elections                                                                                                                                         Earnings Forecasts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Key term scaled weight
                                                                            Key term scaled weight                                                                                                1.00     0.96     0.93       0.89       0.86       0.82        0.78            0.75            0.71           0.68            0.64
                                         1.00    1.00     0.99     0.99     0.99      0.98       0.98        0.98      0.97      0.97       0.97                                                1.4                                                                                                                                KEY TERMS:
                                       7.0                                                                                                     KEY TERMS:                                                                                                                                                                          adjust earn
                                                                                                                                               sen obama                                                                                                                                                                           analyst earn
                                                                                                                                               romney                                                                                                                                                                              analyst poll
                                       6.0                                                                                                     sen mccain                                       1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   forecast earn
                                                                                                                                               dukakis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   earn forecast
                                                                                                                                               mitt romney
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   earningspershare
                                       5.0                                                                                                     democratic primary
                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0                                                                                                                                earn expectation
                                                                                                                                               republican primary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   beat expectation
                                                                                                                                               mitt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   earn guidance
                                       4.0                                                                                                     gop primary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   earn estimate
                                                                                                                                               run mate                                         0.8




15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   earn projection
                                                                                                                                               republican presidential
                                       3.0                                                                                                     gop candidate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   earn growth
                                                                                                                                               caucuses                                                                                                                                                                            earn release
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                                                                company forecast




                                                                                                                                                                         Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                               republican nominee




                Topic proportion (%)
                                       2.0                                                                                                     senate race                                                                                                                                                                         analyst forecast
                                                                                                                                               republican candidate                                                                                                                                                                analyst expect
                                                                                                                                               democratic candidate                                                                                                                                                                report earn
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                       1.0                                                                                                     rubio                                                                                                                                                                               project earn
                                                                                                                                               marco rubio                                                                                                                                                                         earn season
                                                                                                                                               democratic nominee                                                                                                                                                                  revenue forecast
                                       0.0                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                       198401   198705   199009   199401   199705   200009     200401       200705    201009    201401     201705                                               198401   198705    199009    199401     199705     200009       200401      200705          201009          201401         201705
                                                                                      Date                                                                                                                                                           Date

                                                                                     Terrorism                                                                                                                                            Natural Disasters
                                                                             Key term scaled weight
                                         1.00    0.99      0.98     0.97     0.96       0.95         0.94      0.93      0.92       0.91       0.90                                                                                    Key term scaled weight
                                       4.5                                                                                                        KEY TERMS:                                      1.00    0.98     0.95      0.93       0.90       0.88       0.86         0.83           0.81           0.78           0.76
                                                                                                                                                  taliban                                       5.0                                                                                                                        KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                  karzai                                                                                                                                                                   katrina
                                       4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 quake
                                                                                                                                                  afghan                                        4.5
                                                                                                                                                  qaeda                                                                                                                                                                    hurricane katrina
                                       3.5                                                                                                                                                      4.0                                                                                                                        fishermen
                                                                                                                                                  kabul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           coast guard
                                                                                                                                                  pakistani
                                                                                                                                                                                                3.5                                                                                                                        storm
                                       3.0                                                                                                        islamabad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           emergency management
                                                                                                                                                  musharraf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tsunami
                                                                                                                                                  hamid karzai                                  3.0
                                       2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 earthquake
                                                                                                                                                  afghan government
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           boat
                                                                                                                                                  kashmir                                       2.5
                                       2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 hurricane
                                                                                                                                                  president hamid                                                                                                                                                          natural disaster
                                                                                                                                                  islamic state                                 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fisheries
                                       1.5                                                                                                        osama




                Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           baton rouge
                                                                                                                                                                         Topic proportion (%)




                                                                                                                                                  laden                                         1.5                                                                                                                        salmon
                                       1.0                                                                                                        pakistan                                                                                                                                                                 beaches
                                                                                                                                                  pervez                                        1.0                                                                                                                        mississippi river
                                                                                                                                                  extremist group                                                                                                                                                          debris
                                       0.5                                                                                                        hamid                                         0.5                                                                                                                        rita
                                                                                                                                                  suicide bomber                                                                                                                                                           dam
                                       0.0                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                       198401   198705   199009   199401   199705     200009    200401       200705    201009     201401     201705                                             198401   198705   199009    199401    199705     200009     200401       200705         201009          201401         201705
                                                                                       Date                                                                                                                                                       Date



     Note. The black line shows the topic attention as a percent of total monthly WSJ news production. The right vertical axis lists the topic's key terms, and the blue
     line shows the weight of each term in the topic (scaled by the maximum term weight within that topic).
                                                                                                             Figure 4: Dominant Topics By Month


                       Elections                               1222                               11                          1
                                                                                                                              2 1                            1
                                                                                                                                                             2 1 12
                                                                                                                                                                  11              1        2 1 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                11             21       211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              111              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11      22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              111      1 22   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 2   112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              122
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
        International exchanges                               221       22
                                                                         222 2 2               2 2 1     12
                                                                                                          211
                                                                                                            112
                                                                                                              111
                                                                                                                111
                                                                                                                  111
                                                                                                                    12212
                                                                                                                        211
                                                                                                                          111
                                                                                                                            112
                                                                                                                              111
                                                                                                                                112
                                                                                                                                  111
                                                                                                                                    111
                                                                                                                                      111
                                                                                                                                        111
                                                                                                                                          21121 12
                                                                                                                                                 21 2
                 Treasury bonds              211 21        22 21 11
                                                                  111
                                                                    1111
                                                                       111
                                                                         111
                                                                           111
                                                                             111
                                                                               111
                                                                                 11222  1
                                                                                        112
                                                                                          111
                                                                                            111
                                                                                              111
                                                                                                122
                                                                                                  21111
                                                                                                     1 21
                                                                                                        212 222 2         2 2
                     Small caps                                                                                                  2 2  222
                                                                                                                                        221 1  22 22112122
                                                                                                                                                         222 12 2   12
                                                                                                                                                                     112
                                                                                                                                                                       11 2  2 2 2
                                                                                                                                                                                 11 1  11
                                                                                                                                                                                        112
                                                                                                                                                                                          1 2221  21121
                                                                                                                                                                                                      12  2
                      US Senate 2              2
                                               1 2 12                               2       2                     221 1
                                                                                                                      1112222                   2                     2        2      2 1                   22 2 2   2               12 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         21 2    2              222 1         2 22               222
                        Earnings       2                                                  1 2212212 22222 222 22 221111111121111                                    211 2        2 2 2 2
                       Terrorism                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                         112 2
                                                                                                                                                                           1                                                    2 11    11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12 1 12 1         2 11            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            211 111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12 1 12222222
       European sovereign debt                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           111 2 1 1 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1221112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              22 1 2            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                21  1
                         Internet                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                         121
                                                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                                                             122
                                                                                                                                                               12                                       2112122 2   2 2                                                  22
                          Reagan 11
                                  12 1 1
                                       112 22
                                         1    2 1 1    11
                                                        121
                                                          1112
                    Middle east                                                                                                                        2                     2                               11                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    212 2          21111 1  1         2
           Convertible/preferred 22
                                  211
                                    122 22 2
                                           1111 222
              Currencies/metals       22 1      2 2 22   122
                                                          2 11
                                                             1112                                  2
                             Iraq                                                  1
                                                                                   1111
                                                                                      112                                                                                        1211
                                                                                                                                                                                    111                         1                                                          2
            Bush/Obama/Trump                                                                                                                                                                                                     222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                            1 2                         211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11
                        Clintons                                                                    22 22 21                    222           1
                                                                                                                                              2 1 1122
                 Financial crisis                                                                                                                                                                                       22 2 1 22111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1111 22
                           Taxes       2 1  21 2 1  1 2
                                                   21                               1         2       1                                                                               2
                     Oil market                  2
                                                 21                                2                                                                                                          11      22         2          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2                                                  2        2
                          NASD                                                                                                                                             2 112          211 2   11
                Trading activity                                      22 2  22 22 2             2               2
     Private equity/hedge funds                                                                                                                                                                               11  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    112
                Federal Reserve                                        2                                                                                                                      1         2 21 2 1 12
                      Mortgages                                                                                                                                                                                   1 1 211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12 2
                    Indictments                                                                                                                                                          22 212 21                                                                   2
                          Courts                                                 2       22 1                                                                     22                                                                                                2
                    Accounting                                                                                                                                             111
                                                                                                                                                                             121
                                                                                                                                                                               1
              European politics                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                   1       111                       2
                          Russia                                                          222                                                                                                                                 2                                          11
               Natural disasters                                                                                                                                                                       11                                     2 2  2            2




16
                      Takeovers                      12         12 2
                     US defense                                                       2
                                                                                      2                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                    22
                Savings & loans 21    1 1  2
                   Police/crime                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      22        12           2
                 Mobile devices                                                                                                                                                                                                                21                 2 22
                   Commodities                  1                2           22
                 Southeast Asia                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                            22
                           China                                                                                                                                                                      2 1                                                                           22
              Phone companies                                                                                                                          2                                    1      1       1
                          Drexel                      1            222
               Health insurance                                                                           12                                                                                                                          22
                           Retail                                                                                                                                                                2      1       2
                   Options/VIX                               2                                                                                                                          2           2
               National security                                                                                                                                         22                                                                                         1
           Government budgets                    1                                                                                                                                                                                                2 2
                    NY politics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        22                 2
           Nuclear/North Korea                                                                                                                                                     2                           1                                                   1
                         Disease                                                                                                                                       2                                 1                                                                    2
                          Profits                                                                                                                                                                  22 2
               Bear/bull market                                                                                                                   2                  2
                       Germany                                               22
                       Software                                                                                                                    2           2
                   Mutual funds                                                                                     2               2
          Safety administrations                                                                                                                                 2
                        Utilities                                                                                                                                                       2
               Rental properties                                                                                                                                         2
                     Oil drilling                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                      Recession                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                    198401                   198705                  199009                   199401                   199705                   200009                   200401                   200705                   201009                  201401                   201705


     Note. The figure reports the topics ranked 1 and 2 each month in terms of highest WSJ news attention proportion.
                                         Figure 5: News Attention Across Metatopics


                 Banks
 Asset managers/I-banks

                 Buyouts
                 Markets

      Corporate earnings
       Economic growth
            Oil/mining
             Technology

              Industries
         Announcements
                Activism
                 Science

       Outlook language
          Social/cultural
          Entertainment
     International affairs
   Terrorism/Middle east
        National politics
                    Legal
             Government
 Transport/health/defense
            Management
          Labor/transfers
                       198401   198705    199009   199401   199705    200009   200401   200705   201009   201401   201705



Note. Stacked area plot of attention allocation to 23 metatopics based on the first-level clustering of baseline topics.


during debate of the Clinton Health Plan proposal (peaking around President Clinton's speech to
Congress in September 1993), the proposal and passage of Obamacare in 2008­2010, and around
the debated repealing of Obamacare around the 2016 presidential election. Seasonal topics include
"presidential elections," whose attention has a clockwork pattern peaking every four years with
a secondary peak every two years, and the "earnings forecasts" topic which spikes ahead of each
quarterly earnings announcement season. Episodic topics are dormant for much of the sample, then
spike around particular events. For example, the "terrorism" topic is a prototypical regime shift: It
receives minute attention for the first half of our sample, spikes dramatically at 9/11, and remains
high henceforth. Similarly, the "natural disasters" topic draws very little attention during most of
the sample, but rises sharply in August 2005 (Hurricane Katrina), then reverts but remains slightly
elevated for much of the remaining sample, presumably due to increased news attention on the effects
of climate change (Engle et al., 2019).
      With 180 topics, it is difficult to isolate the focus of attention at each point in time in a single
line plot overlaying many time series. To overcome this, Figure 4 shows the top two topics receiving
the most news attention each month. Dominant topics vary depending on exogenous factors (such
as election cycles or natural disasters) and endogenous states of the economy (such as recessions and
sovereign debt crises), with primary attention rotating between political, macroeconomic, industrial,
and financial topics.

                                                                 17
                                                                                              Figure 6: News Attention Within Metatopics


                                                            Political Leaders                                                                                                             Banks
         European politics                                                                                                                   Mortgages


                                                                                                                                            Bank loans

                Elections




                                                                                                                                        Financial crisis
       Bush/Obama/Trump
                                                                                                                                          Credit ratings
                  Reagan



                                                                                                                                   Nonperforming loans




               US Senate
                                                                                                                                       Savings & loans




                 Clintons

                          198401    198705    199009    199401    199705    200009   200401    200705   201009   201401   201705                     198401   198705   199009   199401   199705   200009   200401   200705   201009   201401   201705




18
                                                                 Technology                                                                                                     International Affairs
            Microchips
                                                                                                                                                   UK


                                                                                                                                           France/Italy
              Software

                                                                                                                                              Germany
            Computers

                                                                                                                                        Southeast Asia

                                                                                                                                                 China

                                                                                                                                   Canada/South Africa

       Phone companies
                                                                                                                                                 Japan

                                                                                                                                        Latin America


            Electronics                                                                                                              Trade agreements



                                                                                                                                                Russia
        Mobile devices

               Internet

                     198401        198705    199009    199401    199705    200009    200401    200705   201009   201401   201705                     198401   198705   199009   199401   199705   200009   200401   200705   201009   201401   201705




     Note. Stacked area plot of attention allocation to baseline topics within four of the first-level metatopics.
   Figure 5 zooms out to show how attention behaves at the 23-metatopic level. The fraction of
news attention allocated to metatopics is remarkably stable over time. This metatopic stability
belies a high degree of attention churn within metatopic clusters. The upper left panel of Figure
6 shows stable attention to the "political leaders" metatopic as a whole, but that attention within
this metatopic transitions dramatically as power changes hands, from Reagan at the beginning of
the sample to Trump at the end. Likewise, while attention to the "banks" metatopic is stable over
time, the focus shifts from savings and loans in the 1980's to mortgages in the mid 2000's, and
remains dominated by attention to financial crises even through the recent economic expansion. The
stable attention to "technology" is dominated by mainframe and desktop computers at the start of
the sample, which is displaced by attention to software mid-sample, which is in turn displaced by
mobile devices and the internet in the later part of the sample. The "international affairs" metatopic
includes steady attention to western Europe, but also shows episodic spikes in attention to Russia,
a brief focus on Southeast Asia during its 1998 crisis, and the gradual emergence of China as a focal
point by the end of the sample.

3.2.2   Article-level News Attention

Time series plots describe the attention paid to each topic by the WSJ as a whole. In this section,
we explore patterns in topic attention at the article level. Article-level attention is a 180-dimension
vector listing the proportion attention that the article pays to each topic. While this is an enormous
reduction in dimensionality relative to the term count representation, the fits amount to a large
dataset in their own right: a matrix of roughly 800,000 articles by 180 topics. In order to visualize and
interpret article-level fits, we project the fitted proportions into two dimensions using t-distributed
stochastic nearest neighbor embedding (t-SNE, Maaten and Hinton, 2008). Intuitively, the t-SNE
plot assigns a two-dimensional coordinate to each article so that the nearness of articles in the plane
best represents the nearness of the article fits in the full 180-dimensional space.
   The top panel of Figure 7 shows the two-dimensional embedding of model fits for every WSJ
article in our data set, and Figure 8 breaks down the complexity of Figure 7 by separately plotting
articles based on their leading topic for an illustrative subset of nine topics. In Figure 7, each topic is
assigned a color, and each article (a single point) is colored in correspondence with the topic having
the highest weight in that article. Naturally, articles cluster spatially based on their dominant topics.
Graphically, an article (which the model views as a mixtures of topics) is an intersection of topic
clouds. Articles that mix many topics must intersect with many clouds, so they are centrally located
in the plot. Similarly, clouds of topics that tend to co-occur with other topics (such as "Federal
Reserve") need to be dispersed throughout the t-SNE, while those that mix with only a few other
topics are more concentrated (such as "mortgages" and "terrorism"). This can also be seen at the
article level via the two bottom panels of Figure 7, which separates articles by their purity. "Pure"
articles are shown in color on the left, and are defined as those with a maximum topic proportions
exceeding 33%. These articles (18% by count) are dominated by a single topic. The right shows the
set of "mixed" articles (maximum topic proportion below 25%). Pure articles, which have little need



                                                    19
                           Figure 7: Article-level Nearest Neighbor Embedding




Note. The top shows the two-dimensional embedding of WSJ articles, where each topic is assigned a color and articles
are colored in correspondence with their dominant topic. The bottom left panel highlights only "pure" (those with
maximum topic proportion exceeding 33%), while the bottom right shows "mixed" articles (maximum topic proportion
below 25%).


for proximity to other topics, and tend to live on the periphery of the embedding. Mixed articles
require topic crossing and are thus centrally located.
    Figure 9 provides more detail for one specific example. It documents the other topical content of


                                                        20
                Figure 8: Article-level Nearest Neighbor Embedding (Topic Breakout)




Note. Two-dimensional embedding of WSJ articles broken out by individual topics.


articles whose leading topic is "Federal Reserve." It splits articles within the Fed topic based on their
second largest topic allocation. Figure 9 shows that articles about the Fed also tend to relate to the
"economic growth," "European sovereign debt," "bond yields," "macroeconomic data,""Treasury
bonds," "financial crisis," "mortgages," and "China" topics, with each of these secondary topics
tightly spatially clustered within the Fed topic.
    Like the hierarchical metatopic analysis, the t-SNE plots as a whole demonstrate coherence of the
estimated topic model. They show that an economic event--captured verbally as a news article--
is summarized via our model as the constellation of topics that constitute that event. Likewise,
the point-in-time distribution of aggregate topic proportions summarizes the overall state of the
economy. These model estimates illustrate that the economy is fundamentally complex. An attempt


                                                      21
                              Figure 9: Articles Featuring the Federal Reserve




Note. Detail of two-dimensional embedding for article whose dominant topic is "Federal Reserve." Articles within this
set are colored according to their second largest topic proportion.


at parsimoniously representing the verbal state of the economy, while a drastic simplification of the
full WSJ narrative, nonetheless requires an elaborate specification to capture its common themes.
But our model estimation results, and our further empirical analysis below, also demonstrate that
this complexity can be effectively harnessed for economic analysis.


4     News Attention and the State of the Economy
In this section we empirically investigate how faithfully the topical content of economic news captures
the state of the economy. Our analysis proceeds by linking the output of our estimated topic model,
both in terms of topical content and attention allocation across topics, to commonly studied numerical
macroeconomic data series.




                                                          22
                                   Table 1: Reconstructing Macroeconomic Time Series

                  Industrial Production Growth                                              Employment Growth
     Topic                Coeff.           p-val.                          Topic                   Coeff.              p-val.
     Recession             -0.38               0.03                        Recession                   -0.61            0.00
     Oil market            -0.18               0.00                        Rail/trucking/shipping      0.21             0.00
     Southeast Asia        0.11                0.07                        Bush/Obama/Trump            -0.15            0.08
     Health insurance       0.06               0.96                        Iraq                        -0.14            0.00
     Clintons              0.03                0.23                        Clintons                    0.13             0.07
     R2                     0.22                                           R2                           0.59
                                                      Actual                                                               Actual
                                                      Predicted        2                                                   Predicted
 2
                                                                       1
 0
                                                                       0
-2                                                                 -1

-4                                                                 -2

                                                                   -3
-6
                                                                   -4
-8
      1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017                1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017


     Note. Five-regressor lasso regression estimates and fits with p-values are adjusted for post-selection inference.


     4.1     Reconstructing Economic Activity With News Text
     We begin by investigating the extent to which our estimates of news topic attention align with a
     range of numerical measures of economic and financial activity. We then move to predictive analysis
     via vector autoregression.

     4.1.1    Macroeconomic Activity

     Ideally, an accurately estimated vector of economic state variables would be able to statistically
     reconstruct other measures of macroeconomic activity with a high degree of accuracy.
         We attempt to reconstruct a candidate numerical measure of economic activity, xt (e.g., US
     industrial production growth), through a time series regression of xt on the set of estimated topic
     attention proportions, at = (a1,t , ..., aK,t ). Our criteria for this analysis are two-fold. First, we
     evaluate accuracy of the text-based explanation in terms of regression fit, and second we evaluate
     whether the most influential news topics in the regression are thematically related to xt .
         With 180 topics, the attention vector is high-dimensional relative to the number of monthly time
     series observations, so OLS regression of xt on at is subject to severe overfit. To limit the undue
     influence of data mining on our conclusions, we apply heavy lasso penalization in the estimation.
     We make a stark choice on the extent of penalization--we set the lasso penalty parameter such that
     exactly five out of the 180 coefficients take non-zero values. We choose a fixed five-variable regression


                                                                  23
to ensure clear interpretability of results, as well as to have uniformity and comparability across the
many x variables that we study.13
    Because lasso penalization behaves like a model selection device, standard errors on the non-zero
coefficients must be adjusted to account for model search. Our reported p-values use the post-
selection inference approach of Tibshirani et al. (2016). We scale regression coefficients to reflect
the dependent variable's response in standard deviations to a one standard deviation change in the
regressor.
    To begin, we study two high profile macroeconomic indicators that are available at the monthly
frequency, aggregate output (industrial production) and employment (non-farm payrolls). The left
side of Table 1 reports results for the lasso regression of (seasonally adjusted) monthly log indus-
trial production growth on the 180 news attention time series. With a lasso penalty chosen to
include exactly five non-zero regression coefficients, we find that attention to "recession," "oil mar-
ket," "Southeast Asia," "health insurance," and "Clintons" news topics most closely associate with
contemporaneous industrial production growth. After accounting for the effects of model selection,
only "recession" and "oil market" significantly correlate with output growth at the 5% level. A one
standard deviation rise in WSJ attention to these two topics associates with 0.38 and 0.18 standard
deviation drops in industrial production growth, respectively. With just five non-zero topics, we find
that fluctuations in news topic attention explain 22% of output growth variance.
    Log employment growth most closely associates with attention to "recession," "rail/trucking/shipping,"
and "Iraq" topics, which are significant at the 5% level. The fitted regression explains 59% of the
variance in realized employment growth. A one standard deviation rise in "recession" attention
associates with a 0.61 standard deviation decrease in employment growth and the "Iraq" topic as-
sociates with a 0.14 standard deviation drop. In contrast, a standard deviation rise in attention to
"rail/trucking/shipping" aligns with a 0.21 standard deviation rise in employment growth. Finally,
the lasso regression juxtaposes the employment experience under various presidential administra-
tions, though these are insignificant effects at the 5% level.14 As a whole, Table 1 illustrates that
news attention closely tracks macroeconomic indicators, and the most correlated topics have intuitive
thematic associations with the numerical data.

4.1.2    Financial Activity

We next analyze the ability of WSJ to track fluctuations in financial markets, including various forms
of financing activity, measures of market risk, and values of financial assets.
    In terms of financing activity, we study IPO volume and leveraged buyout (LBO) volume. Table
2 shows that news attention closely tracks fluctuations in each financial time series with R2 values of
43% and 58%, respectively. More interestingly, the news topics that associate most strongly with each
financing variable are also those with the most similar thematic content. The three significant topics
  13
      Separately tuning cross-validation parameters for each x generally produces even higher R2 values than what we
present here, but do not provide much additional economic insight.
   14
      This result also shows how the choice of topic number can influence second-stage economic analysis. A finer
decomposition of the WSJ into 300 topics produces separate topics for each presidential administration, while a coarser
decomposition of 50 topics groups all administrations together.


                                                          24
in the IPO volume regression are "IPOs," "venture capital" which is the typical form of financing
prior to IPO, and "internet" which is the industry that saw the greatest IPO activity during our
sample period. For LBO volume, "takeovers," "control stakes," "key role," and "job cuts" topics
capture key LBO concepts such as transition from public market to private ownership and control,
management changes ("key role"), and eliminating jobs to reduce costs and improve production
efficiency.
    The upper right panel of Table 2 reports the monthly count of bankruptcies among US public
companies. News attention explains the variance in bankruptcy intensity with an R2 of 42%, with the
three significantly associated topics "recession," "accounting," and "small caps" all being themes that
closely relate to debt default. The lower left panel reports regressions of average CDS spreads among
Eurozone countries on news attention. A one standard deviation rise in the lone significant news
topic, "European sovereign debt," associates with a 0.59 standard deviation increase in European
sovereign credit spreads. The time series plot of actual spreads versus spreads reconstructed from
news shows the rapid rise and fall of CDS spreads and reveals that this data series only amounts
to a handful of distinct observations. Despite this, news text data is informative enough that lasso
regression hones in on the correct narrative account of these events.15
    The remaining two panels study risk and return in the US stock market. The lower center panel
shows that the five-topic news attention regression captures 63% of the variance in stock market
volatility.16 By far the most important topic is "recession," which carries a coefficient of 0.54, and
reflects the strongly countercyclical nature of market volatility. It also shows that there is more news
attention to options and the VIX index, and tends to describe adverse conditions more generally
(captured by the "problems" topic) when market volatility is elevated. It also shows that discussion
of "small business" and "electronics" topics tends to associate with the low volatility regimes in our
sample.
    The lower right panel regresses returns on the value-weighted US stock market index on AR(1)
innovations in topic attention. Realized returns significantly negatively associate with increases in
"recession" attention. Collectively, the most informative five topics explain 25% of the variation in
stock market fluctuations. This is a rather extraordinary result. One of the central puzzles in financial
economics is the notorious inability to explain stock market fluctuations even ex post with anything
other than other asset prices (Roll, 1988).17 As a benchmark for comparison, AR(1) innovations
in the four components of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index18 jointly explain less than 5%
of the variation in contemporaneous monthly stock returns. As another benchmark, we consider
a contemporaneous regression of market returns on AR(1) innovations in the 108 macroeconomic
variables in the FRED-MD database.19 To remain comparable with news attention regressions, we
  15
      While other topics related to financial crises and subprime mortgages follow similar time series patterns, the
penalized regression bypasses these in favor of the European sovereign debt narrative.
   16
      We measure monthly stock market volatility as the standard deviation of daily market returns within the month.
   17
      Our analysis focuses on explaining aggregate stock market fluctuations. Boudoukh et al. (2018) examine the
complementary question of explaining idiosyncratic returns for individual stocks using news text.
   18
      The four component indices measure production/income, employment/unemployment/hours, personal consump-
tion/housing, and sales/orders/inventory.
   19
      Available at https://research.stlouisfed.org/econ/mccracken/fred-databases/. We exclude FRED-MD in-


                                                        25
                                                                        Table 2: Reconstructing Financial Activity

     Topic                                   Coeff.             p-val.             Topic                      Coeff.           p-val.              Topic                     Coeff.           p-val.

                IPO Volume                                                                    LBO Volume                                                   Bankrupty Filings
     IPOs               0.27                                     0.00              Takeovers        0.31                        0.28               Recession        0.48                       0.00
     Venture cap.       0.22                                     0.00              Insurance       -0.28                        0.02               Venture cap.     0.25                       0.06
     Bankruptcy        -0.14                                     0.20              Control stakes   0.27                        0.03               Accounting       0.24                       0.03
     Internet           0.12                                     0.05              Key role        0.23                         0.70               Small caps      0.12                        0.00
     M&A                0.09                                     0.61              Job cuts        -0.18                        0.13               Machinery       -0.06                       0.34
     R2                 0.43                                                       R2               0.58                                           R2               0.42
                                                                               3
                                                                 Actual                                                           Actual       5                                                  Actual
 8                                                               Predicted                                                        Predicted                                                       Predicted
                                                                               2                                                               4
 6
                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                               1
 4                                                                                                                                             2

                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                               1
 2

                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                              -1
 0
                                                                                                                                              -1

     1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017                        1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017



           European CDS Spreads                                                          Stock Market Volatility                                          Stock Market Return
     Euro. sov. debt   0.59     0.00                                               Recession        0.54       0.00                                Recession       -0.33      0.00
     Middle east       0.16     0.26                                               Options/VIX      0.28       0.00                                Problems        -0.21      0.06
     Govt. budgets     0.13     0.35                                               Electronics     -0.24       0.02                                Convert./pref.  -0.17      0.46
     Company spokes.   0.13     0.91                                               Problems         0.16       0.00                                Options/VIX     -0.11      0.95
     Mobile devices    0.11     0.60                                               Small business  -0.15       0.00                                Record high      0.10      0.08
     R2                0.79                                                        R2               0.63                                           R2               0.25
                                                                               4                                                               3
          Actual                                                                                                                  Actual
 3        Predicted                                                                                                               Predicted    2
                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                               1
 2                                                                             2                                                               0

                                                                                                                                              -1
 1                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                              -3
 0
                                                                              -1                                                              -4

                                                                                                                                              -5                                                  Actual
-1                                                                                                                                                                                                Predicted
                                                                              -2
 1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014   2017        1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017



     Note. Five-regressor lasso regression estimates and fits with p-values are adjusted for post-selection inference.


     use a lasso penalty to select exactly five non-zero coefficients among the macro variables. We find
     an R2 of 10%, which exceeds that from the CFNAI regression, but is less than half of the text-based
     result.20 The ability of non-price variables, and interpretable text-based regressors in particular,
     to produce such a large gain in explained return variation, is refreshing progress in resolving the
     Roll (1988) puzzle. It indicates that the lack of explanatory power in past analyses is likely to be
     driven by inadequate methods for introducing narratives into the statistical model, a problem that
     our approach helps solve.
     terest rate and exchange rate variables. These are asset prices and have mechanically links to stock market returns.
        20
           This result is robust to a variety of regression specifications. The explained variation in returns is essentially
     unchanged if we use other constructions of macro variable innovations, or if we control for lagged as well as contempo-
     raneous values. Even if we include interest rate and exchange rate variables, the R2 rises only to 17%.


                                                                                                            26
4.1.3    Industry Volatility

Our third set of contemporaneous lasso regressions investigates how well WSJ news attention ac-
counts for patterns in industry-level stock volatility. We use the 49 industry categories from Ken
French's website, and measure monthly volatility as the standard deviation of daily industry returns
within the month. Essentially all equity portfolios tend to share a large common time series compo-
nent associated with overall market volatility (Herskovic et al., 2016). To hone in on industry-specific
volatility patterns that are distinct from the market volatility analysis above, we perform two ad-
justments to the raw industry volatility data. First, we orthogonalize each industry volatility series
against the first principal component of the industry volatility panel. Then, we construct the AR(1)
innovations in the adjusted series.21
    Table 3 reports results from five-regressor lasso regressions of industry volatility innovations on
AR(1) innovations in news topic attention. For the sake of brevity, the table reports results for
nine of the 49 industries. The influential topics in each regression are close thematic counterparts
for the respective industry. For example, banking sector volatility is highest amid news attention
to "nonperforming loans" and "mortgages" topics. Volatility in the computer hardware industry
(which includes firms like Apple, Dell, and Hewlett Packard) is most tightly linked to "retail,"
"computers," and "software" topic attention. In addition to the "pharma" news topic, volatility
in the pharmaceuticals sector is associated with attention to the "Clintons" topic, reflecting the
important role of healthcare reform in the policy platforms of both Bill and Hillary Clinton, as well
as attention to the "health insurance" topic.

4.2     News Attention and Macroeconomic Dynamics
Analyzing contemporaneous correlation between news narratives of macroeconomic fluctuations helps
validate the extent to which news can be converted to a numerical summary of the state of the
economy--one with inherent interpretability. This, however, has little to say about whether news
text conveys new information that is distinct from information in standard numerical macroeconomic
indicators, and the extent to which it helps predict longer term macroeconomic trajectories.
    We investigate whether news attention has a distinct impact on macroeconomic outcomes by
studying its incremental forecasting power in a macroeconomic VAR. We build on the five-variable
monthly VAR specification studied by Baker et al. (2016), which includes (in order) the BBD news-
based measure of economic policy uncertainty (EPU), log value of the S&P 500 index, Federal Reserve
funds rate, log employment, and log industrial production. We augment this VAR to include a sixth
variable--media attention to the "recession" topic--based on its central role in the lasso regressions
of Table 1. We define orthogonal shocks based on the Choleski decomposition for this variable
ordering, and include three lags of all variables.
    We estimate output and employment impulse response functions for a shock to recession news
  21
     Without the principal component adjustment, we essentially recover the results seen for market volatility in
the lower center panel of Table 2. While the principal component adjustment is necessary for our conclusions, the
results from our analysis are largely unchanged if we use levels of orthogonalized industry volatility rather than AR(1)
innovations.


                                                          27
                                           Table 3: Reconstructing Industry Volatility (Innovations)

     Topic                            Coeff.        p-val.           Topic                          Coeff.         p-val.            Topic                      Coeff.           p-val.

                Aircraft and Parts                                              Automotive                                                         Banking
     Sales call              0.19                    0.00            Automotive         0.18                        0.01             Nonperf. loans    0.23                       0.00
     Airlines                0.15                    0.00            Mutual funds      -0.14                        0.26             Mortgages         0.18                       0.00
     Research               -0.15                    0.03            Fees               0.11                        0.12             Options/VIX       -0.13                      0.31
     Terrorism               0.09                    0.46            Corporate gov.     0.11                        0.79             NASD              -0.10                      0.89
     Restraint               0.08                    0.96            Credit cards       0.10                        0.94             Financial crisis  0.08                       0.77
     R2                      0.15                                    R2                 0.09                                         R2                 0.14
                                                    Actual               Actual                                                  4                                                  Actual
 6
                                                    Predicted    3       Predicted                                                                                                  Predicted
                                                                                                                                 3

 4                                                               2
                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                 1
 2
                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                 0

 0                                                              -1                                                              -1

                                                                -2                                                              -2
-2
                                                                -3
     1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017



               Pharmaceuticals                                            Investments and Trading                                           Computer             Hardware
     Clintons            0.19                        0.05            Investment banks     0.18    0.23                               Retail                      0.19             0.01
     Pharma              0.15                        0.01            Elections           -0.13    0.40                               Computers                   0.17             0.01
     Health insurance    0.12                        0.08            Earnings losses     -0.13    0.49                               Software                    0.12             0.09
     News conference    -0.12                        0.30            Recession           -0.13    0.09                               Couriers                    0.09             0.96
     Earnings forecasts  0.09                        0.96            European politics    0.10    0.91                               Competition                 0.05             0.68
     R2                  0.11                                        R2                   0.11                                       R2                          0.09
 3                                                                                                                  Actual       3
                                                                 4
                                                                                                                    Predicted
 2                                                               3                                                               2

                                                                 2                                                               1
 1
                                                                 1                                                               0

 0                                                               0                                                              -1

                                                                -1                                                              -2
-1
                                                                -2                                                              -3
-2
         Actual                                                 -3                                                              -4                                                  Actual
         Predicted                                                                                                                                                                  Predicted
     1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017



                  Insurance                                                       Oil and          Gas                                            Tobacco
     Insurance            0.21                       0.00            Oil market                     0.35            0.00             Tobacco          0.18                        0.01
     Revised estimate    -0.16                       0.09            Cultural life                   0.18           0.01             Mexico            0.12                       0.79
     Mortgages            0.12                       0.43            Casinos                        -0.17           0.36             Lawsuits          0.09                       0.13
     Mgmt. changes       -0.10                       0.91            Options/VIX                    -0.16           0.10             Product prices   -0.09                       0.53
     Bank loans           0.09                       0.54            Earnings losses                -0.15           0.09             Recession        -0.08                       0.94
     R2                   0.12                                       R2                              0.23                            R2                0.09
                                                                                                                                 6
                                                    Actual                                                                                                                          Actual
                                                    Predicted    3                                                                                                                  Predicted
 6
                                                                 2                                                               4

 4                                                               1
                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                 0
 2                                                              -1                                                               0

                                                                -2
 0
                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                -3
                                                                                                                    Actual
-2                                                              -4                                                  Predicted
                                                                                                                                -4
     1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017          1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017



     Note. Five-regressor lasso regression estimates and fits with
                                                                28 p-values are adjusted for post-selection inference.
                     Figure 10: VAR Responses to Recession News Attention Shock


                                               Panel A: Baseline VAR
                       Industrial Production                                       Employment




                                                Panel B: Robustness
                       Industrial Production                                       Employment




Note. Responses to a one standard deviation impulse to recession topic attention in various VAR specifications.


attention and plot results in Panel A of Figure 10. A one standard deviation rise in recession news
attention associates with a drop in industrial production of 1.7% after twelve months. Employ-
ment experiences a maximum response of 0.8% after sixteen months. These effects are statistically
significant, as shown by the 90% confidence bands (dashed lines).
    The estimated responses reflect large economic magnitudes. As a benchmark for comparison,
Panel B reports our replication of the impulse response to EPU (solid gray line) in the VAR model
of BBD.22 The response of industrial production to EPU and recession news attention are similar in
magnitude, while employment responds nearly twice as strongly to a rise in recession news attention
  22
     We replicate Figure 8 of BBD exactly, with the minor exception that we define the shock as a one standard
deviation movement in the EPU measure for comparability with our attention shock definition. The resulting impulse
responses to EPU are therefore slightly larger than those reported by BBD.


                                                         29
than it does to EPU.
   The baseline impulse responses to recession news attention are conservative. Our news attention
variable is ordered last in the baseline VAR, thus the impulse responses reflect the macroeconomic im-
pact of recession news coverage after controlling for contemporaneous responses to all other variables.
Panel B demonstrates the robustness of our baseline VAR conclusions to alternative specifications.
First, we consider ordering news attention first in the VAR while otherwise preserving the order
of covariates. This has a large impact on our conclusions, more than doubling the recession news
impulse response from production and almost doubling the effect on employment. If instead we alter
the order of variables so that the news attention variable is second, after the S&P 500 index but
before the Fed funds rate, production, and employment, we see slight increases in the magnitude
of both industrial production and employment responses. The difference in responses for "news
1st" and "news 2nd" specifications highlights that news is often revealed simultaneously by media
narratives and asset prices.
   We then add BBD's EPU index (which we order first in the VAR, as done in BBD), which
magnifies the drop in production to -2.2% at twelve months and the drop in employment to -0.9%
at sixteen months following a recession news attention shock. Replacing EPU with the Michigan
Consumer Sentiment Index (ordered first) attenuates the effect of recession news attention but leaves
the baseline pattern unchanged and statistically significant. Likewise, accounting for fluctuations in
economic uncertainty via inclusion of the VIX index, introducing a time trend, and incorporating
six rather than three lags in the VAR leave results qualitatively unchanged.
   Our interpretation of these findings is that news attention to the recession topic captures useful
information about future economic outcomes that is missed by other variables in the system. That
such a readily available source of data--news text--can improve output and employment predictions
above standard numeric macroeconomic series highlights fascinating possibilities for use of textual
data in problems such as macroeconomic forecasting, which rely primarily on numerical data sources,
and modeling the role of information transmission and media in the macroeconomy.

4.3   Narrative Retrieval
In the preceding analyses, we project a given numerical economic time series, xt , onto topic attention
to reconstitute macroeconomic time series in terms of news text. By combining estimates from this
projection with the structure of the topic model, we can recover narratives corresponding to specific
fluctuations in xt or in conditional expectations of xt . To illustrate our approach to narrative retrieval,
we work with a lasso regression analysis motivated by the VAR in the previous section.
   We first orthogonalize monthly industrial production growth with respect to its own lagged value
in order to focus on growth rate innovations that are not forecastable with their own past values.
Next, we forecast these innovations using news attention data in a five-variable lasso regression,
following Section 4.1.
   Table 4 reports the predictive regression results. The right panel plots industrial production
growth AR(1) innovations (blue line) against their predicted values based on lagged news topic


                                                    30
                      Table 4: News-based Industrial Production Growth Forecasts

                                                                 4
                                                                                                                    Actual
                                                                                                                    Predicted
                                                                 2
                 Topic                       Coeff.   p-val.
                 Recession                    -0.18    0.04      0
                 Health insurance              0.13    0.10
                                                                -2
                 Russia                       -0.09    0.80
                 Space program                -0.08    0.83     -4
                 Oil market                   -0.08    0.08
                                                                -6
                 R2                            0.08

                                                                     1984 1987 1990 1994 1997 2000 2004 2007 2010 2014 2017


Note. Five-regressor lasso regression estimates and fits with p-values are adjusted for post-selection inference. Depen-
dent variable is the AR(1) innovation in industrial production growth.


attention (red line). The left panel shows the five topics selected by the lasso, their regression
coefficients, and their adjusted p-values for post-selection inference. In line with our VAR analysis
above, the regression results show that the recession topic is a strong predictor of output growth.
A one standard deviation increase in recession attention forecasts a 0.18 standard deviation drop in
next month's production growth (after controlling for lagged growth rates). The other marginally
significant forecaster of growth rates is attention to the oil market topic.
    From the fitted forecasting model we can investigate which narratives are associated with changes
in expected output. Both the top and bottom panel in Figure 11 show the news-based growth rate
predictions in red, which correspond to the fitted values shown in the left panel of Table 4. Along
with the news-based model predictions, we plot the contributions to the predicted values coming
from the recession topic (top panel) and oil market topic (bottom panel). Prediction contributions
for each topic are defined as the topic's prediction coefficient multiplied by its attention proportion
each period.
    Overlaying expected growth rates with forecast contributions shows how fluctuations in numerical
economic time series can be mapped to news via topic attention regressions. From here, one can
further map economic fluctuations to specific textual narratives by using topic model estimates. In
each month t, we identify the WSJ article published during the month that is most representative of
each topic k . This representative article is defined as the article i with the largest proportion of its
content (i ) allocated to topic k .
    The top panel of Figure 11 illustrates this mapping from growth rate expectations to narratives by
annotating the six largest shifts in recession attention with the headlines of articles most indicative of
recession news coverage at the time of the shift. For example, our model shows that narratives related
to falling consumer confidence (November 1987), declining corporate sales and profits (October 1998,
November 2008, and February 2016), and global growth concerns (September 2015) are key drivers
of growth rate expectations in our model. Likewise, the lower panel shows that oil market narratives
regarding changes in oil demand (October 2005), oil extraction (June 2004), and supply uncertainty



                                                          31
                     Figure 11: Narrative Retrieval for Industrial Production Growth Forecasts

                                                                             Panel A: Recession Topic
           Predicted IP Growth
           Recession Attention Contribution                                                                                                                Dow Drops 6.6 in August
                                                                           Slower Growth In Manufacturing Raises Concerns                              Amid Concerns Prices Don't Fully
                                                                                                                                                       Reflect Worsening Global Growth




                                                          Executives Anticipate Lower Sales and Profits




                  Survey Finds Sharp Drop in Confidence
                  Of Consumers After Stock Market Crash
                                                                                                                                                                       No Profit Relief in Sight



                                                                                                                        Stanley to Cut Jobs as Sales Of Tools Slow




198402         198706              199010             199402              199706              200010            200402             200706             201010               201402                  201706

                                                                            Panel B: Oil Market Topic
                                                                                                                                        Predicted IP Growth
                                                                                                                                        Oil Market Attention Contribution

     OPEC Discord Seen Limiting Policy Options                                                                     Gasoline Prices Fall as Imports Rise Demand Drops
      Big Producers Want Flood Of Oil Others
        Seek Cuts As Group Meets on Crisis




                                                 OPEC's Output May Forestall Energy Shortfall




                                                                                   OPEC Raises Output Quotas By 11% To Tame
                                                                                High Oil Prices Move Reflects an Attempt To Calm                      Forecasters Lower Oil Price Calls, Global
                                                                                  Markets Concerned About Middle East Turmoil                            Benchmark Ends Under 50 a Barrel
          Falling Oil Prices Relieve Consumers                                                                                                            Goldman Predicts an Average 42
         But May Set Stage for Future Shortage




198402         198706              199010             199402              199706              200010            200402             200706             201010               201402                  201706

Note. News-based growth rate predictions are in red, and contributions to the predicted values coming from the
recession topic (top panel) and oil market topic (bottom panel) are in black. Each panel is annotated with the six
largest shifts in attention based on the headlines of articles most indicative of topic coverage at the time of the shift.


                                                                                                  32
(February 1986) influence growth expectations.
   More generally, our proposed algorithm for narrative retrieval is the following. First, estimate
the projection of numerical series xt on the set of news topic attention proportions (a1,t , ..., aK,t ) and
recover projection coefficients 1 , ..., K (many of which may be zero if using a penalized regression
as in our earlier analysis). For a given event of interest, x , identify the topics that most strongly
contribute to that event through the projection. In the growth forecast example, we sought the topic
that contributed most prominently to the shift in growth forecasts, corresponding to topic-dates
characterized by large values of i (ai, - ai, -1 ). After identifying the key topics and events, we
finally trace the event back to the original narrative text underlying that topic by finding the article
published at time  with the largest allocation to the key topics. For the purpose of Figure 11,
we represented the event narrative as the headline of a single representative article. But retrieved
narratives can be as rich as the researcher desires, including multiple articles with high attention on
the topic of interest (rather than a single representative article) and leading sentences, paragraphs,
or even full text (as opposed to just a headline).

4.4   High Frequency Macroeconomic Modeling: A Financial Frictions Narrative
Few economists saw the 2007­2009 financial crisis coming, perhaps because it is not possible to
predict such events (Cochrane, 2011), because of behavioral biases (Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018), or
because of strong beliefs in misspecified economic models (Krugman, 2009). When financial turmoil
begins, economists, market participants, and policy makers gradually develop a narrative for the
market's behavior (Shiller, 2017). This narrative is important as it can shape the policy response.
   Recent literature has developed several measures of financial frictions that can quantify their
severity in realtime. These measures can sound the alarm about emerging risks in the financial sector,
but leave the problem of identifying their causes open. We next provide a method for identifying
such causes by studying the time-varying correlation of a high frequency measure of financial frictions
with the topics that appear in the WSJ.
   We measure financial frictions by the spread between the price of five-year interest rate swaps
and five-year treasury rates. Swap spreads represent the difference between the yield on a synthetic
bond (receiving fixed on a swap) and the yield on a treasury bond of the same maturity. A larger
spread captures the extent to which the financial intermediary that writes the swap is riskier than
the treasury. Liu et al. (2006) have shown that this credit premium is primarily compensation
for liquidity risk. Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2018) show that it is tightly related to balance sheet
frictions and constraints faced by financial intermediaries. A major advantage of this measure is that
it is readily available starting in mid-2000 on a daily basis. The high frequency nature of our daily
newspaper data allows a higher frequency narrative for emerging risks than, for example, Hanley
and Hoberg (2019) who rely on annual corporate filings.
   We estimate which topics best explain intermediary frictions in rolling 1000-day lasso regressions
of swap spreads on topic proportions. As before, we select a penalty that generates exactly five
non-zero coefficients. We show a heatmap of topic coefficients over time in both levels (Figure 12)


                                                     33
                                         Figure 12: Financial Frictions (Levels)


                  Accounting
  Acquired investment banks
                  Automotive
                   Bank loans
                  Bankruptcy
        Bush/Obama/Trump                                                                                       0.4
                    California
                     Clintons
                Commodities
               Control stakes
                Credit ratings
           Currencies/metals
                    Elections
                Environment
    European sovereign debt
      Exchanges/composites                                                                                     0.2
             Federal Reserve
              Financial crisis
                  France/Italy
              Futures/indices
        Government budgets
            Health insurance
                 Immigration
                  Indictments
     International exchanges
                      Internet                                                                                 0.0
                          Iraq
          Justice Department
                        M&A
               Mid-size cities
                 Middle east
                  Mortgages
                 NY politics
            Natural disasters
                  Oil market
  Private equity/hedge funds                                                                                   -0.2
                   Problems
                  Publishing
                   Recession
                 Record high
                      Russia
                        SEC
       Safety administrations
                  Small caps
                       Taxes
                   Terrorism                                                                                   -0.4
              Treasury bonds
                  US Senate
                      Unions
              Venture capital
                           2000


                                  2002


                                            2004


                                                        2006


                                                                     2008


                                                                                   2010


                                                                                                 2012

Note. We estimate which topics best explain financial frictions, as measured by the swap spread. The swap spread is
the yield difference between five-year interest rate swaps and five-year treasury rates, both from FRED. We run rolling
1000-day window Lasso regressions of swap spreads on news topic proportions (levels on levels). We select a penalty
that generates exactly five non-zero coefficients and plot a heatmap of these topic coefficients over time.


and innovations (Figure 13). The sparsity of the regression models provides a concise narrative for
major events that exacerbated (redder) or alleviated (bluer) financial frictions.
      Figure 12 shows that regressing levels on levels tends to focus on slow-moving trends associated
with financial frictions. For example, "mortgages" and "financial crisis" light up in 2003, suggesting
that concerns about mortgages and potential for an impending financial crisis partly explain the
variation in swap spreads over the 2003­2006 period--well before the full blown crisis starts in the
summer of 2007. Other major topics associated with worsening liquidity risk are "recession" and
"European sovereign debt". Interestingly, while coverage of the 2004 and 2008 elections coincided
with worsening financial frictions, the 2012 elections are a period of improving liquidity.
      A regression of changes on changes suggests a more nuanced narrative of financial frictions. Fig-



                                                           34
                                        Figure 13: Financial Frictions (Innovations)


  Acquired investment banks
                     Activists
                  Agriculture
              Announce plan
                          Arts
                   Bank loans
                  Bankruptcy
  Biology/chemistry/physics                                                                                    0.04
                    California
                      Casinos
            Chemicals/paper
                     Clintons
                  Committees
                   Computers
                  Connecticut
       Convertible/preferred
                       Courts
                Credit ratings
                      Disease
                       Drexel
                     Earnings
           Earnings forecasts
              Earnings losses
           Economic growth
          Economic ideology
    European sovereign debt                                                                                    0.02
      Exchanges/composites
             Federal Reserve
              Financial crisis
            Financial reports
      Foods/consumer goods
                  France/Italy
              Futures/indices
        Government budgets
                         IPOs
                    Insurance
     International exchanges
                      Internet
                      Job cuts
          Justice Department
                     Key role
               Latin America
                     Lawsuits
             Long/short term                                                                                   0.00
                        M&A
        Macroeconomic data
       Management changes
                       Mexico
                   Microchips
                  Middle east
                   Mortgages
              Music industry
                 Negotiations
       Nonperforming loans
        Nuclear/North Korea
                     Pensions
                       Pharma
       Political contributions
                   Publishing
                       Reagan
                   Real estate
                    Recession                                                                                  -0.02
                  Record high
                   Regulation
                     Restraint
             Revised estimate
                        Russia
                          SEC
             Savings & loans
           Scenario analysis
              Share payouts
                 Short sales
                 Soft drinks
                   Software
                Subsidiaries
                      Taxes
                    Tobacco
           Trade agreements
            Trading activity
             Treasury bonds                                                                                    -0.04
                         UK
                  US Senate
                     Unions
                    Utilities
                 Wide range
                        2000


                                 2002


                                          2004


                                                      2006


                                                                  2008


                                                                               2010


                                                                                             2012


Note. We estimate which topics best explain financial frictions, as measured by the swap spread. The swap spread is
the yield difference between five-year interest rate swaps and five-year treasury rates, both from FRED. We run rolling
1000-day window Lasso regressions of swap spreads on news topic proportions (innovations on innovations). We select
a penalty that generates exactly five non-zero coefficients and plot a heatmap of these topic coefficients over time.


ure 13 shows that more topics become transiently important for understanding variation in swap
spreads. For example, increased coverage of the middle east, concentrated around the 9/11 attack
and the subsequent war in Iraq, is associated with increasing swap spreads. Greater coverage of
"California" is associated with worsening financial frictions, long before it became an epicenter for
delinquent mortgage-backed securities. Mentions of "acquired investment banks", "trading activ-
ity", and securities market "exchanges" are associated with improved liquidity, as are mentions of
"Connecticut"--a hedge fund hub. Toward the end of our swap spreads sample, which ends on
October 28, 2016, the greatest source of heightened financial frictions is attributed to "utilities," in-
dicating a link between financial stability and attention on energy production and regulation around



                                                             35
                         Table 5: WSJ Topics and Economic Policy Uncertainty Indices

Topic                Coeff   P-Value     Topic                   Coeff   P-Value      Topic             Coeff    P-Value
       Entitlement   Programs                     Financial Regulation                 Fiscal Policy/Spending/Taxes
Govt. budgets         0.45      0.00     Financial crisis        0.25        0.00     Govt. budgets     0.49     0.00
Euro. sov. debt       0.18      0.00     Competition            -0.25        0.00     Recession         0.20     0.00
Takeovers            -0.18      0.11     Bank loans              0.15        0.02     M&A              -0.16     0.00
Credit ratings        0.17      0.09     Problems                0.14        0.13     Competition      -0.16     0.33
Economic growth       0.08      0.15     Recession               0.13        0.03     Credit ratings    0.11     0.92
R2                    0.46               R2                      0.45                 R2                0.54

       Government    Spending                         Health Care                              Monetary Policy
Govt. budgets         0.54      0.00     Govt. budgets          0.37         0.44     Recession         0.24        0.06
Restraint             0.17      0.00     Economic growth        0.25         0.00     Airlines          0.22        0.00
M&A                  -0.17      0.00     Takeovers             -0.18         0.96     Restraint         0.20        0.00
Problems              0.13      0.74     Bush/Obama/Trump       0.14         0.00     Record high      -0.18        0.00
Competition          -0.05      0.27     Euro. sov. debt        0.14         0.00     Problems          0.13        0.01
R2                    0.55               R2                     0.53                  R2                0.37

         National Security                              Regulation                       Sov. Debt/Currency Crises
Iraq                0.53        0.00     Govt. budgets            0.27       0.11     Southeast Asia   0.41      0.24
Internet           -0.19        0.00     Recession                0.23       0.04     Euro. sov. debt  0.33      0.03
Airlines            0.17        0.00     Financial crisis         0.20       0.00     Music industry -0.26       0.79
Record high        -0.17        0.00     M&A                     -0.19       0.01     Movie industry -0.13       0.15
US defense          0.09        0.06     Competition             -0.15       0.01     Problems         0.13      0.16
R2                  0.57                 R2                       0.46                R2               0.43

                 Taxes                                Trade Policy                              Broad   EPU
Govt. budgets         0.43      0.00     Mexico                  0.44        0.00     Problems           0.33       0.00
Recession             0.24      0.00     Trade agreements        0.26        0.00     M&A               -0.28       0.00
M&A                  -0.15      0.00     Consumer goods          0.23        0.00     Govt. budgets      0.27       0.00
Competition          -0.15      0.00     Trading activity        0.15        0.06     Restraint          0.17       0.05
Credit ratings        0.12      0.08     Intl. exchanges         0.01        0.83     Competition       -0.09       0.07
R2                    0.49               R2                      0.50                 R2                 0.53

Note. Five-regressor lasso regression estimates and fits with p-values are adjusted for post-selection inference.


that time.

4.5     Unsupervised Economic Policy Uncertainty
In influential recent work, Baker et al. (2016) develop a broad index of economic policy uncertainty
(EPU) based on news text, as well as a number of category-specific sub-indices that focus on par-
ticular aspects of economic policy like trade, taxes, and financial regulation. Our estimated topics
are closely related to the EPU indices developed by BBD. Table 5 reports the five-regressor lasso
regression of BBD's 12 EPU indices (11 catagorical EPU indices plus their broad EPU index) on our
estimated news attention time series, and Figure 14 plots the model fits. For example, our five-topic
news attention regression explains 55% of the variation in the BBD "government spending" uncer-
tainty index. This is driven primarily by our "government budget" topic {key terms: spend cut,
deficit reduction, grammrudman, federal budget, balance budget}, which has a univariate correlation

                                                           36
of 66% with the BBD index. The BBD "financial regulation" uncertainty index looks like a com-
bination of our "financial crisis," "competition," "bank loans," and "recession" topics (R2 = 45%).
It is interesting to note that "competition" is the only topic significantly negatively associated with
financial regulation uncertainty. And the BBD "trade policy" uncertainty index behaves like a com-
bination of our "Mexico," "trade agreements," and "consumer goods" topics (R2 = 50%).
    To construct their main EPU index, BBD measure the fraction of articles in ten leading U.S.
newspapers that contain the terms "economic" or "economy;" "uncertain" or "uncertainty;" and
"Congress," "deficit," "Federal Reserve," "legislation," "regulation," or "White House." Their tex-
tual analysis amounts to a heavily restricted model, as the researchers decide on a few specific search
terms from first principles prior to analyzing data. This approach has advantages and limitations.
Thoughtfully choosing a small list of search terms ex ante has the advantage that a researcher can
hone in on the text content of interest while easily avoiding the complexity and noise of surrounding
text. But by requiring such detailed researcher input (i.e., priors), this textual analysis approach is
especially prone to misspecification biases. Without some degree of flexibility in the text model, it
is impossible to discern potentially important patterns in news outside of the pre-established term
list. These considerations are a manifestation of the fundamental bias-variance tradeoff at the core
of statistics.
    In contrast to BBD, our topic modeling approach is unsupervised and comparatively unrestricted.
This also has its advantages and limitations. LDA lays out a general distributional framework for
word counts that acts as a blank canvas for the data. This has the advantage of allowing the data
to speak directly by projecting its underlying patterns onto this canvas (within the structure of the
distributional assumptions). That is, our priors are less informative and therefore our approach is
less biased. On the variance side of the tradeoff, our model has the limitation that, by modeling raw
counts in their complex and high-dimensional form, it must wrestle with all varieties of noise in the
data.
    Our estimated news attention series share the great advantage of BBD's approach--the natural
interpretability inherent in the use of text as data. While the BBD approach relies on careful
researcher intervention to curate narrow search term lists, our results illustrate the exciting potential
that topic models and other machine learning methods offer for constructing indices of economic
conditions from news text with much less researcher intervention.

4.6     Exploring Ultra-high Dimensionality
In the preceding sections, we approach the reconstruction of numerical economic time series with
linear models of topic attention time series. The view we propose, that the state of the economy is
describable as time-varying configurations of topic attention, is likely to be better captured in regres-
sions that allow for (potentially complex) interactions among topics. We explore this by extending
the five-regressor lasso regressions for industrial production and employment in Table 1 to include
not only the 180 topic attention time series as regressors, but also all pairwise topic interactions.
    Table 6 reports the results. Interestingly, we find that no individual topics are selected for the


                                                   37
                                          Figure 14: WSJ Topics and Economic Policy Uncertainty Indices

                     Entitlement Programs                                                            Financial Regulation                                              Fiscal Policy/Spending/Taxes
 5           Actual                                                                                                                               Actual               Actual
                                                                                                                                                               4
             Predicted                                                           6                                                                Predicted            Predicted
 4
                                                                                 5                                                                             3
 3                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                               2
 2                                                                               3

                                                                                 2                                                                             1
 1
                                                                                 1                                                                             0
 0
                                                                                 0
-1                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                -1
     1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990    1994    1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017




                     Government Spending                                                                      Health Care                                                           Monetary Policy
             Actual                                                              5       Actual                                                                                                                               Actual
 5           Predicted                                                                   Predicted                                                             5                                                              Predicted

 4                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                               4

 3                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                               3

 2                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                               2

 1                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                               1

 0                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                               0

-1                                                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                              -1

     1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990    1994    1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017




                          National Security                                                                   Regulation                                                  Sov. Debt/Currency Crises
                                                                    Actual       8                                                                Actual       5       Actual
 6                                                                  Predicted                                                                     Predicted            Predicted
                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                 6
 4                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                               2
 2
                                                                                 2                                                                             1

 0                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                              -1

     1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990    1994    1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017




                                    Taxes                                                                 Trade Policy                                                              Broad EPU Index
 5
             Actual                                                                                                                               Actual       4                                                              Actual
             Predicted                                                                                                                            Predicted                                                                   Predicted
 4                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                               3
 3
                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                               2
 2
                                                                                 4                                                                             1
 1
                                                                                 2                                                                             0
 0
                                                                                 0                                                                            -1
-1
                                                                                                                                                            -2
     1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990    1994    1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017 1984   1987   1990   1994   1997   2000   2004   2007   2010   2014    2017



 Note. Five-regressor lasso regression fits.


                                                                                                                      38
                Table 6: Reconstructing Macroeconomic Time Series With Interactions

            Industrial Production Growth                                       Employment Growth
Topic                               Coeff.      p-val.         Topic                                 Coeff.     p-val.
Recession×Oil market                  -0.25      0.00          Inv. banks×Bush/Obama/Trump            -0.28     0.94
Inv. banks×Bush/Obama/Trump           -0.18      0.17          Recession×Fees                         -0.22     0.24
Job cuts×Recession                    -0.09      0.73          Publishing×Recession                   -0.19     0.51
Recession×Corporate governance        -0.07      0.94          Recession×Bankruptcy                   -0.17     0.04
Short sales×Recession                 -0.02      0.11          Credit ratings×Recession               -0.07     0.60
R2                                     0.24                    R2                                      0.63

Note. Five-regressor lasso regression estimates and fits with p-values are adjusted for post-selection inference, using
individual topic attention regressors as well as their pairwise interactions.


model. Instead, all of the selected regressors are topic interactions, and the majority of them (eight
of ten) include the recession topic. These results suggest that macroeconomic outcomes can be
accurately captured not just by discussion of economic downturns, but with specific attributes of
downturns such as conditions in commodities markets and attention to corporate bankruptcy. More
broadly, these results raise the possibility that more flexible non-linear models from the machine
learning toolkit, such as tree models which tend to be more adept than regressions for modeling
covariate interaction, are likely to be valuable tools for measuring the state of the economy.


5       Conclusion
Understanding the forces that drive fluctuations in the state of the economy is central to economic
modeling. The overwhelming majority of empirical research has focused on numerical macroeconomic
indicators to approach this problem. We offer an alternative approach that summarizes economic
conditions in terms of narratives in business news.
    Our approach is motivated by the view that news text is a mirror of the state of the economy. The
media sector is an information intermediary that meets information demand of consumers and in-
vestors with verbal descriptions of economic events and their interpretation. Of course, viewing news
media as a verbal mirror of the economy, we must also recognize that it comes with flawed refrac-
tions, often in the form of producer and consumer biases, erroneous inference, and unsubstantiated
speculations (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2006).
    We estimate a topic model from the full text of The Wall Street Journal. Our estimates provide
a complete taxonomy of its recurrent themes that describe subjects of attention in financial markets
and the broader economy. We measure how much attention is allocated to each theme at each point
in time, and then use these measurements as inputs into statistical models of economic fluctuations.
    Economic topics identified from WSJ text closely coincide with related numerical measures of
economic activity, including macroeconomic aggregates like output and employment, financing ac-
tivity, asset prices, and different measures of economic uncertainty. In the context of a standard
macroeconomic VAR, we show that news topic attention contains substantial information about
future economic outcomes above and beyond standard indicators.


                                                          39
   Lastly, we propose a new econometric perspective on shock identification. Our approach relies on
the model to digest massive text corpora that are beyond human readability, and flags articles that
are most statistically related to a specific shock or fluctuation of interest. It thus isolates news-based
narratives of those events that the researcher can "close-read" for detail and nuance about a given
"shock" in numerical data.




                                                   40
References
Asuncion, Arthur, Max Welling, Padhraic Smyth, and Yee Whye Teh, 2009, On smoothing and
  inference for topic models, in Proceedings of the twenty-fifth conference on uncertainty in artificial
  intelligence , 27­34, AUAI Press.

Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J Davis, 2016, Measuring economic policy uncertainty,
  The quarterly journal of economics 131, 1593­1636.

Blei, David, 2013, Probabilistic topic models, Lecture Slides, http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~blei/
  talks/Blei_MLSS_2012.pdf.

Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan, 2003, Latent dirichlet allocation, Journal of
  machine Learning research 3, 993­1022.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and Matthew Richardson, 2018, Information,
  trading, and volatility: Evidence from firm-specific news, The Review of Financial Studies 32,
  992­1033.

Chauvet, Marcelle, and Jeremy Piger, 2008, A comparison of the real-time performance of business
  cycle dating methods, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 26, 42­49.

Cochrane, John H., 2011, How Did Paul Krugman Get It so Wrong?1, Economic Affairs 31, 36­40.

Cong, Lin William, Tengyuan Liang, and Xiao Zhang, 2018, Textual factors: A scalable, inter-
  pretable, and data-driven approach to analyzing unstructured information, SSRN Working Paper
  .

Engle, Robert, Takatoshi Ito, and Wen-Ling Lin, 1990, Meteor showers or heat waves? heteroskedas-
  tic intra-daily volatility in the foreign exchange market, Econometrica 58, 525­42.

Engle, Robert F, 2019, Financial volatility in an age of geopolitical risks, Technical report, NYU
  Working Paper.

Engle, Robert F, Stefano Giglio, Bryan T Kelly, Heebum Lee, and Johannes Stroebel, 2019, Hedging
  climate change news, Review of Financial Studies .

Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2018, Shadow funding costs: Measuring the cost
  of balance sheet constraints, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, A crisis of beliefs: Investor psychology and financial
  fragility (Princeton University Press).

Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M Shapiro, 2006, Media bias and reputation, Journal of political
  Economy 114, 280­316.



                                                  41
Griffiths, Thomas L, and Mark Steyvers, 2004, Finding scientific topics, Proceedings of the National
  academy of Sciences 101, 5228­5235.

Hanley, Kathleen Weiss, and Gerard Hoberg, 2019, Dynamic Interpretation of Emerging Risks in
  the Financial Sector, The Review of Financial Studies .

Hansen, Stephen, Michael McMahon, and Andrea Prat, 2017, Transparency and deliberation within
  the fomc: a computational linguistics approach, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 801­870.

Hassan, Tarek A, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun, Forthcoming, Firm-
  level political risk: Measurement and effects, Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Herskovic, Bernard, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016, The common
  factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications, Journal of Financial
  Economics 119, 249­283.

Kelly, Bryan, Asaf Manela, and Alan Moreira, 2019, Text selection, Working Paper 14.

Krugman, Paul, 2009, How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?, The New York Times .

Liu, Jun, Francis A. Longstaff, and Ravit E. Mandell, 2006, The market price of risk in interest rate
  swaps: The roles of default and liquidity risks, The Journal of Business 79, 2337­2359.

Maaten, Laurens van der, and Geoffrey Hinton, 2008, Visualizing data using t-sne, Journal of ma-
  chine learning research 9, 2579­2605.

Manela, Asaf, and Alan Moreira, 2017, News implied volatility and disaster concerns, Journal of
  Financial Economics 123, 137­162.

Mikolov, Tomas, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean, 2013, Efficient estimation of word
  representations in vector space, arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 .

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer, 2005, The market for news, American Economic Review
  95, 1031­1053.

Murtagh, Fionn, and Pierre Legendre, 2014, Ward?s hierarchical agglomerative clustering method:
  which algorithms implement ward?s criterion?, Journal of classification 31, 274­295.

Quinn, Kevin M, Burt L Monroe, Michael Colaresi, Michael H Crespin, and Dragomir R Radev,
  2010, How to analyze political attention with minimal assumptions and costs, American Journal
  of Political Science 54, 209­228.

Roll, Richard, 1988, Presidential address: R2, Journal of Finance 43, 51­566.

Shiller, Robert J., 2017, Narrative Economics, American Economic Review 107, 967­1004.

Steyvers, Mark, and Tom Griffiths, 2007, Probabilistic topic models, Handbook of latent semantic
  analysis 427, 424­440.

                                                 42
Tibshirani, Ryan J, Jonathan Taylor, Richard Lockhart, and Robert Tibshirani, 2016, Exact post-
  selection inference for sequential regression procedures, Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
  ciation 111, 600­620.




                                                 43
A      Construction the WSJ Document-Term Matrix
We conduct data processing steps in the following order:
    1. Remove all articles prior to January 1984 and after June 2017 (data purchased at the beginning of July
       2017).
    2. Replace all non-alphabetical characters with an empty string and set the remaining characters to lower-
       case.
    3. Parse article text into a white-space-separated word list retaining the article's word ordering. Exclude
       single-letter words.
    4. Exclude articles with page-citation tags corresponding to any sections other than A, B, C, or missing.
    5. Exclude articles corresponding to weekends.
    6. Exclude articles with subject tags associated with obviously non-economic content such as sports. See
       the full list of excluded tags at www.structureofnews.com.
    7. Exclude articles with the certain headline patterns (such as those associated with data tables or those
       corresponding to regular sports, leisure, or books columns). See the full list of excluded headline patterns
       at www.structureofnews.com.
    8. Concatenate articles with the same accession-number as these are chained articles.
    9. Exclude articles with less than 100 words.
  10. Remove common "stop" words and URL-based terms. See the full list of excluded stop words and URL
      patterns at www.structureofnews.com.
  11. Lastly, we conduct light lemmatizing of derivative words. The following rules are applied in the order
      given, where 'x' is a candidate term. In each case, the stemming is only applied if the multiple terms
      reduce to the same stem.

        (a) Replace trailing "sses" with "ss"
        (b) Replace trailing "ies" with "y"
        (c) Remove trailing "s"
        (d) Remove trailing "ly"
        (e) Remove trailing "ed." Replace remaining trailing "ed" with "e"
        (f) Replace trailing "ing" with "e". For remaining trailing "ing" that follow a pair of identical conso-
            nants, remove "ing" and one consonant. Remove remaining trailing "ing"
        (g) Remove words with less than 3 letters.

  12. From the resulting uni-grams, generate the set of bi-grams as all pairs of (ordered) adjacent uni-grams.
  13. Exclude terms (both uni-grams and bi-grams) appearing in less than 0.1% of articles. The unique set of
      terms is the corpus vocabulary. Each column of the DTM corresponds to an element of the vocabulary.
  14. Convert an article's word list into a vector of counts for each term in the vocabulary. This vector is the
      row of the DTM corresponding to the article.


B      Topic Key Terms


                                                        44
                                                                               Table 7: Topic Key Terms

     Metatopic label     Topic label               Key terms
     Labor/transfers     Executive pay             bonus, base salary, total compensation, pay package, compensation package, compensation committee, restrict stock, tyco, executive compensation, bonuses
                         Job cuts                  job cut, work force, fulltime employee, layoff, eliminate job, attrition, cut job, employment opportunity, employee work, unemployed
                         Unions                    uaw, teamsters, relation board, union member, national labor, labor relation, picket line, worker union, union leader, nonunion
                         Health insurance          hmo, health plan, health coverage, health care, manage care, blue cross, health insurance, care act, blue shield, healthcare system
                         Pensions                  pension plan, employee retirement, benefit guaranty, pension, state pension, retirement system, retirement save, pension liability, retirement benefit, pension
                                                   system
                         Government budgets        spend cut, deficit reduction, grammrudman, federal budget, balance budget, budget plan, cbo, house budget, entitlement program, budget
                         Fees                      fee paid, pay fee, fee, charge fee, fee charge, higher fee, receive payment, license fee, company pay, upfront
                         Taxes                     irs, tax rate, deduction, income tax, tax bill, irss, capitalgains, capitalgains tax, tax court, taxable income

     Management          Connecticut               stamford conn, stamford, greenwich conn, conn, haven conn, clark, greenwich, norwalk, norwalk conn, westport
                         C-suite                   executive officer, chief operate, operate officer, financial officer, chief financial, chairman president, officer john, officer robert, company chief, administrative
                                                   officer
                         Mid-level executives      vice, vice president, executive vice, senior vice, named senior, named vice, named executive, president finance, president market, group vice
                         Management changes        succession plan, top job, departure, management shakeup, management style, shakeup, succession, heir apparent, top post, daytoday operation

     Transport/health/   Natural disasters         katrina, quake, hurricane katrina, fishermen, coast guard, storm, emergency management, tsunami, earthquake, boat
     defense             Police/crime              inmates, police officer, violent crime, police department, gang, police, homicide, firearms, robbery, gunman
                         Mid-size cities           kansas city, fla, lauderdale, palm beach, salt lake, lauderdale fla, lake city, fort lauderdale, beach fla, west palm
                         Disease                   disease control, aid virus, cdc, breast cancer, breast, infectious disease, heart disease, virus, flu, diagnosed




45
                         US defense                rumsfeld, missile defense, marine corps, joint chief, donald rumsfeld, strategic defense, defense secretary, naval, senate arm, defense official
                         Pharma                    pfizer, generic, bristolmyers, lilly, generic version, drug company, generic drug, eli lilly, novartis, drug maker
                         Aerospace/defense         force contract, lockheed, mcdonnell, mcdonnell douglas, northrop, pratt whitney, grumman, lockheed martin, airbus, general dynamic
                         NY politics               blasio, cuomo, gov andrew, mayor bill, mayor michael, city council, andrew cuomo, city mayor, mayor, city hall
                         Automotive                auto maker, domestic car, import car, ford, sportutility, chevrolet, chrysler, mazda, toyota, eestimated
                         Rail/trucking/shipping    railroad, norfolk southern, conrail, csx, rail, union pacific, amtrak, burlington northern, norfolk, freight
                         Airlines                  airline, texas air, twa, american airline, airways, pilot association, pilot union, flight attendant, load factor, northwest airline
                         California                los angeles, angeles, los, francisco, san francisco, diego, san diego, orange county, santa monica, angeles county
                         Rental properties         square feet, square foot, vacancy rate, tenant, office space, landlord, office tower, squarefoot, retail space, highrise
                         Retail                    walmart, department store, store open, walmart store, penney, kmart, retail analyst, comparablestore, bentonville, bentonville ark

     Government          Political contributions   donation, political contribution, philanthropy, campaign contribution, charity, nonprofit organization, nonprofit group, philanthropic, donor, donate
                         Regulation                propose rule, rule govern, rule require, final rule, federal regulation, consumer protection, regulation, rule change, current rule, protect consumer
                         Environment               epa, emission, protection agency, environmental protection, carbon dioxide, dioxide, greenhouse gases, clean air, environmental, environmental group
                         Private/public sector     private sector, private enterprise, private business, public sector, private firm, private company, privatization, government aid, privatize, taxpayer money
                         State politics            rhode island, state legislature, state include, west virginia, state legislator, schwarzenegger, north carolina, rhode, washington state, state lawmaker
                         Watchdogs                 inspector general, gao, account office, general account, accountability office, government accountability, page report, report conclude, inspector, review process
                         Utilities                 nrc, megawatt, nuclear regulatory, pge, nuclear plant, electricity, electric utility, public utility, utility commission, power company
                         Safety administrations    safety board, traffic safety, highway traffic, safety administration, transportation safety, osha, national highway, occupational safety, health administration,
                                                   accident
                                                                                                                                                                                          Continued on next page
                                                                       Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
     Metatopic label     Topic label           Key terms
                         National security     cybersecurity, security agency, hacker, intelligence committee, fbi, cia, espionage, homeland security, security expert, senate intelligence

     Legal               Justice Department    spitzer, antitrust division, general eliot, receive subpoena, eliot spitzer, department antitrust, department investigation, justice department, internal investi-
                                               gation, general office
                         Indictments           indictment, plead guilty, plead, plea agreement, mail fraud, face maximum, guilty plea, wire fraud, prosecutor allege, guilty
                         Courts                supreme court, appeal court, scalia, federal appeal, chief justice, high court, justice william, william rehnquist, antonin, court rule
                         Lawsuits              punitive damage, suit file, classaction, plaintiff lawyer, class action, suit allege, plaintiff attorney, lawsuit file, compensatory damage, classaction suit

     National politics   Clintons              lewinsky, whitewater, rodham clinton, hillary rodham, rodham, clinton administration, president clinton, independent counsel, impeachment, janet reno
                         US Senate             majority leader, senate bill, daschle, house bill, hastert, senate majority, appropriations committee, senate floor, senate version, gop leadership
                         Reagan                contra, reagan administration, president reagan, shultz, george shultz, state george, regan, irancontra, james baker, secretary james
                         Bush/Obama/Trump      obama administration, trump administration, president donald, president barack, bush administration, president dick, president bush, president joe, house
                                               press, barack
                         Elections             sen obama, romney, sen mccain, dukakis, mitt romney, democratic primary, republican primary, mitt, gop primary, run mate
                         European politics     opposition party, socialist party, ldp, parliamentary election, centerleft, parliamentary, rule party, centerright, rule coalition, main opposition

     Terrorism/          Middle east           palestinian, gaza, hamas, serb, gaza strip, israeli, plo, israel, hezbollah, palestinian authority
     Middle east         Nuclear/North Korea   pyongyang, north korea, north korean, kim jong, nuclear program, daewoo, korean, seoul south, jong, kim
                         Terrorism             taliban, karzai, afghan, qaeda, kabul, pakistani, islamabad, musharraf, hamid karzai, afghan government
                         Iraq                  iraqi, saddam, saddam hussein, kurds, baghdad, iraqi leader, iraqi government, erdogan, iraqi official, ankara

     International       Russia                yeltsin, moscow, putin, russian, kremlin, gorbachev, kiev, ukraine, russian president, boris yeltsin




46
     affairs             Trade agreements      gatt, wto, tariff, trade representative, antidumping, trade pact, protectionist, trade official, general agreement, freetrade agreement
                         Latin America         argentina, chavez, latin, latin america, latin american, hugo chavez, cuban, colombia, president hugo, paulo brazil
                         Japan                 japanese company, tokyo japan, japan largest, japan biggest, shinzo, minister shinzo, abe, japanese business, strong yen, japan ministry
                         Canada/South Africa   south africa, quebec, canadian government, toronto stock, british columbia, calgary, canadian cent, mandela, ottawa, calgary alberta
                         China                 yuan, beijing, xinhua, chinese official, chinese government, chinese company, chinese, zhu, beijing china, china sea
                         Southeast Asia        jakarta, thailand, southeast asia, rupiah, southeast asian, suharto, indonesian, baht, indonesia, bhd
                         Germany               east german, helmut kohl, bonn, chancellor helmut, helmut, german company, east germany, german official, west germany, chancellor gerhard
                         France/Italy          generale, chirac, societe generale, french government, sarkozy, societe, french bank, belgium, francois, french company
                         UK                    gbp, scotland, hold plc, scotland group, plc british, british bank, british company, scottish, group plc, unit kingdom

     Entertainment       Music industry        album, record label, song, record company, music industry, universal music, music group, music company, emi, musicians
                         Broadcasting          clear channel, broadcaster, broadcast, cable channel, broadcast network, television station, cos nbc, nbc, viewership, liberty media
                         Publishing            barnes noble, circulation, time mirror, random house, magazine publisher, daily news, gannett, newspaper publisher, daily newspaper, chicago tribune
                         Marketing             saatchi, interpublic, omnicom, ddb, rubicam, saatchi saatchi, bbdo, wpp, young rubicam, publicis
                         Movie industry        boxoffice, hollywood, paramount picture, motion picture, dreamworks, studio, sony picture, eisner, hollywood studio, mattel

     Social/cultural     Economic ideology     letter letter, relate letter, hoover institution, moral, liberalism, enterprise institute, american enterprise, morality, hoover, franklin roosevelt
                         Schools               public school, private school, high school, school, curriculum, test score, teacher union, school board, student, school district
                         Sales call            conference room, salesman, salesmen, boss, phone call, hotline, colleague, receive call, desk, stunned
                         Cultural life         dog, cowboy, deer, jacket, shirt, sweat, tshirt, cat, wear, shower
                         Arts                  sothebys, museum, auction house, art, collector, gallery, portrait, exhibit, thcentury, artistic
                                                                                                                                                                                     Continued on next page
                                                                             Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
     Metatopic label    Topic label                  Key terms
                        Immigration                  immigrant, illegal immigrant, migrant, census, census bureau, immigration law, undocumented, immigration, citizenship, illegal immigration
                        Positive sentiment           awful lot, pretty good, spend lot, good time, awful, good idea, making money, people feel, good deal, big money
                        Humor/language               phrase, fool, word, humor, polite, translation, stupid, funny, emotion, tongue
                        Gender issues                female, young women, mother, daughter, divorce, father, young children, sexual harassment, family member, wives

     Outlook language   Changes                      major shift, shift, fundamental change, big change, major change, significant change, rethink, rapid change, direction, change
                        Key role                     key role, play role, play key, play major, major role, important role, big role, play big, lead role, active role
                        Problems                     problem face, biggest problem, big problem, matter worse, major problem, real problem, bigger problem, similar problem, solve, fundamental problem
                        Challenges                   uphill battle, uphill, face tough, face pressure, battle, intense pressure, challenge face, status quo, quo, face challenge
                        Small possibility            door open, time frame, frame, door, move quick, left open, wait, leave, ready, takes place
                        Spring/summer                early march, late summer, close watch, late march, watch close, early sign, early stage, summer, watch, show sign
                        Long/short term              long term, short term, long run, longer term, long time, term limit, short run, long period, long haul, long

     Science            Research                     survey conduct, respondents, survey show, survey, survey release, methodology, data compile, statistical, gallup, study release
                        Scenario analysis            financial analysis, commentary, worstcase scenario, worstcase, analysis, foreseeable, foreseeable future, conventional wisdom, imply, scenario
                        Programs/initiatives         program aim, goal, broader effort, top priority, pilot program, initiative, ambitious, achieve, program design, high priority
                        Biology/chemistry/physics    gene, dna, mice, molecules, biology, scientist, physics, molecular, national laboratory, genetic
                        Space program                nasa, space administration, national aeronautic, space station, space shuttle, spacecraft, astronauts, orbit, booster, mann
                        Systems                      task force, task, current system, centralized, decentralized, system work, complexity, efficient, inefficiency, workable
                        Size                         big chunk, chunk, large chunk, smaller, bigger, smaller company, rough double, rely heavily, size, rapid grow




47
                        Wide range                   wide range, vary wide, vast majority, broad range, wide variety, large number, limit number, large portion, vary, wide

     Activism           Activists                    icahn, carl icahn, investor carl, getty, pennzoil, carl, texaco, white plain, source close, holmes
                        Announce plan                announce plan, plan announce, unveil plan, announce earlier, previous announce, yesterdays announcement, announce restructure, company announce,
                                                     outline plan, latest move
                        Major concerns               raise concern, major concern, express concern, concern, increase concern, voice concern, concern raise, cit, held, addition
                        Futures/indices              spot index, dollar yen, brother treasury, commodity oil, oil barrel, treasury index, future index, bond lehman, stock volume, jonesaig future
                        Corrections/amplifications   amplifications, correction amplifications, article correction, incorrect, news article, incorrect state, relate article, incorrect report, article, correction
                        Buffett                      buffett, berkshire, hathaway, berkshire hathaway, warren buffett, warren, omaha neb, omaha, neb, billionaire investor
                        Mexico                       mexican, salinas, mexican government, grupo, mexico, mexico city, ernesto, lopez, mexican peso, telefonos

     Announcements      Restraint                    temporary restrain, restrain order, postponement, postpone, delay, extension, indefinite, temporarily, expiration date, restrain
                        News conference              news conference, told news, press conference, told reporter, conference, press release, news release, remark, attendees, public appearance
                        Company spokesperson         call seek, seek comment, return call, spokesman confirm, return phone, spokesman decline, spokesman add, return telephone, company spokesman, comment
                                                     spokesman
                        People familiar              people familiar, familiar, person familiar, person close, people close, people involve, person, matter, individual familiar, executive familiar
                        Agreement reached            definitive agreement, sign letter, sign definitive, definitive, reach definitive, agreement call, lone star, preliminary agreement, agreement include, agreement
                                                     reach
                        Committees                   panel member, advisory committee, advisory panel, recommendation, proposal include, proposal call, advisory group, final decision, panel, vote unanimous
                        Negotiations                 stick point, negotiator, negotiate table, side agree, negotiation, impasse, reach deal, reach compromise, resolve dispute, unresolved

     Industries         Soft drinks                  coke, bottler, pepsi, softdrink, cola, cocacola, soft drink, pepsico, north america, beverage company
                                                                                                                                                                                            Continued on next page
                                                                          Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
     Metatopic label   Topic label               Key terms
                       Small business            smallbusiness, small business, smallbusiness owner, business owner, national federation, independent business, small firm, small company, business admin-
                                                 istration, mediumsize business
                       Cable                     warner cable, time warner, aol time, warner, parsons, warner communication, levin, adelphia, aol, warner incs
                       Fast food                 franchisee, taco bell, burger king, fastfood, rite aid, starbucks, pizza hut, mcdonald, taco, fastfood chain
                       Competition               goodyear, stiff competition, tire rubber, increase competition, fierce competition, goodyear tire, competitive advantage, competitive market, increase competi-
                                                 tive, high competitive
                       Chemicals/paper           union carbide, carbide, specialty chemical, georgiapacific, chemical company, pont, weyerhaeuser, chemical concern, chemical business, dupont
                       Venture capital           venture, joint venture, venture capitalist, venture capital, venturecapital firm, venturecapital, form joint, venture partner, venture fund, venturecapital fund
                       Tobacco                   tobacco, smokers, tobacco company, cigarette, philip morris, nicotine, tobacco industry, morris, cigarette maker, reynolds tobacco
                       Subsidiaries              owned subsidiary, wholly owned, spinoff, itt, parent company, unit include, separate company, wholly, noncore, business unit
                       Credit cards              mastercard, credit card, debit card, debit, creditcard company, card, creditcard issuer, american express, creditcard, expresss
                       Couriers                  postal service, fedex, postal, unit parcel, ups, parcel service, post office, federal express, parcel, mail
                       Foods/consumer goods      sara lee, general mill, nestle, hershey, avon, campbell soup, diapers, detergent, cereal, toothpaste
                       Insurance                 policyholders, life insurance, reinsurance, insurance department, insurance regulator, allstate, insurance commissioner, mutual life, life insurer, insurance
                                                 business
                       Luxury/beverages          lvmh, vuitton, hennessy louis, louis vuitton, moet, moet hennessy, lvmh moet, beer, brewer, wine
                       Casinos                   casino, atlantic city, marriott, hilton, carnival, hilton hotel, hotel chain, hotel room, inn, caesars
                       Revenue growth            growth strategy, growth opportunity, annual revenue, boost revenue, growth area, company revenue, total revenue, company growth, revenue growth, growth
                                                 potential




48
     Technology        Internet                  facebook, web site, search engine, alibaba, yahoo, ebay, youtube, home page, internet user, online advertise
                       Mobile devices            iphone, smartphone, android, handset, ipad, blackberry, mobile device, nokia, apple incs, mobile phone
                       Electronics               playstation, nintendo, console, kodak, digital camera, lcd, flatpanel, xbox, cdrom, electronic art
                       Phone companies           att, sprint, longdistance, local phone, bell atlantic, phone company, baby bell, bell company, mci, longdistance company
                       Computers                 ibm, compaq, mainframe, dell, mainframe computer, machine corps, armonk, computer giant, packard, computer business
                       Software                  linux, window operate, ballmer, microsoft window, redmond wash, redmond, microsoft, oracle, software giant, lotus
                       Microchips                amd, advance micro, memory chip, santa clara, semiconductor industry, clara, intel chip, intel, clara calif, chip maker

     Oil/mining        Steel                     steel price, steel industry, steelmaker, alcan, steel product, nucor, steel producer, steel, steel mill, steel company
                       Mining                    bhp, rio tinto, tinto, newmont, bhp billiton, mining company, miner, mining, billiton, newmont mining
                       Machinery                 machine tool, manufacture plant, whirlpool, manufacture facility, construction equipment, manufacture operation, manufacture capacity, appliance maker,
                                                 production facility, cummins
                       Oil drilling              exxon, drill, cubic feet, mobil, exxon mobil, drill rig, offshore oil, chevron, amoco, royal dutchshell
                       Agriculture               genetically modified, farm, growers, poultry, madcow, farmer, ranchers, tyson food, agriculture secretary, tyson
                       Oil market                opec, nonopec, opec member, oil minister, oil demand, world oil, brent crude, oil market, oil exporter, export country

     Economic growth   Record high               record level, highest level, reach record, hit record, previous record, highest, pentup demand, high level, pentup, alltime
                       Economic growth           gdp growth, productivity growth, gdp, domestic product, gross domestic, economy grew, national product, economy expand, gross national, growth forecast
                       Federal Reserve           greenspan, alan greenspan, yellen, federalfunds rate, federalfunds, fomc, chairman alan, raise rate, janet yellen, inflation expectation
                       European sovereign debt   ecb, imf, eurozone, euro zone, monetary fund, international monetary, draghi, eurozone country, trichet, ecb president
                       Recession                 economic downturn, steep drop, steep decline, downturn, bright spot, hardest hit, hit hard, weak economy, hit bottom, hard hit
                                                                                                                                                                                    Continued on next page
                                                                          Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
     Metatopic label   Topic label               Key terms
                       Product prices            raise price, increase price, price reduction, price increase, price cut, wholesale price, higher cost, cut price, retail price, reduce price
                       Optimism                  cautious optimistic, remain optimistic, remain cautious, remain uncertain, uncertainty surrounding, positive sign, optimistic, overly optimistic, cautious,
                                                 remain confident
                       Macroeconomic data        seasonal variation, durable good, construction spend, seasonal adjust, nonresidential, business inventory, nondurable, durable, conference board, jobless claim

     Corporate         Profits                   net profit, profit rose, profit fell, firsthalf net, profit increase, profit jump, operate profit, profit climb, profit surge, pretax profit
     earnings          Revised estimate          previous estimate, original estimate, preliminary estimate, revision, earlier estimate, revise downward, downward revision, initial estimate, revise, substantial
                                                 increase
                       Earnings losses           loss include, net loss, discontinue operation, operate loss, loss widen, pretax charge, discontinue, aftertax charge, post loss, restructure charge
                       Small changes             typical require, average yield, decline slight, decrease, slight increase, remain unchanged, remain flat, sharp increase, part reflect, slight decline
                       Financial reports         ended sept, forma, pro forma, ended march, latest fiscal, march compare, current fiscal, full fiscal, ended, company fiscal
                       Earnings forecasts        adjust earn, analyst earn, analyst poll, forecast earn, earn forecast, earningspershare, earn expectation, beat expectation, earn guidance, earn estimate
                       Earnings                  cent dilute, dilute share, share revenue, share relate, callthomson financial, cent share, callthomson, call consensus, pershare figure, thomson financialfirst

     Markets           IPOs                      ipo, ipo market, initial public, public offer, ipo price, firstday, public stock, stock offer, roadshow, offer price
                       Bond yields               yield rise, highyield bond, sell bond, yield fall, corporatebond, bond issue, treasury yield, issue bond, municipalbond, bond sale
                       Short sales               short seller, short interest, short sell, borrow stock, borrow share, shortselling, shortsellers, short sale, sell borrow, seller
                       Small caps                york smallcapitalization, poor smallcap, smallcapitalization stock, russell index, nyse rose, smallcap index, smallcap market, nyse fell, nasdaq gain, small-
                                                 capitalization
                       Treasury bonds            accept noncompetly, cusip, bid widen, price accept, noncompetitive tender, coupon equivalent, application accept, price rate, cusip number, bill mature
                       International exchanges   dax stock, perspective geneva, australia world, switzerland australia, germany hong, firstsection, firstsection volume, international perspective, kong switzer-




49
                                                 land, index calculate
                       Exchanges/composites      composite trade, exchange composite, exchange trade, market composite, york stock, stock exchange, adrs, share close, board trade, composite
                       Currencies/metals         dollar french, home mkt, frankfurt gold, dollar british, london toronto, comex base, tokyo zurich, comex london, yen swiss, ounce comex
                       Share payouts             nyse symbol, share buyback, stock buyback, dividend increase, buyback, buyback program, share repurchase, share common, pay dividend, time estimate
                       Bear/bull market          bear market, bull market, stock pick, stockpicking, priceearnings ratio, growth stock, pricetoearnings ratio, bull, priceearnings, pricetoearnings
                       Commodities               cocoa exchange, comex division, sugar cocoa, coffee sugar, soybean future, coffee future, lifeofcontract, pork belly, wheat future, york cotton
                       Trading activity          action stock, fell bond, market action, otc trade, volume total, investor report, issue advance, board volume, index exclude, transportation average
                       Options/VIX               option exchange, volatility index, board option, contract compare, put trade, option strategist, option market, vix, cboe, option trader

     Buyouts           M&A                       combine company, merge company, propose merger, combine entity, merger plan, merger talk, planned merger, merger, planned acquisition, antitrust concern
                       Control stakes            control stake, minority stake, majority stake, buy stake, abn, sell stake, remain stake, bought stake, minority shareholder, owns stake
                       Drexel                    drexel, leverage buyout, kohlberg kravis, drexel burnham, transaction finance, kohlberg, kravis robert, kravis, boesky, pickens
                       SEC                       sec file, sec, sec allege, sec official, commission file, sec enforcement, sec chairman, exchange commission, sec staff, sec investigation
                       Bankruptcy                bankruptcy, unsecured creditor, bankruptcy court, federal bankruptcy, bankruptcy code, chapter company, creditor lawsuit, bankruptcy judge, reorganization
                                                 plan, bankruptcy protection
                       Corporate governance      annual meet, shareholder meet, proxy contest, corporate governance, independent director, dissident shareholder, board seat, proxy battle, annual shareholder,
                                                 proxy fight
                       Takeovers                 poison pill, hostile takeover, takeover bid, hostile bid, share offer, hostile tender, share tender, higher offer, takeover battle, takeover attempt
                       Real estate               real estate, reit, estate investment, realestate investment, estate market, estate, estate developer, estate development, commercial real, realty trust
                       Convertible/preferred     common share, preferred share, convertible preferred, common stock, class common, convertible debenture, company common, national overthecounter,
                                                 convertible subordinate, preferred
                                                                                                                                                                                                Continued on next page
                                                                            Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
     Metatopic label   Topic label                  Key terms

     Asset managers/   Mutual funds                 compound yield, simple yield, money fund, taxfree fund, assume reinvestment, taxable fund, stock fund, taxable money, fund company, taxexempt fund
     I-banks           Accounting                   andersen, account firm, kpmg, arthur andersen, fasb, deloitte, ernst young, audit firm, ernst, skadden
                       Investment banking           csfb, sachs group, goldman, suisse group, sachs, goldman sachs, credit suisse, suisse, ubs, morgan
                       Acquired investment banks    salomon smith, smith barney, barney, merrill, bear stearns, stearns, merrill lynch, lynch, stearns cos, painewebber group
                       Private equity/hedge funds   hedge fund, privateequity, privateequity firm, hedgefund, blackstone, carlyle, privateequity fund, hedgefund firm, hedgefund manager, blackstone group
                       NASD                         nasd, customer account, security transaction, member firm, barred, disciplinary action, admit, disciplinary, misappropriated, deny

     Banks             Savings & loans              fdic, thrift, loan association, federal deposit, federal save, deposit insurance, bank board, save loan, thrift industry, loan insurance
                       Nonperforming loans          wells fargo, fargo, loanloss provision, bruyette, bankamerica, keefe bruyette, bruyette wood, nonperforming asset, loanloss, noninterest
                       Credit ratings               debt rate, fitch rate, rate firm, rate service, creditwatch, rate agency, creditrating, taxes depreciation, junk status, notches
                       Financial crisis             stress test, relief program, large financial, trouble asset, financial system, creditdefault swap, financial regulator, creditdefault, financial firm, financial crisis
                       Bank loans                   syndicate loan, revolving credit, credit line, libor, credit agreement, loan agreement, revolving, bank loan, creditor bank, rescheduling
                       Mortgages                    fixedrate mortgage, home price, home buyer, adjustablerate mortgage, mortgage rate, countrywide, federal house, mortgage company, mortgage lender,
                                                    mortgage payment




50
                                                                                                                              Figure 15: Topic Attention Proportions

                                                                     Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                                                  Key term scaled weight
                              1.00     0.96     0.92       0.88      0.84        0.80         0.76           0.73           0.69            0.65         0.61                                            1.00    0.98      0.96     0.94     0.93      0.91          0.89      0.87      0.85      0.83       0.81
                            1.6                                                                                                                             KEY TERMS:                                 1.4                                                                                                       KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                            ipo                                                                                                                                                  yield rise
                                                                                                                                                            ipo market                                                                                                                                           highyield bond
                            1.4                                                                                                                             initial public                                                                                                                                       sell bond
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.2
                                                                                                                                                            public offer                                                                                                                                         yield fall
                                                                                                                                                            ipo price                                                                                                                                            corporatebond
                            1.2                                                                                                                             firstday                                                                                                                                             bond issue
                                                                                                                                                            public stock                               1.0                                                                                                       treasury yield
                                                                                                                                                            stock offer                                                                                                                                          issue bond
                            1.0                                                                                                                             roadshow                                                                                                                                             municipalbond
                                                                                                                                                            offer price                                                                                                                                          bond sale
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                            followon                                                                                                                                             higher yield
                            0.8                                                                                                                             price range                                                                                                                                          treasury debt
                                                                                                                                                            secondary offer                                                                                                                                      highyield
                                                                                                                                                            share offer                                0.6                                                                                                       high yield




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                Topic proportion (%)
                            0.6                                                                                                                             public market                                                                                                                                        bond portfolio
                                                                                                                                                            initial offer                                                                                                                                        bond deal
                                                                                                                                                            lockup                                                                                                                                               risk premium
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                            0.4                                                                                                                             prospectus                                                                                                                                           muni
                                                                                                                                                            company initial                                                                                                                                      buy bond
                                                                                                                                                            lead underwriter                                                                                                                                     governmentbond
                            0.2                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                            198401   198705    199009    199401     199705     200009       200401      200705          201009         201401         201705                                           198401   198705   199009   199401   199705     200009    200401       200705    201009    201401     201705
                                                                                Date                                                                                                                                                                   Date
                                                                    Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                                                  Key term scaled weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00    0.99     0.97      0.96     0.94      0.93      0.92         0.90      0.89      0.87      0.86
                              1.00    0.99      0.99      0.98      0.98       0.97         0.96        0.96           0.95           0.94           0.94                                              3.5                                                                                                     KEY TERMS:
                            2.0                                                                                                                         KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                        disease control                                                                                                                                        rumsfeld
                                                                                                                                                        aid virus                                                                                                                                              missile defense
                            1.8                                                                                                                                                                        3.0                                                                                                     marine corps
                                                                                                                                                        cdc
                                                                                                                                                        breast cancer                                                                                                                                          joint chief
                            1.6                                                                                                                         breast                                                                                                                                                 donald rumsfeld
                                                                                                                                                        infectious disease                             2.5                                                                                                     strategic defense
                            1.4                                                                                                                         heart disease                                                                                                                                          defense secretary
                                                                                                                                                        virus                                                                                                                                                  naval




51
                                                                                                                                                        flu                                            2.0                                                                                                     senate arm
                            1.2
                                                                                                                                                        diagnosed                                                                                                                                              defense official
                                                                                                                                                        implants                                                                                                                                               military service
                            1.0                                                                                                                         immune system                                  1.5                                                                                                     cruise missile
                                                                                                                                                        infected                                                                                                                                               defense initiative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nuclear missile




                                                                                                                                                                                Topic proportion (%)
                            0.8                                                                                                                         immune deficiency




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                        deficiency syndrome                            1.0                                                                                                     maj
                                                                                                                                                        acquire immune                                                                                                                                         pentagon official
                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                        infectious                                                                                                                                             arm service
                                                                                                                                                        symptom                                        0.5                                                                                                     military personnel
                            0.4                                                                                                                         infection                                                                                                                                              aircraft carrier
                                                                                                                                                        world health                                                                                                                                           armor
                            0.2                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                            198401   198705   199009    199401    199705      200009     200401       200705         201009         201401         201705                                              198401   198705   199009   199401   199705    200009     200401      200705    201009     201401    201705
                                                                               Date                                                                                                                                                                    Date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Key term scaled weight
                                                                   Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                1.00    0.98     0.97     0.95     0.94      0.92       0.90        0.89      0.87      0.85      0.84
                              1.00    0.99     0.98      0.97      0.97       0.96       0.95         0.94           0.93           0.92           0.91                                                2.5                                                                                                    KEY TERMS:
                            2.5                                                                                                                       KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              opec
                                                                                                                                                      fixedrate mortgage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nonopec
                                                                                                                                                      home price
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              opec member
                                                                                                                                                      home buyer
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.0                                                                                                    oil minister
                            2.0                                                                                                                       adjustablerate mortgage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oil demand
                                                                                                                                                      mortgage rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              world oil
                                                                                                                                                      countrywide
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              brent crude
                                                                                                                                                      federal house
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oil market
                                                                                                                                                      mortgage company                                 1.5
                            1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oil exporter
                                                                                                                                                      mortgage lender
                                                                                                                                                      mortgage payment                                                                                                                                        export country
                                                                                                                                                      mortgage banker                                                                                                                                         petroleum export
                                                                                                                                                      foreclosure                                                                                                                                             refiner
                            1.0                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                      fannie                                                                                                                                                  oil supply
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              international energy
                                                                                                                                                                                Topic proportion (%)




                                                                                                                                                      freddie




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                      realtors                                                                                                                                                crude price
                                                                                                                                                      countrywide financial                                                                                                                                   oil price
                            0.5                                                                                                                       mortgage loan                                    0.5                                                                                                    higher oil
                                                                                                                                                      home mortgage                                                                                                                                           high oil
                                                                                                                                                      adjustablerate                                                                                                                                          oil export
                                                                                                                                                      house market                                                                                                                                            oil refiner
                            0.0                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                            198401   198705   199009    199401    199705     200009     200401       200705         201009         201401      201705                                                  198401   198705   199009   199401   199705   200009     200401       200705    201009    201401    201705
                                                                              Date                                                                                                                                                                    Date
                                                                  Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                                       Key term scaled weight
                              1.00    0.98     0.96     0.93      0.91      0.89       0.87        0.84       0.82       0.80       0.78                                                   1.00    1.00     1.00     0.99      0.99      0.99       0.99          0.99        0.98           0.98           0.98
                            1.1                                                                                                        KEY TERMS:                                        1.2                                                                                                                   KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                       job cut                                                                                                                                                                 epa
                                                                                                                                       work force                                        1.1                                                                                                                   emission
                            1.0
                                                                                                                                       fulltime employee                                                                                                                                                       protection agency
                                                                                                                                       layoff                                            1.0                                                                                                                   environmental protection
                            0.9                                                                                                        eliminate job                                                                                                                                                           carbon dioxide
                                                                                                                                       attrition                                         0.9                                                                                                                   dioxide
                                                                                                                                       cut job                                                                                                                                                                 greenhouse gases
                            0.8                                                                                                        employment opportunity                                                                                                                                                  clean air
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                       employee work                                                                                                                                                           environmental
                                                                                                                                       unemployed                                                                                                                                                              environmental group
                            0.7                                                                                                                                                          0.7
                                                                                                                                       workforce                                                                                                                                                               greenhousegas
                                                                                                                                       find job                                                                                                                                                                greenhousegas emission
                                                                                                                                       parttime                                          0.6
                            0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                air act
                                                                                                                                       lost job                                                                                                                                                                superfund




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                  Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                       temporary worker                                  0.5                                                                                                                   global warm
                            0.5                                                                                                        retraining                                                                                                                                                              pollutants
                                                                                                                                       job loss                                          0.4                                                                                                                   hazardous waste
                                                                                                                                       skill worker                                                                                                                                                            environmentalists
                            0.4
                                                                                                                                       fulltime                                          0.3                                                                                                                   greenhouse
                                                                                                                                       humanresources                                                                                                                                                          carbon
                            0.3                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                            198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009    200401       200705     201009     201401     201705                                                198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009     200401        200705      201009         201401         201705
                                                                           Date                                                                                                                                                          Date
                                                                   Key term scaled weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Key term scaled weight
                              1.00     0.96     0.92     0.89       0.85      0.81         0.77       0.73       0.69       0.66        0.62
                            1.0                                                                                                            KEY TERMS:                                      1.00    0.98     0.96      0.95      0.93      0.91          0.89       0.87         0.86           0.84           0.82
                                                                                                                                                                                         3.0                                                                                                                     KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                           venture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ecb
                                                                                                                                           joint venture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 imf
                            0.9                                                                                                            venture capitalist                                                                                                                                                    eurozone
                                                                                                                                           venture capital                               2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 euro zone
                                                                                                                                           venturecapital firm                                                                                                                                                   monetary fund
                            0.8                                                                                                            venturecapital                                                                                                                                                        international monetary
                                                                                                                                           form joint                                    2.0                                                                                                                     draghi
                                                                                                                                           venture partner                                                                                                                                                       eurozone country
                            0.7                                                                                                            venture fund                                                                                                                                                          trichet
                                                                                                                                           venturecapital fund                                                                                                                                                   ecb president
                                                                                                                                           jointventure partner                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 jeanclaude trichet




52
                            0.6                                                                                                            joint                                                                                                                                                                 greece
                                                                                                                                           capitalist                                                                                                                                                            eurozone economy
                                                                                                                                           startup company




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.0                                                                                                                     greek




                                                                                                                                                                  Topic proportion (%)
                            0.5                                                                                                            jointventure                                                                                                                                                          athens
                                                                                                                                           byers                                                                                                                                                                 austerity measure
                                                                                                                                           startup                                                                                                                                                               bailout fund
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                            0.4                                                                                                            perkins                                                                                                                                                               european central
                                                                                                                                           joint owned                                                                                                                                                           debt crisis
                                                                                                                                           form partnership                                                                                                                                                      sovereigndebt
                            0.3                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                            198401   198705   199009    199401    199705    200009     200401       200705     201009     201401      201705                                             198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009      200401        200705      201009         201401         201705
                                                                              Date                                                                                                                                                       Date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Key term scaled weight
                                                                   Key term scaled weight
                                                                                                                                                                                           1.00     1.00     1.00      1.00      1.00       1.00         0.99        0.99            0.99           0.99            0.99
                              1.00    0.99      0.98     0.98      0.97      0.96          0.95      0.94       0.94       0.93       0.92                                               3.0                                                                                                                           KEY TERMS:
                            1.2                                                                                                          KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       yeltsin
                                                                                                                                         public school
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       moscow
                            1.1                                                                                                          private school
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       putin
                                                                                                                                         high school                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                         school
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       russian
                            1.0                                                                                                          curriculum                                                                                                                                                                    kremlin
                                                                                                                                         test score                                                                                                                                                                    gorbachev
                            0.9                                                                                                          teacher union                                   2.0                                                                                                                           kiev
                                                                                                                                         school board                                                                                                                                                                  ukraine
                                                                                                                                         student                                                                                                                                                                       russian president
                            0.8
                                                                                                                                         school district                                                                                                                                                               boris yeltsin
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                         school system                                                                                                                                                                 president vladimir
                            0.7                                                                                                          educators                                                                                                                                                                     medvedev
                                                                                                                                         classroom                                                                                                                                                                     vladimir putin
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.0                                                                                                                           ruble
                                                                                                                                                                  Topic proportion (%)




                            0.6                                                                                                          teacher




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                         elementary                                                                                                                                                                    ukrainian
                                                                                                                                         elementary school                                                                                                                                                             mikhail gorbachev
                            0.5
                                                                                                                                         graduation                                                                                                                                                                    vladimir
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                         faculty                                                                                                                                                                       sergei
                            0.4                                                                                                          education department                                                                                                                                                          mikhail
                                                                                                                                         graduate                                                                                                                                                                      gazprom
                            0.3                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                            198401   198705   199009   199401    199705     200009    200401       200705     201009     201401      201705                                              198401   198705   199009    199401    199705     200009        200401      200705      201009          201401         201705
                                                                             Date                                                                                                                                                          Date
                                                                 Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                           Key term scaled weight
                              1.00    0.99     0.98     0.97     0.97      0.96       0.95    0.94     0.93     0.92      0.92                                               1.00    0.97      0.95     0.92      0.89      0.87          0.84       0.81       0.79       0.76        0.73
                            1.3                                                                                              KEY TERMS:                                    3.5                                                                                                            KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                             gatt                                                                                                                                                         stress test
                            1.2                                                                                              wto                                                                                                                                                          relief program
                                                                                                                             tariff                                        3.0                                                                                                            large financial
                            1.1                                                                                              trade representative                                                                                                                                         trouble asset
                                                                                                                             antidumping                                                                                                                                                  financial system
                            1.0                                                                                              trade pact                                    2.5                                                                                                            creditdefault swap
                                                                                                                             protectionist                                                                                                                                                financial regulator
                                                                                                                             trade official                                                                                                                                               creditdefault
                            0.9
                                                                                                                             general agreement                             2.0                                                                                                            financial firm
                                                                                                                             freetrade agreement                                                                                                                                          financial crisis
                            0.8
                                                                                                                             trade talk                                                                                                                                                   credit crisis
                                                                                                                             freetrade                                     1.5                                                                                                            secretary henry
                            0.7
                                                                                                                             trade policy                                                                                                                                                 financial regulation
                                                                                                                             bilateral trade                                                                                                                                              timothy geithner




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                    Topic proportion (%)
                            0.6                                                                                              trade barrier                                 1.0                                                                                                            geithner
                                                                                                                             unfair trade                                                                                                                                                 government bailout
                            0.5                                                                                              trade dispute                                                                                                                                                henry paulson
                                                                                                                             protectionism                                 0.5                                                                                                            financial instrument
                            0.4                                                                                              trade war                                                                                                                                                    bank balance
                                                                                                                             trade deal                                                                                                                                                   basel
                            0.3                                                                                                                                            0.0
                            198401   198705   199009   199401   199705    200009    200401   200705   201009   201401   201705                                             198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009     200401        200705     201009     201401      201705
                                                                           Date                                                                                                                                             Date
                                                                 Key term scaled weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Key term scaled weight
                              1.00    0.96     0.93     0.89     0.86      0.82       0.78    0.75     0.71     0.68     0.64
                            1.8                                                                                             KEY TERMS:                                       1.00    0.97     0.94     0.91      0.88      0.85       0.82         0.79       0.76       0.73        0.71
                                                                                                                                                                           1.2                                                                                                          KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                            economic downturn                                                                                                                                           gene
                                                                                                                            steep drop                                                                                                                                                  dna
                            1.6                                                                                                                                            1.1
                                                                                                                            steep decline                                                                                                                                               mice
                                                                                                                            downturn                                                                                                                                                    molecules
                            1.4                                                                                             bright spot                                    1.0                                                                                                          biology
                                                                                                                            hardest hit                                                                                                                                                 scientist
                                                                                                                            hit hard                                       0.9                                                                                                          physics
                            1.2                                                                                             weak economy                                                                                                                                                molecular
                                                                                                                            hit bottom                                                                                                                                                  national laboratory
                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                            hard hit                                                                                                                                                    genetic
                            1.0
                                                                                                                            economic slowdown                                                                                                                                           fusion




53
                                                                                                                            weak demand                                    0.7                                                                                                          lab
                            0.8                                                                                             sharp drop                                                                                                                                                  massachusetts institute
                                                                                                                            economic slump




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                           0.6                                                                                                          physicist




                                                                                                                                                    Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                            slump                                                                                                                                                       mit
                            0.6                                                                                             weaken economy                                                                                                                                              cell
                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                            steep                                                                                                                                                       research team
                                                                                                                            lowest level                                                                                                                                                chemistry
                            0.4                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                            gloomy                                                                                                                                                      nobel prize
                                                                                                                            sharp decline                                                                                                                                               experiment
                            0.2                                                                                                                                            0.3
                            198401   198705   199009   199401   199705   200009     200401   200705   201009   201401   201705                                             198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009    200401        200705     201009     201401      201705
                                                                           Date                                                                                                                                           Date
                                                                 Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                           Key term scaled weight
                              1.00    1.00     1.00     1.00      1.00      1.00      1.00     0.99     0.99     0.99     0.99                                               1.00     1.00     1.00     0.99       0.99      0.99          0.99       0.99       0.99        0.98        0.98
                            3.0                                                                                              KEY TERMS:                                    2.0                                                                                                              KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                             auto maker                                                                                                                                                     supreme court
                                                                                                                             domestic car                                                                                                                                                   appeal court
                                                                                                                                                                           1.8
                                                                                                                             import car                                                                                                                                                     scalia
                            2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             federal appeal
                                                                                                                             ford
                                                                                                                             sportutility                                  1.6                                                                                                              chief justice
                                                                                                                             chevrolet                                                                                                                                                      high court
                            2.0                                                                                              chrysler                                                                                                                                                       justice william
                                                                                                                             mazda                                         1.4                                                                                                              william rehnquist
                                                                                                                             toyota                                                                                                                                                         antonin
                                                                                                                             eestimated                                                                                                                                                     court rule
                            1.5                                                                                                                                            1.2
                                                                                                                             car maker                                                                                                                                                      court decision
                                                                                                                             small car                                                                                                                                                      justice john
                                                                                                                             sportutility vehicle                          1.0                                                                                                              supreme
                            1.0                                                                                              japanese auto                                                                                                                                                  lowercourt
                                                                                                                                                    Topic proportion (%)




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                             car market                                                                                                                                                     antonin scalia
                                                                                                                             honda                                         0.8                                                                                                              anthony kennedy
                                                                                                                             sedan                                                                                                                                                          justice antonin
                            0.5
                                                                                                                             vehicle sale                                                                                                                                                   threejudge
                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                             minivan                                                                                                                                                        oral argument
                                                                                                                             ford motor                                                                                                                                                     threejudge panel
                            0.0                                                                                                                                            0.4
                            198401   198705   199009   199401   199705    200009    200401   200705   201009   201401    201705                                            198401   198705   199009    199401    199705    200009     200401        200705     201009      201401      201705
                                                                            Date                                                                                                                                             Date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Key term scaled weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                1.00     1.00     0.99     0.99       0.98      0.98         0.98       0.97       0.97            0.96        0.96
                                                                  Key term scaled weight                                                                                                      3.0                                                                                                                 KEY TERMS:
                              1.00    1.00     1.00     1.00      0.99      0.99       0.99        0.99       0.99        0.99           0.99                                                                                                                                                                     andersen
                            1.1                                                                                                             KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  account firm
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcy
                                                                                                                                            unsecured creditor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kpmg
                            1.0                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcy court                                                                                                                                                      arthur andersen
                                                                                                                                            federal bankruptcy                                                                                                                                                    fasb
                            0.9                                                                                                             bankruptcy code                                                                                                                                                       deloitte
                                                                                                                                            chapter company                                   2.0                                                                                                                 ernst young
                            0.8                                                                                                             creditor lawsuit                                                                                                                                                      audit firm
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcy judge                                                                                                                                                      ernst
                            0.7                                                                                                             reorganization plan                                                                                                                                                   skadden
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcy protection                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  peat marwick
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcylaw                                                                                                                                                         deloitte touche
                            0.6                                                                                                             chapter bankruptcy                                                                                                                                                    skadden arps
                                                                                                                                            chapter
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0                                                                                                                 meagher flom




                                                                                                                                                                       Topic proportion (%)
                            0.5                                                                                                             creditor committee




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  arps
                                                                                                                                            court protection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  standard board
                            0.4                                                                                                             bankruptcy file
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcy proceed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  marwick
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                            bankruptcylaw protection                                                                                                                                              arps slate
                            0.3                                                                                                             bankruptcy law                                                                                                                                                        slate meagher
                                                                                                                                            chapter protection                                                                                                                                                    meagher
                            0.2                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                            198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009     200401      200705     201009      201401         201705                                                198401   198705   199009    199401    199705     200009     200401      200705      201009      201401         201705
                                                                            Date                                                                                                                                                                Date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Key term scaled weight
                                                                    Key term scaled weight
                                                                                                                                                                                                1.00     1.00     0.99     0.99      0.98       0.98         0.97      0.97        0.97        0.96           0.96
                              1.00     0.97     0.94     0.92       0.89      0.86         0.83       0.80        0.77           0.75        0.72                                             2.5                                                                                                                KEY TERMS:
                            1.3                                                                                                                 KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 exxon
                                                                                                                                                immigrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 drill
                            1.2                                                                                                                 illegal immigrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cubic feet
                                                                                                                                                migrant
                                                                                                                                                census                                        2.0                                                                                                                mobil
                            1.1
                                                                                                                                                census bureau                                                                                                                                                    exxon mobil
                                                                                                                                                immigration law                                                                                                                                                  drill rig
                            1.0
                                                                                                                                                undocumented                                                                                                                                                     offshore oil
                                                                                                                                                immigration                                                                                                                                                      chevron
                            0.9                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                citizenship                                                                                                                                                      amoco
                                                                                                                                                illegal immigration                                                                                                                                              royal dutchshell
                            0.8




54
                                                                                                                                                migration                                                                                                                                                        occidental
                                                                                                                                                legal status                                                                                                                                                     oil spill
                            0.7                                                                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                deportation                                                                                                                                                      dutchshell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cubic




                                                                                                                                                                       Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                poverty




     Topic proportion (%)
                            0.6                                                                                                                 inequality                                                                                                                                                       arco
                                                                                                                                                population growth                                                                                                                                                dutchshell group
                            0.5                                                                                                                 residency                                     0.5                                                                                                                deepwater
                                                                                                                                                latino                                                                                                                                                           offshore drill
                            0.4                                                                                                                 hispanic                                                                                                                                                         liquefied natural
                                                                                                                                                food stamp                                                                                                                                                       conocophillips
                            0.3                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                            198401   198705   199009    199401    199705     200009     200401      200705      201009      201401          201705                                            198401   198705   199009   199401     199705    200009     200401       200705     201009      201401          201705
                                                                             Date                                                                                                                                                               Date
                                                                   Key term scaled weight                                                                                                                                           Key term scaled weight
                              1.00     1.00     1.00     0.99       0.99      0.99         0.99       0.99       0.98         0.98           0.98                                               1.00    0.99     0.98     0.97      0.96      0.95       0.95        0.94       0.93        0.92           0.91
                            1.8                                                                                                                 KEY TERMS:                                    1.8                                                                                                             KEY TERMS:
                                                                                                                                                yuan                                                                                                                                                          spend cut
                            1.6                                                                                                                 beijing                                                                                                                                                       deficit reduction
                                                                                                                                                xinhua                                        1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              grammrudman
                                                                                                                                                chinese official                                                                                                                                              federal budget
                            1.4                                                                                                                 chinese government
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.4                                                                                                             balance budget
                                                                                                                                                chinese company                                                                                                                                               budget plan
                            1.2                                                                                                                 chinese                                                                                                                                                       cbo
                                                                                                                                                zhu                                           1.2                                                                                                             house budget
                            1.0                                                                                                                 beijing china                                                                                                                                                 entitlement program
                                                                                                                                                china sea                                                                                                                                                     budget
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                chinese authority                                                                                                                                             fiscal budget
                            0.8                                                                                                                 chinese leader                                                                                                                                                federal spend
                                                                                                                                                jiang                                         0.8                                                                                                             budget process
                            0.6                                                                                                                 wen                                                                                                                                                           budget proposal




     Topic proportion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                       Topic proportion (%)




                                                                                                                                                xinhua news                                                                                                                                                   cut spend
                                                                                                                                                zhang                                         0.6                                                                                                             budget office
                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                chinese bank                                                                                                                                                  domestic spend
                                                                                                                                                deng                                                                                                                                                          congressional budget
                            0.2                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                guangzhou                                                                                                                                                     budget cut
                                                                                                                                                china central                                                                                                                                                 budget gap
                            0.0                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                            198401   198705   199009    199401    199705    200009      200401      200705     201009       201401         201705                                             198401   198705   199009   199401    199705    200009     200401      200705     201009      201401         201705
                                                                              Date                                                                                                                                                            Date
