                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MICRO JUMPS, MACRO HUMPS:
   MONETARY POLICY AND BUSINESS CYCLES IN AN ESTIMATED HANK MODEL

                                         Adrien Auclert
                                        Matthew Rognlie
                                         Ludwig Straub

                                       Working Paper 26647
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26647


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




For helpful comments, we thank Marios Angeletos, Florin Bilbiie, Luigi Bocola, Larry
Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, Emmanuel Farhi, Xavier Gabaix, Greg Kaplan, Rohan Kekre,
Ralph Luetticke, Alisdair McKay, Kurt Mitman, Ben Moll, Ricardo Reis, Gianluca Violante, and
Peter Zorn. This research is supported by the National Science Foundation grant SES-1851717.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Adrien Auclert, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Micro Jumps, Macro Humps: Monetary Policy and Business Cycles in an Estimated HANK
Model
Adrien Auclert, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub
NBER Working Paper No. 26647
January 2020
JEL No. E21,E22,E32,E43,E52,E70

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate a Heterogeneous-Agent New Keynesian model with sticky household expectations
that matches existing microeconomic evidence on marginal propensities to consume and
macroeconomic evidence on the impulse response to a monetary policy shock. Our estimated
model uncovers a central role for investment in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy,
as high MPCs amplify the investment response in the data. This force also generates a procyclical
response of consumption to investment shocks, leading our model to infer a central role for these
shocks as a source of business cycles.


Adrien Auclert                                  Ludwig Straub
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Stanford University                             Harvard University
579 Serra Mall                                  Littauer 211
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                        and NBER
aauclert@stanford.edu                           ludwigstraub@fas.harvard.edu

Matthew Rognlie
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
matthew.rognlie@northwestern.edu
1      Introduction
A central question in monetary economics is how to model the effects of monetary policy. How
do we gauge the success of a model? What empirical moments should we use to judge?
     The traditional approach in the literature is to build models that are consistent with macro mo-
ments, such as the impulse response to identified monetary policy shocks (Rotemberg and Wood-
ford 1997, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans 2005) or the covariance structure of aggregate time
series (Smets and Wouters 2007, Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti 2010). One important fact in
this literature is that the macroeconomic response to aggregate shocks tends to be hump-shaped.
This is consistent with the conventional view in central banks that "monetary policy can have lit-
tle immediate effect on either real activity or inflation" (Woodford 2003, p. 322). The left panel
of Figure 1 displays the impulse response of output to an identified monetary policy shock--one
of the targets of our estimated model in section 4--which clearly displays such a macro hump. To
deliver these hump-shapes, the literature to date has used representative-agent models enhanced
with a variety of adjustment frictions such as habit formation, or deviations from rational expecta-
tions such as inattention.1 Estimated versions of these models are currently widely used by central
banks for forecasting and policy analysis.
     A recent literature has proposed instead to build models that are consistent with micro moments,
such as the path of the consumption response to an identified transitory income shock. This path
is generally characterized by an immediate jump on impact--an elevated Marginal Propensity to
Consume, or MPC--followed by a less pronounced but still elevated level of spending in the fol-
lowing periods, as in the right panel of figure 1 (see Fagereng, Holm and Natvik 2018, Auclert,
Rognlie and Straub 2018). To match these moments, the literature to date has used heterogeneous-
agent models with incomplete markets, idiosyncratic risk and borrowing constraints.2 These mod-
els have gathered a considerable amount of attention because they can speak to the interaction be-
tween monetary policy and distribution, and are often viewed as painting a realistic and intuitive
picture of the monetary transmission mechanism.
     At present, these two approaches are incompatible. As is well-known, representative-agent
models feature MPCs that are much too low compared to the data, so models in the macro mo-
ments tradition fail to match micro jumps. Similarly, existing heterogeneous-agent models feature
an aggregate impulse response to monetary policy that is peaked on impact (e.g. Kaplan, Moll and
Violante 2018, figure 3), so models in the micro moments tradition fail to match macro humps, and
are therefore ill-suited for estimation using macro data.
     In this paper, we combine elements from both literatures to build and estimate a model of the
monetary transmission mechanism that simultaneously matches these macro and micro moments.
We overcome two major difficulties that had made this exercise difficult until now. First, we show
that the standard approach to generating consumption hump-shapes--introducing habit forma-
tion in consumption--makes it very difficult to match MPCs. By contrast, we show that introduc-
    1 e.g.   Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007), and Ma´ckowiak and Wiederholt (2015).
    2 e.g.   McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018), and Bilbiie (2019).


                                                            2
                                               Figure 1: Macro Humps, Micro Jumps.

             Output response to identified m.p. shock (%)                                Intertemporal MPCs
   0.3
                                                                       0.2



   0.2
                                                                      0.15


   0.1
                                                                       0.1


     0
                                                                      0.05


  -0.1
                                                                        0

         0     2      4      6      8     10      12    14                   0   1   2     3       4     5    6   7   8
                              Quarter                                                          Quarter

Note. Left panel shows the impulse response of output to a Romer and Romer (2004) shock, estimated with a Jordà
(2005) projection; see section 4.2 for details. Right panel shows the consumption response to a one-time unanticipated
increase in average labor incomes; estimated by Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018) using Norwegian administrative
data; interpolated to quarterly data using cubic interpolation on the cumulative spending response.


ing sluggishness in the adjustment of households' expectations of aggregate variables ("sticky ex-
pectations", as in Carroll, Crawley, Slacalek, Tokuoka and White 2018) allows the model to simul-
taneously match macro humps and micro jumps. Second, we build upon the rapid sequence-space
simulation procedure developed in Auclert, Bardóczy, Rognlie and Straub (2019) by introducing
a new and general methodology to handle departures from rational expectations. With these hur-
dles cleared, we are able to estimate a HANK model featuring sticky expectations, sticky prices
and wages with indexation, long-term debt, and investment adjustment costs. We match a) a set
of macro monetary policy impulse responses, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), and
b) a set of macro aggregate time series, as in Smets and Wouters (2007). Our estimation procedure
is reliable and fast, even on a laptop computer.
    We use our estimated model to revisit the transmission mechanism of monetary policy and the
sources of business cycle fluctuations. Our first main finding is that investment is a crucial driver
of monetary policy transmission. If investment is constrained not to respond to a monetary shock,
the cumulative output response over five years falls by over 80%. By contrast, in a standard
representative-agent model with habits estimated using the same data, shutting off investment
only causes the output response to decline by investment's accounting share of 40%. This result
implies that factors affecting the responsiveness of investment to monetary policy are much more
important for aggregate outcomes than previously thought.
    This outsized role of investment follows naturally from our strategy of matching both MPCs
and macro moments. Since we match the investment impulse response, investment in our model
makes a significant contribution to aggregate output demand. As in the traditional Keynesian

                                                               3
cross, this leads to a rise in household income, which--thanks to high MPCs--causes consumption
to rise, making an additional contribution to output demand. Conceptually, this amplification
mechanism only requires elastic investment and high MPCs, as we demonstrate in appendix A.3
    The quantitative importance of this mechanism, however, hinges on our model's ability to
also match the consumption impulse response. Our model achieves this with sticky expectations:
it takes time for households to become informed about future macro variables. This dampens
ex-ante intertemporal substitution and income effects, which otherwise would lead to a large,
immediate consumption response. Once households actually receive the labor income from an
output boom, however, they have high MPCs. This leads to a hump-shaped consumption re-
sponse--driven, in the end, mostly by income effects that originate with the hump-shaped invest-
ment response.
    We also use our estimated model to investigate two other aspects of monetary transmission.
First, we examine the role of fiscal policy, which has been emphasized by Kaplan, Moll and Vi-
olante (2018) as an important source of indirect effects on consumption. We show that two features
of our model make fiscal policy surprisingly unimportant for monetary transmission: long-term
debt that matches the empirical duration in the US, and a more realistically delayed fiscal adjust-
ment instead of a balanced-budget rule. Second, we look at the stock market response, finding that
it has the right direction and timing--which has been challenging for HANK models to match, as
stressed by Kaplan and Violante (2018)--and that the resulting consumption response is also con-
sistent with the empirical literature.
    Our second main finding in the paper is about the sources of business cycles. A fundamen-
tal puzzle in the business-cycle literature, dating back to Barro and King (1984), is to explain the
procyclical comovement of consumption and investment. The literature has traditionally done
so with shocks to TFP or markups: Smets and Wouters (2007), for instance, has a prominent role
for both. Although investment shocks can play some role (see Justiniano, Primiceri and Tam-
balotti 2010), in representative-agent models it is difficult for these shocks to generate procyclical
consumption.4 In our model, on the other hand, the complementarity between high MPCs and
investment naturally delivers procyclical consumption. As a result, when we estimate the shock
processes underlying the US business cycle, we find a large role for investment shocks: they ex-
plain 65% of output variation at business cycle frequencies, vs. only 15% in the representative-
agent version of our model. Crucially, they also explain the majority of consumption-investment
comovement, vs. almost none in the representative-agent model.
    All in all, our paper unifies three strands of the literature. First, we build on a large body
   3 Amplification   is greater, however, when intertemporal MPCs are also high, since these lead to intertemporal de-
mand feedbacks (Auclert, Rognlie and Straub 2018). To demonstrate this, we also estimate a two-agent model with
habits, calibrated to have the same average MPC, on the same data. Investment is barely more important than in the
representative-agent model: shutting off investment causes the output response to decline by 45%. This is low because
the two-agent model, unlike our heterogeneous-agent model, fails to match the intertemporal MPCs in figure 1.
   4 One route is to put consumption-labor complementarity into utility (e.g. Furlanetto and Seneca 2014), but as Auclert

and Rognlie (2017) point out, such complementarities can interact perversely with sticky prices.




                                                           4
of work that estimates representative-agent models with limited or full-information methods.5
Second, we build on the active HANK literature pioneered by Gornemann, Kuester and Nakajima
(2016), McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), Auclert (2019), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018)
and Werning (2015),6 by estimating a HANK model. Third, we build on the large literature that
considers how various deviations from rational expectations can explain the effects of monetary
policy.7 The specific model we use is a type of sticky-information model, as in Gabaix and Laibson
(2001) and Mankiw and Reis (2002, 2007), though our version with sticky expectations is closest to
Carroll et al. (2018).
    An emerging literature also estimates HANK models using limited or full-information meth-
ods. Challe, Matheron, Ragot and Rubio-Ramirez (2017) was an early contribution, in a model
with restricted heterogeneity. Hagedorn, Manovskii and Mitman (2019b) estimate a one-asset
model to match the impulse response to identified technology shocks. They provide an ana-
lytical characterization of the role of redistribution and fiscal policy in shaping this impulse re-
sponse in their model, relative to what a representative-agent model would deliver, and they
obtain humps in consumption because their estimated responses of monetary and fiscal policy
to technology shocks are themselves hump-shaped. Bayer, Born and Luetticke (2019a) perform
a full-information Bayesian estimation of the two-asset HANK model in Bayer, Luetticke, Pham-
Dao and Tjaden (2019b). They find that demand shocks play a somewhat larger role in driving
business cycle fluctuations in their model relative to the Smets and Wouters (2007) model, and
uncover a role for shocks to idiosyncratic income risk and the supply of liquid assets. Relative
to their work, our focus is on simultaneously matching MPCs and hump-shapes in consumption,
and on the role of investment in the transmission mechanism. We also use a complementary set of
methods--sequence-space rather than state-space, which we show to be particularly well-suited
to the deviation from rational expectations that we introduce.


Layout. The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we show why sticky expectations can si-
multaneously rationalize micro jumps and macro humps. In section 3, we present our general
equilibrium HANK model. In section 4 we present details of our impulse-matching estimation
procedure and discuss model fit. In section 5 we examine the transmission mechanism of mone-
tary policy in our estimated model. In section 6 we enrich the model with a full set of shocks and
estimate shock processes to revisit the sources of business cycles. We conclude in section 7.
   5 See, among many others, Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets and Wouters (2007) and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Lindé (2011), in addition to the work already cited.
   6 See Bilbiie (2008) for an early contribution to this literature, in a model with limited heterogeneity.
   7 This includes models with cognitive discounting as in Gabaix (2016), lack of common knowledge of as in Angeletos

and Huo (2018), rational inattention as in Sims (2003), Ma´      ckowiak and Wiederholt (2009, 2015) and Zorn (2018), or
level-k thinking as in García-Schmidt and Woodford (2019) and Farhi and Werning (2019).




                                                           5
2     Jumps and humps in consumption
We begin by describing the challenge of simultaneously matching micro jumps and macro humps
in consumption. Micro "jumps" are intertemporal MPCs: the micro responses of consumption to
transitory income shocks. In the data, these responses peak on impact. Macro "humps" are the
aggregate consumption responses to persistent shocks, such as monetary policy shocks. In the
data, these responses have delayed peaks.
      We first set up a standard heterogeneous-agent model that matches jumps, but cannot generate
humps. We then explain why habit formation can match humps, but cannot generate jumps.
Finally, we introduce an informational rigidity that can successfully generate both humps and
jumps, and will therefore serve as a basis for our general equilibrium model in section 3.


2.1     Heterogeneous households and iMPCs

We model the behavior of a mass one of heterogeneous households in discrete time. The model is
in partial equilibrium, without aggregate risk: households face deterministic sequences of interest
rates {rt } and average labor incomes {yt }. Each household is indexed by its income state s and
its liquid asset position . s follows a Markov process with transition matrix , and determines
household productivity e (s). Household behavior is characterized by the following dynamic pro-
gramming problem:

                                    Vt ( , s) = max u(c) + E Vt+1                   , s |s                            (1)
                                                     c,
                                                    c+         (1 + r t ) + y t e ( s )                               (2)
                                                          0                                                           (3)

      Aggregate consumption Ct is the integral of household consumption choices ct ( , s) over the
time-varying cross-sectional distribution of states Dt ( , s). Given an initial distribution D0 , Ct can
be expressed as a function of the sequence {ys , rs }s0 :

                                             Ct = Ct ({ys , rs }s0 ) ,       t0

      The consumption function C summarizes the aggregate behavior of households, holding con-
stant primitive parameters such as preferences and the process for idiosyncratic income risk.8 In
particular, the derivatives of C around the steady state ys = y , rs = r  characterize the first-order
response of households to changes in aggregate income and real interest rates. These derivatives,
or sequence-space Jacobians, are sufficient statistics for the aggregate behavior of households in
general equilibrium (Auclert et al. 2019).
      As we argued in Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2018), the Jacobians Ct /ys , which we call
intertemporal marginal propensities to consume or iMPCs, play a particularly important role. First,
    8 See for example Auclert,   Rognlie and Straub (2018), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018), or Farhi and Werning (2019).



                                                                6
                         Figure 2: Intertemporal MPCs Ct /y0 in models and in the data


                                                                   0.2                                              Data (FHN)
                                                                                                                        RA




                                Ct
                                 y0
                                                                                                                       HA




                                MPC out of unanticipated income
                                                                                                                     RA habits
                                                                  0.15                                              HA habits



                                                                   0.1



                                                                  0.05



                                                                    0

                                                                         0       1      2     3     4    5     6     7    8      9
                                                                                                   Quarter


Note. This figure displays intertemporal MPCs Ct /y0 in various models and in the data. The black dots are con-
structed by fitting a cubic spline through the estimated cumulative annual iMPCs from Fagereng, Holm and Natvik
(2018). The green line displays iMPCs in a baseline heterogeneous agent (HA) model calibrated to match a first-year
annual iMPC of 0.55, as per footnote 10. The orange line displays iMPCs in a representative-agent (RA) model with
 (1 + r ) = 1 and r = 5%. The red line shows iMPCs in an RA model with habit formation in consumption calibrated
to match a first-year annual iMPC of 0.55, as described in appendix B.1. The blue line shows iMPCs in a HA model
with habit formation in consumption, as described in appendix B.2.


they determine fiscal multipliers, and the general equilibrium response to demand shocks more
broadly. Second, the impulse response of average consumption to a one-time unanticipated tran-
sitory increase in labor income, Ct /y0 , can be directly compared with the data and is helpful to
discriminate across models. For example, the black dots in Figure 2 represent the quarterly iMPCs
implied by the estimates in Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018), who combine Norwegian admin-
istrative data on income and wealth with data on lottery winnings to estimate Ct /y0 .9 The data
iMPCs clearly feature a "micro jump": the average response to an unanticipated income shock is
highest on impact and then declines slowly towards zero. The high initial level C0 /y0 of about
0.2 is consistent with findings from the large empirical literature on MPCs.
    The green line in Figure 2 shows the intertemporal MPCs Ct /y0 for a version of the hetero-
geneous-agent (HA) model described above, calibrated to match an average annual MPC of 0.55--the
point estimate from Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018).10 This strategy achieves a good fit overall,
both to the initial level of iMPCs and their subsequent path. Hence, the model is able to replicate
the "micro jumps" in the data. This is in direct contrast with a standard representative-agent (RA)
model--a version of (1) with no income risk and no borrowing constraint--which predicts a low
   9 We provide a detailed mapping from data to the model in Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2018). To convert the

estimates from annual to quarterly, we use cubic spline interpolation of the estimated cumulative annual iMPCs.
  10 In this calibration, we use the same income process e ( s ), utility function u and steady-state real interest rate r  as

that of our quantitative model (see section 4). We then find the discount factor  that generates an aggregate MPC in
                                                                             s
                                                                                 Cs
the first year of 0.55, that is, 3
                                 s =0
                                                                     1
                                                                    1+r           y0   = 0.55. This procedure yields  = 0.8422 at an annual rate.



                                                                                                   7
and flat iMPC schedule, as shown in the orange line of Figure 2.


2.2     Habit formation and iMPCs

One problem with the heterogeneous-agent model just described is that, if we simply embed it into
general equilibrium with no further modification, it cannot generate hump-shaped consumption
responses to persistent macroeconomic shocks, or "macro humps". This is a property of virtu-
ally all HANK models in the existing literature. For example, in all of McKay and Reis (2016),
McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), Gornemann, Kuester and Nakajima (2016), Kaplan, Moll
and Violante (2018), Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2018), and Hagedorn, Manovskii and Mitman
(2019a), the consumption response of the economy to monetary and fiscal shocks is peaked on
impact, rather than hump-shaped as it typically is in the data. The reason is well-known from
the representative-agent literature: standard models of preferences with rational expectations do
not have any force delaying the consumption response to aggregate shocks. Yet, such a delay is
typically seen as a prerequisite for model estimation. Hence, to make models suitable for estima-
tion, this literature has either modified preferences, or deviated from the assumption of rational
expectations.
      A very popular approach, pursued by Fuhrer (2000), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)
and Smets and Wouters (2007) among many others, modifies preferences to feature habit forma-
tion in consumption. This approach successfully slows down the adjustment to macroeconomic
shocks, but here we argue it is poorly suited to obtaining a good micro fit.11,12
      Consider first the assumption of external habits, as in Smets and Wouters (2007). This modifies
the utility function u(c) in (1) to read u(c - C- ), where C- represents average consumption
in the previous period, and a good macro fit requires  to be a large number like 0.6.13 In a
typical heterogeneous-agent model, this strategy is infeasible: if the model is to be consistent with
the steady-state distribution of consumption, it has to feature many agents with consumption far
below 0.6 times average consumption, whose marginal utility of consumption would be infinite.14
      Consider next the alternative assumption of internal habits, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum and
Evans (2005), which replaces the utility function u(c) in (1) by u(c - c- ), where c- is the agent's
own consumption in the previous period, and can therefore scale differently for rich and poor
agents. The problem with this specification is that it substantially lowers marginal propensities to
consume. In appendix B.1, we prove this formally for the case of the RA model: there, the impact
MPC is reduced by a fraction 1 -  relative to the standard RA MPC. The reason is visible in the
red line of figure 2: in response to a one-time income transfer, agents limit their initial increase in
  11 We  focus on additive habits, which are used by the majority of papers in the macro estimation literature. Multi-
plicative, external habits may provide an alternative to our solution of sticky expectations.
  12 In a related argument, Havranek, Rusnak and Sokolova (2017) show that micro and macro approaches to estimating

habits tend to produce inconsistent estimates.
  13 For example, in the estimated Smets-Wouters model,  = 0.71.
  14 Another way to see this is that the steady state of the model would feature a counterfactually high degree of

precautionary savings, and therefore a counterfactual distribution of consumption, as all agents save enough to ensure
minimal consumption of C- in the face of large variability in incomes.


                                                          8
consumption to avoid raising their consumption habit too rapidly. The resulting pattern of iMPCs
is increasing over time, the opposite of the jump in the data.
      The intuition that habits reduce impact MPCs carries over to a HA model with internal addi-
tive habits. To make this point, we set up such a model with  = 0.6 and otherwise calibrate it
to the same parameters as our no-habit HA model (see appendix B.2 for details). As the blue line
of figure 2 illustrates, that model features a micro hump: iMPCs themselves are hump-shaped, in
contrast to the data.
      These results lead us to pursue a different strategy to model hump-shaped responses to macroe-
conomic shocks, one that relies on a deviation from rational expectations. This route has the addi-
tional advantage that it does not involve any change to the ability of the HA model to match
iMPCs.


2.3     Sticky expectations and iMPCs

We propose to extend the standard HA model with a version of the "sticky information" friction
pioneered by Gabaix and Laibson (2001) and Mankiw and Reis (2002, 2007). The exact version we
use is Carroll et al. (2018)'s formulation of sticky expectations. In order to formally express it, we
work with an aggregate-risk version of the household problem (1) in which both rt and yt follow
stochastic processes that are orthogonal to idiosyncratic risk.
      In the sticky-expectations model, households update their information sets about aggregate
shocks infrequently, with an iid probability of 1 -  each period. At time t, a household that last
updated k  0 periods ago bases its forecast of the future on the information available at time t - k.
The parameter  indicates the stickiness of expectations in the model, and rational expectations
correspond to the special case where  = 0.
      We assume that only expectations about future aggregates are sticky, not expectations about
future idiosyncratic productivity shocks e(s). This reflects the idea, formalized in the rational inat-
tention literature, that idiosyncratic shocks have a much greater variability and therefore receive
more attention by households (see e.g. Ma´
                                         ckowiak and Wiederholt 2009).
      Formally, households solve, subject to the unchanged constraints (2)­(3):

             Vt ( , s, k ) = max u(c) + Et-k  Vt+1       , s , k + 1 + (1 -  ) Vt+1   , s , 0 |s    (4)
                          c,


The number of periods k since the last information update enters as a state variable, which matters
because it shapes the expectation Et-k on the right. Since households are aware that, with proba-
bility  , they will keep a stale information set and move to k = k + 1, while with probability 1 - 
they they will update their information set next period and move to state k = 0, the expectation
is taken over a convex combination of Vt+1 ( , s , k + 1) and Vt+1 ( , s , 0). Note that as in Carroll
et al. (2018), households always observe current rt and yt , ensuring that they know their current
cash on hand (1 + rt ) + yt e(s) and do not violate their borrowing constraints.
      There are two interpretations of the information friction embedded in (4). First, non-adjusting


                                                     9
households might not use the information available in current aggregates like rt and yt to update
their expectations about future aggregates. Alternatively, these households might update their ex-
pectations about future aggregates, but fail to incorporate this information into their consumption-
savings decision, instead anchoring their decision rule to past expectations. Empirical estimates of
sluggish expectation adjustment miss the latter possibility, and thus provide only a lower bound
for the  in our model.
      The sticky-expectation formulation of informational rigidities has two main advantages for our
purposes. First, intertemporal MPCs are unchanged15 by sticky expectations: a one-time unantic-
ipated income shock does not change future incomes or interest rates, and therefore does not
interact with frictions in the adjustment of these expectations over time. Second, and more im-
portantly, slow adjustment of expectations allows us to model hump-shaped impulse responses
to macroeconomic shocks. We turn to this exercise next.16


3     An inattentive HANK model
We now embed our model of a population of heterogeneous households with sticky expecta-
tions--which we will call "inattentive" for brevity--into general equilibrium.
      To maximize comparability with the existing representative-agent literature, we structure the
rest of our general equilibrium model following Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and
Smets and Wouters (2007). In addition to the heterogeneous-agent inattentive household sector,
we depart from these papers by abstracting away from endogenous capacity utilization, fixed
costs in production, and a "cost channel" for monetary policy, since we did not find any of these
three features essential to match the impulse response. But we maintain the key features of these
models that generate macroeconomic sluggishness in inflation (namely, price and wage indexa-
tion) and investment (namely, investment adjustment costs).17


3.1     Inattentive households

We build on the model presented in section 2, extending it by letting households hold a second,
illiquid asset, and allowing for heterogeneity in illiquid asset holdings.
      The economy is populated by a unit mass of households that face both idiosyncratic and aggre-
gate uncertainty. Households transition stochastically between idiosyncratic productivity states s
  15 That is, feeding a realized path of average incomes { y + , y, y, y, . . . } with constant r and small > 0 into the
economy at its deterministic steady state always generates a response of average consumption equal to that shown in
Figure 2, irrespective of  .
  16 The formulation in (4) is also consistent with several pieces of evidence. First, at the macro level, evidence from

the cross section of monetary impulse responses (eg Cloyne, Ferreira and Surico 2019, Wong 2018) suggest that impulse
responses are hump-shaped within groups, not just across groups, which our formulation delivers. Second, at the micro
level, our formulation is consistent with the sluggish adjustment of household expectations documented in Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015) (see section 4.4).
  17 An alternative route to generate sluggishness in inflation and investment is to assume inattentiveness of unions

and firms. We followed this route in a previous version of this paper. This alternative specification did not affect the
main results of the paper.


                                                          10
according to a Markov process with fixed transition matrix . The mass of households in state
s is always equal to s , the probability of s in the stationary distribution of . We normalize
idiosyncratic productivity levels e(s) to have mean one, so s s e(s) = 1.
   In addition to stochastic heterogeneity, we also allow for permanent heterogeneity. House-
holds are each assigned a permanent type, g, such that there is a mass µ g of households of type g.
The permanent type influences three household attributes: their discount factor  g ; their group-
average skill level e g ; and their steady-state level of aggregate illiquid asset holdings a g . This
permanent heterogeneity allows us to fit the large heterogeneity in illiquid asset holdings in the
data while maintaining a simplified model of households' decisions to save in the illiquid asset.
We normalize  g µ g = 1.
   In each period, a household enjoys the consumption of a generic consumption good c and gets
disutility from working n hours according to the separable felicity function u(c) - v(n). Because of
sticky wages, n is determined by union labor demand. As described in section 3.4, unions allocate
labor equally across all households, so that for every household, nt = Nt in period t, where Nt
is aggregate labor demand. Individual after-tax labor income in period t is therefore given by
zt  Zt e g e(s), where Zt  (1 - t )wt Nt is aggregate after-tax labor income.
   Each household has access to two assets. As in section 2, they can trade in a liquid asset, ,
which has a return rt between t - 1 and t that is predetermined in period t - 1, and they are subject
to a zero-borrowing constraint. In equilibrium, this asset will earn a relatively low return. They
                                                                           a . In the non-stochastic
also hold an illiquid asset, a, which carries a higher equilibrium return rt
steady state of the economy, agents behave in such a way that all agents in group g hold the same
amount a g in illiquid assets. Both liquid and illiquid assets are issued by a financial intermediary,
which is introduced in section 3.2 below.
   Formally, a household in group g and state s, with liquid assets , illiquid assets a, and who
observed the aggregate state k periods ago when it had illiquid assets a-k , solves the dynamic
programming problem

       Vg,t ( , a, a-k , s, k ) = max u(c) - v( Nt ) +  g Et-k  Vg,t+1             , a , a-k , s , k + 1
                                 c,
                                                                     + (1 -  ) Vg,t+1        , a , a , s , 0 |s
                                c+        = 1 + rt        + Zt e g e(s) + d g,t ( a-k , k)                        (5)
                                           a
                                a = (1 + r t ) a - d g,t ( a - k , k )
                                      0

where  denotes the stickiness of household expectations--the probability that they do not update
their information about aggregates or the value of their illiquid account--and d g,t is a distribution
from the illiquid account, described below. We assume  to be the same across all groups.
   While the return on the liquid asset is set by the financial intermediary in period t - 1, the
                              a is stochastic and moves around with the value of the stock market.
return on the illiquid asset rt
We assume that households update their information on the value of their illiquid account a in-

                                                       11
frequently, at the same time they update their expectations.18 They then distribute an amount d g,t
from their illiquid to their liquid account that depends on ae = ae                          a
                                                                  t ( a-k , k )  Et-k [(1 + rt ) a | a-k ],
the value of the portfolio they expect to have given their last information update. Specifically, we
assume that households follow the rule

                                                        r a,ss
                              d g,t ( a - k , k ) =              ae +  ae - (1 + r a,ss ) a g                       (6)
                                                      1 + r a,ss

where r a,ss is the steady-state level of illiquid returns and  is a small, positive constant. The first
term in (6) states that households increase their distributions only when they observe a higher
value of the stock market, and by a fraction corresponding to the steady-state annuity value of
this increase. As we show in section 5.5, this ensures that the marginal propensity to consume
out of capital gains is small in the aggregate, and that the consumption response is delayed, both
consistent with empirical evidence. The second term in (6) ensures that households save when
they expect their portfolio value to be low, and dissave when they expect it to be high, so that in
the long run their liquid asset position is equal to a g . We set the parameter  to be positive but
very close to 0.19
      This set of assumptions delivers a two-asset model that is complex enough to deliver micro
jumps (with MPCs as high as in the data) and macro humps (with consumption following a hump-
shaped path after shocks), yet tractable enough to be estimated using the methodology developed
in section 4.3.


3.2     Financial intermediary

The financial intermediary in our model has two activities: a banking activity, performing matu-
rity transformation by collecting liquid short-term deposits Lt and investing in long-term govern-
ment debt Bt subject to an intermediation cost of  Lt paid in the next period, and a mutual fund
activity, collecting illiquid funds At and investing them in government bonds and shares in firms.
      The consolidated representative financial intermediary faces the following sequence of flow-
of-funds constraints. At the beginning of the period, the value of outstanding illiquid and liquid
liabilities must be equal to the liquidation value of the portfolio of government bonds and shares
in firms, net of the intermediation cost of liquid deposits, so that:

                    a
             (1 + r t ) At-1 + 1 + rt Lt-1 = (1 + qt ) Bt-1 +                     p jt + D jt v jt-1 dj -  Lt-1     (7)

where v jt denotes the shares of firm j with price p jt . At the end of the period, the value of newly-
  18 There is empirical evidence that households infrequently choose to observe the value of their financial assets (for

example Alvarez, Guiso and Lippi 2012). Moreover, we show in section 5.5 that, at the aggregate level, our model
predicts the pattern for the consumption response to capital gains documented in Chodorow-Reich, Nenov and Simsek
(2019). Even though households are inattentive, the stock market is always priced by competitive, fully informed and
rational financial traders--see section 3.2.
  19 Different small values of  yield numerically identical results. A similar device is used in incomplete-market small

open economy models to induce stationarity (see e.g. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe 2003).



                                                                12
purchased bonds and shares must be equal to the value of newly issued liquid and illiquid liabil-
ities, so that:
                                                   p jt v jt dj + qt Bt = At + Lt                                     (8)

The financial intermediary's problem is to choose v jt , Bt and Lt so as to maximize the expected
                                    a
return on illiquid liabilities, Et rt     20
                                      +1 . This leads to the following asset pricing equations:


                         a          Et [ 1 +  q t +1 ]   Et p jt+1 + D jt+1
              Et [ 1 + r t +1 ] =                      =                    = 1 + r t +1 +   1 + r t                  (9)
                                           qt                    p jt

where we have defined rt as the ex-ante real interest rate. Hence, in equilibrium, competitive
intermediaries fully pass through the cost of deposit issuance to a lower deposit interest rate,
rt+1 = rt -  , and they equalize the expected returns on all other assets to the ex-ante real interest
rate.
      We also allow the financial intermediary to invest in nominal reserves issued by the central
bank, that are in zero net supply and pay an interest rate it between t and t + 1. In appendix C.2,
we show that the first order condition with respect to reserve holdings implies the Fisher equation:

                                                                           Pt+1
                                               1 + r t = (1 + i t ) Et                                               (10)
                                                                            Pt

Our assumption of perfect attention for the mutual fund is consistent with immediate reaction of
financial markets to news, as documented, for example, by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Gürkay-
nak, Sack and Swanson (2005), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) for monetary policy.


3.3     Firms

Our specification of firms mostly follows Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets
and Wouters (2007), except that we abstract from endogenous capacity utilization, fixed costs in
production, and a cost channel of monetary policy.


Final good.       A final good firm produces the homogeneous output good Yt out of intermediate
goods. Its production function is implicitly defined by the equation

                                                         1        Yjt
                                                             Gp         dj = 1                                       (11)
                                                     0            Yt

where G p is the Klenow and Willis (2016) version of the Kimball (1995) aggregator, which satisfies
                                               p
                                        1- x   p
G p (1) = 1 and G p ( x ) = exp           p        .  p is the demand superelasticity, with  p = 0 correspond-
ing to standard CES demand.
  20 Here we assume that the financial intermediary uses a risk-neutral stochastic discount factor. However, since we

are solving to first order in aggregates, we would obtain an identical solution under any alternative choice of stochastic
discount factor Mt such that the intermediary maximizes Et Mt+1 rt    a
                                                                       +1 .



                                                                  13
Intermediate goods.            All intermediate goods producers operate a common Cobb-Douglas pro-
duction function under monopolistic competition and constant productivity ,

                                                               1- 
                                                   Yjt = K jt Njt


They hire capital and labor from a common market. Hence all firms have the same capital-labor
        K jt
           Kt
ratio    = N
        Njt   t
                and the same real marginal cost st , such that the real wage wt = W
                                                                                  Pt (the ratio of the
                                                                                    t


aggregate nominal wage Wt and the price index for final output, Pt ) and the rental rate on capital
 K are equal, respectively, to
rt

                                                                 -
                                           w t = s t (1 -  )  K t Nt
                                            K           -1 1- 
                                           rt = s t   Kt  Nt

   We assume that prices are sticky à la Calvo and are fully indexed to inflation. With probability
1 -  p , firms are free to reset their price Pjt . From the financial intermediary, they face a menu
of stock prices p jt Pjt conditional on resetting their price to Pjt , and they choose Pjt so as to
maximize the sum of stock price p jt Pjt and dividend

                                                         Pjt
                                               D jt =        - st Yjt
                                                         Pt

The fraction  p of firms that do not reset their price index it to the previous period's inflation, so
that their price follows
                                                   Pjt = t-1 Pj,t-1                                                      (12)
                     Pt-1
where t-1             Pt    . Appendix C.3 shows that optimal price-setting of firms, given the discount
factor from (9), generates an indexed Phillips curve, which to first order is:

                                              p
                               1 - p    1-   1+r         p                      1       k
                                                                                                     p   -1
                t -  t -1 =
                                       p           p +    p   -1
                                                                   Et          1+r
                                                                                            st+k -
                                                                                                             p
                                                                                                                         (13)
                                                                        k


where t  log (t ). As is well-known, a higher Kimball superelasticity p > 0 results in larger
real rigidities, and a lower slope for the Phillips curve in (13). In the special case where  p = 0
                                                                                                         p
and prices are fully flexible, all firms set the same price at a constant markup                     p -1
                                                                                                                 over nominal
                                                                                 p -1
marginal costs, and real marginal costs are equal to the constant                 p
                                                                                        .


Capital firms.                                                                    K . It faces adjustment
                      A capital firm owns the capital stock and rents it at rate rt
costs and one-period time-to-build in investment. When it has capital stock Kt and pre-planned
investment It , this firm pays a dividend of

                                         K    K                          It
                                        Dt = rt Kt - It 1 + S
                                                                        It-1


                                                         14
where the investment adjustment cost function satisfies S(1) = S (1) = 0, S (1) = , and it enters
the next period with a capital stock of

                                              Kt+1 = (1 - ) Kt + It

                                                                                           K and its
At date t, it chooses investment for next period It+1 to maximize the sum of its dividend Dt
             K K
stock price pt                                           K ·, · of stock prices conditional on capital
               ( t+1 , It+1 ), taking as given the menu pt ( )
                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                        pt
stocks and investment levels. Appendix C.4 shows that, if we define Qt  Et                                 +1
                                                                                                        K t +2   , investment
dynamics are characterized by the following set of equations:

                                                                                              2
                       It+1        It+1       It+1                          1         It+2            It+2
               1+S            +         S               = Q t + Et                                S                          (14)
                         It          It         It                       1 + r t +1   It+1            It+1

and
                                                 1
                                   Q t = Et              r K + (1 -  ) Q t +1                                                (15)
                                              1 + r t +1 t +2

Aggregate firm value. There is a mass 1 of outstanding shares in both intermediate goods and
capital firms. The arbitrage conditions (9) ensure that the shares in intermediate goods firms
                         1                                                                          K =
are priced at p jt =    1+r t Et    p jt+1 + D j,t+1 and the shares in capital firms are priced at pt
 1          K + pK
1+r t Et   Dt +1 t+1 . Aggregate dividends are equal to


                                                K                                       It
                         Dt =        D jt dj + Dt = Yt - wt Lt - It 1 + S                                                    (16)
                                                                                       It-1

and the value of the aggregate stock market, pt =                             K , satisfies the equation
                                                                   p jt dj + pt

                                                     1
                                            pt =          E t [ Dt + 1 + p t + 1 ]                                           (17)
                                                   1 + rt

3.4    Unions

We follow standard practice in the New Keynesian sticky-wage literature and assume that house-
hold labor hours nit are determined by union labor demand (Erceg, Henderson and Levin 2000,
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe 2005, Auclert, Rognlie and Straub 2018). Specifically, we assume that
in each period t, each household i provides nijt hours of work to each of a continuum of unions
indexed by j  [0, 1], with nit = nijt dj.
   Each union j aggregates efficient units of work into a union-specific task Njt =                              ei e(sit )nijt di.
A competitive labor packer then packages these tasks into aggregate employment services using
the Kimball technology implicitly defined by

                                                            Njt
                                                       Gw          dj = 1
                                                   j        Nt



                                                             15
                                w
                            1- x w
where Gw ( x ) = exp          w      , and sells these services at price Wt . Unions set wages à la Calvo,
resetting wages with probability 1 -  w per period, and indexing to past price inflation when
they cannot reset wages, as in Smets and Wouters (2007). In every period, unions call upon their
members to supply hours according to a uniform rule, nijt = Njt . Whenever it can reoptimize, a
union sets wages to maximize the average utility of its members given this rule. In appendix C.5,
we show that union maximization leads to a Phillips curve for wage inflation, which to first order
is:
                               (1 -  w ) (1 -  w )                     w                                      w   -1
              w,t -  t -1 =
                                     w                        w   + w - 1
                                                                               Et     k      s w,t + k -
                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                       (18)
                                                                                     k

                      Wt                                v (nit )di
where w,t  log       Wt-1    , and sw,t          (1-t )wt eit u (cit )di
                                                                            is the ratio of the average marginal disutility
of labor to an average income-weighted marginal utility of consumption, divided by the net-of-tax
real wage. In the special case where  w = 0 and wages are fully flexible, all unions set the inverse
                                     w -1
wage markup to the constant            w
                                            .


3.5     Government policy

The government issues long-term bonds Bt , collects labor income taxes t W                       Wt
                                                                         Pt Nt E e g e ( s ) = t Pt Nt ,
                                                                           t


and spends on goods and services Gt . Its budget constraint is

                                                     Wt
                                     qt Bt + t          Nt = Gt + (1 + qt ) Bt-1                                       (19)
                                                     Pt

Given the lack of Ricardian equivalence in our model, the fiscal rule of the government matters.
Since our focus for the next section is on monetary policy rather than fiscal policy, we assume that
the government sets its spending at a constant

                                                             Gt = G

and follows a rule for the tax rate

                                                                       ( Bt-1 - Bss )
                                                t -  ss = qss                                                          (20)
                                                                            Y ss

such that the tax rate rises when debt is above its long-run level, thereby eventually bringing
debt back down. The parameter  governs the speed of this adjustment. We consider several
alternative fiscal rules in section 5.3.
      Finally, we assume that monetary policy follows a conventional inertial Taylor rule for the
nominal interest rate:
                                                                                     (1-  m ) 
                                            ss 1-m                      m      Pt                       m
                      1 + i t = (1 + r )                (1 + i t -1 )                            (1 +   t )
                                                                              Pt-1

where r ss is the steady-state real interest rate, m  [0, 1) is the persistence of the policy rate, and


                                                                  16
 m   is a monetary policy shock. Given these elements, the definition of equilibrium is standard:
 t

Definition. Given a stochastic process for the monetary policy shock                           m
                                                                                               t ,   an initial nominal wage
W-1 and price level P-1 , initial government debt B-1 , an initial capital level K-1 , and an initial dis-
tribution of agents D g,0 ( , a, a-k , s, k ) in each fixed group g, a competitive equilibrium is a stochastic
sequence of prices                                    K , s , r , r , r a , p , i , q , Q , aggregates {Y , N , I , K , C , L ,
                            Pt , Wt , t , w,t , wt , rt    t t t t           t t t       t               t   t t     t   t t
At , Gt , t , Dt }, individual policy rules c g,t ( , a, a-k , s, k ) , ( , a , a - k , s , k ) , a g,t +1 ( , a , a - k , s , k ) ,
                                                                             g,t +1
and joint distributions of agents D g,t ( , a, a-k , s, k ) such that households optimize, the financial in-
termediary optimizes, all firms optimize, unions optimize, monetary and fiscal policy follow their
rules, and asset markets clear:

                                µ g  s (1 -  )  k            D g,t (d , da, da-k , s, k) = Lt
                               g,s,k

                                µ g  s (1 -  )  k           aD g,t (d , da, da-k , s, k ) = At
                               g,s,k


Appendix C.6 shows that, when these conditions are satisfied, the goods market also clears:

                                                                    It
                                       Ct + Gt + It + It S                +  Lt-1 = Yt
                                                                  It-1

which is a statement that aggregate demand for final goods--the sum of consumption, govern-
ment spending, investment including adjustment costs, and liquidity costs--must be equal to
total production of these goods.


Representative-agent model. It will be informative to contrast the predictions of our model
with those of a standard representative-agent model similar to Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans
(2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). For this comparison, the model we use is identical to that
described above, except that we replace the inattentive household sector in section 3.1 with a per-
fectly attentive representative agent with internal additive habits. We restrict this agent not to
invest in the liquid asset, so            = 0 at all times, and hence in equilibrium Lt = 0.21 Hence, the
representative agent solves

                               Vt ( a, c- ) = max u (c - c- ) + Et Vt+1 a , c
                                                     c, a
                                                                  a
                                                   c + a = (1 + r t ) a + Zt

with no constraint on a, leading to an Euler equation described in appendix B.1. Given this, the
definition of equilibrium is straightforward. In what follows, we will refer to this model as the
"RA-habit" model, or RA model for short.
 21 Since the liquid asset delivers inferior average returns, under perfect foresight about future aggregates the agent

would endogenously choose not to hold it, and instead stay at the constraint = 0.




                                                                17
4      Estimating HANK
With the model set up, we are now ready to describe our estimation procedure.


4.1      Two-step estimation procedure

We follow a two-step procedure to estimate our model, very similar to the one followed by Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). In the first step, we calibrate some parameters, including
all those that are relevant for the steady state of our model. In the second step, we estimate the
remaining parameters by matching impulse responses from an identified monetary policy shock.
      The general philosophy guiding our calibration is that we are interested in the average trans-
mission of monetary policy over the last fifty years in the United States, from 1969 to the present-
day 2019. Whenever possible, our steady state captures the average macroeconomic environment
over this period. However, since there has not been much signal from monetary shocks in recent
years (see the discussion in Ramey 2016), our impulse responses to monetary policy shocks are
obtained using the original sample from Romer and Romer (2004), 1969 through 1996.


First step: Calibration. The left panel of table 2 summarizes the calibrated parameters of our
                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                    c 1-  -1
model. Our households have constant CES utility over consumption u (c) =                               1 -  -1
                                                                                                                 with an
                                                                               -1
EIS of  = 1, and a power disutility from labor v(n) = v0                  n 1+  / (1
                                                                          +              -1 )
                                                                                  with Frisch elasticity
                                                            G
of  = 0.5. We set government spending to             = 16% of output, the average of government
                                                            Y
consumption expenditures over GDP in the period from 1969 to 2019, and use v0 to normalize the
level of output in the no-inflation steady state to Y = 1. We assume that the annual steady-state
real interest rate is r = 5%. This corresponds to the average combined real return on capital and
government bonds over the same period. We also assume an intermediation spread of  = -6.5%,
consistent with an average effective real return on deposits of -1.5%.22
     We assume G = 6 permanent household groups to capture the very uneven distribution of
illiquid asset holdings in the United States. Recall that, in the steady state of our model, all house-
holds within a group have the same amount of illiquid assets a g , so there is no steady-state within-
group inequality in illiquid assets. Nevertheless, we aim to capture between-group inequality in
illiquid assets by appropriately selecting groups. We define these groups as cuts of the illiquid
asset distribution in the 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances (Bricker et al. 2014). We define illiq-
uid assets to include retirement accounts, certificates of deposit, the cash value of life insurance,
savings bonds, and total non-financial assets net of mortgages on all residences. Households in
the bottom 50% of the illiquid asset distribution hold virtually no assets and comprise our first
group g = 1. Group g = 2 contains the next 20% of households, groups g = 3, 4 each contain the
next 10% of households, and groups g = 5, 6 contain the next 5% and the top 5% of households.
For each of these groups, we compute the share of total illiquid assets held by the group, as well
as the share of total labor income earned by the group, and report these shares in Table 1. The
    22 This   corresponds to the average of the MZM own rate between 1974 and 2019, minus average realized inflation.


                                                             18
                             Table 1: Calibrating permanent household heterogeneity

               Household group g               1           2           3          4          5        6

              Population share (µ g )      Bottom 50%   Next 20%    Next 10%   Next 10%   Next 5%   Top 5%
                Illiquid asset share          2.7%        7.0%        7.0%      13.0%      12.2%    58.0%
               Labor income share            26.7%       18.3%       10.8%      14.4%      11.0%    18.8%
              Discount factors (p.a.)        0.905       0.919       0.933      0.946      0.950    0.975



table reflects the well-known fact that the distribution of illiquid assets is heavily skewed at the
top. For example, the bottom 50% of the illiquid asset distribution own only 2.7% of total illiquid
assets, though they earn 27% of total labor income. Conversely, the top 5% of the illiquid asset
distribution own 58% of illiquid assets, but earn 19% of labor income.
    There is little evidence that MPCs vary systematically along the illiquid asset distribution. In-
stead, the evidence presented in the literature (for example, Johnson, Parker and Souleles 2006,
Misra and Surico 2014, Kaplan and Violante 2014, and Fagereng, Holm and Natvik 2018) is consis-
tent with the hypothesis that the average MPC is constant across the distribution of illiquid asset
holdings. Furthermore, as discussed in section 2, targeting an average annual MPC of 0.55 deliv-
ers a good fit for the path of iMPCs, our central "micro jump" target. These observations lead us
to calibrate our model to achieve an average annual MPC of 0.55 for each of our six permanent
groups, which we accomplish with group-specific discount factors  g , along with an aggregate
                                       L
ratio of liquidity to GDP of      = 0.23. The discount factors are reported in the last row of table 1.
                                       Y
      Our process for gross income is a quarterly discretization of the process estimated in Kaplan,
Moll and Violante (2018), with one modification: we rescale the variance of innovations by one
minus the ratio of within-group variance to total variance in order to maintain consistency with
the aggregate variance of log earnings in the data. To account for progressive taxation, we then
further scale down the variance of innovations by (1 - 0.18)2 , where 0.18 is the degree of tax
progressivity in Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2017).
      Our calibration for the supply side of the model is as follows, using averages over the 1969­2019
period for all targets. We assume an annualized rate of capital depreciation of K = 5.3%, equal
to the average ratio of depreciation to private fixed assets. We calibrate  to achieve a capital-to-
output ratio of 223%, yielding  = 0.24. The value of government debt to GDP is set to 46%, and
the decay rate  of government bond coupons is set to match the average duration of US gov-
ernment debt of 5 years.23 We calibrate the fiscal rule parameter to  = 0.1 following empirical
estimates from the fiscal rule literature (see appendix D.1).24 We calibrate aggregate household
wealth to GDP to 382%, its average in the data, then use this to back out the steady-state markup
                                                                             1   1
µ p . Since the ratio of the capitalized value of markups to GDP is 1 - µ     p  r = 3.82 - 2.23 - 0.46,
this gives µ p = 1.06. Finally, we follow the standard procedure in the literature (e.g. Smets and
  23 The                                            1+r                                               1
        modified duration of bonds in the model is 1+ r - so that, at an annual rate,  = (1 + r ) 1 - 5 .
  24 Asdiscussed in appendix D.1, our quantitative results are not sensitive to  lying within a wide but empirically
reasonable range.



                                                               19
                                        Table 2: Calibrated and estimated parameters.

                Panel A: Calibrated parameters                                         Panel B: Estimated parameters

 Parameter                                              Value       Parameter                                        Value   std. dev.

                                EIS                       1                             Household inattention        0.935    (0.01)
                               Frisch                     0.5                       Investment adj. cost parameter   9.639   (2.428)
    g                 Discount factors (p.a.)           Table 1          p               Calvo price stickiness      0.926   (0.012)
     r                Real interest rate (p.a.)         0.050            w              Calvo wage stickiness        0.899   (0.016)
                           Capital share                 0.24            m                Taylor rule inertia        0.890    (0.01)
    K              Depreciation of capital (p.a.)       0.053            m            Std. dev. of monetary shock    0.057   (0.005)
    µp           Steady-state retail price markup        1.06
   K /Y                Capital to GDP (p.a.)             2.23
   L /Y             Liquid assets to GDP (p.a.)          0.23
                   Intermediation spread (p.a.)         0.065
   G /Y                  Spending-to-GDP                 0.16
   qB/Y          Government bonds to GDP (p.a.)          0.42
    1+r
   1+r -         Maturity of government debt (a.)         5
                 Response of tax rate to debt (p.a.)      0.1
                       Taylor rule coefficient            1.5



                                                                              p
Wouters 2007) of assuming a wage markup of                          w
                                                                  w -1
                                                                         =   p -1
                                                                                    , and a Kimball superelasticity for prices
and wages of  p = w = 10.


Second step: Estimation. We estimate the remaining parameters by matching the impulse re-
sponses to identified monetary policy shocks, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). We
assume that in our model, the identified shocks correspond to iid shocks to the Taylor rule                                            m
                                                                                                                                       t
with standard deviation m , which have endogenously persistent effects on it through inertia in
the Taylor rule.
   The set of parameters to be estimated then includes the degree of household inattention  , the
curvature of the adjustment cost function , the Calvo parameter for the stickiness of prices  p and
wages  w , inertia m in the Taylor rule, as well as the standard deviation of monetary shocks m .
Collecting these parameters in the vector    , ,  p ,  w , m , m , let J () denote the model-
implied first-order impulse responses and J their empirical counterpart. Our estimator  solves

                                                  min J () - J        -1 J (  ) - J                                              (21)
                                                   

where  is a diagonal matrix containing the estimated variances of the empirical impulse re-
                                      ^ for the asymptotic covariance matrix of  as
sponses. We also compute an estimator V

                                                                                          -1
                                                  ^ =    J                   J
                                                  V                  -1        
                                                                             

            J
where             is the Jacobian of J () at . In our application, we include in J the responses of

                                                                   20
output Yt , consumption Ct , investment It , hours Nt , the price level Pt , the nominal wage level Wt ,
and the nominal rate it , truncating impulse responses at the 16th quarter.
      This procedure can be implemented for any set of empirical impulse responses to an identified
monetary shock. We next present our baseline approach for obtaining these impulse responses.


4.2     The empirical response to a monetary policy shock

As our measure of monetary policy shocks, we use the shocks constructed by Romer and Romer
(2004) on their original sample (1969m3­1996m12). This is one of the leading approaches to iden-
tify monetary shocks in the data, and it delivers impulse responses which generally align well, in
timing and magnitude, both with the conventional view from central banks and with results from
alternative methods (see e.g. Ramey 2016).
      To obtain impulse responses, we use a Jordà (2005) projection. This standard procedure has
the benefit of being able to recover the exact impulse responses in our model, provided that the
Romer-Romer shocks represent iid innovations to the Taylor rule                     m 25
                                                                                    t .
      We collect monthly data on eight standard macro time series: output, consumption, invest-
ment, hours, nominal prices, nominal wages, the nominal interest rate, and a measure of the real
interest rate that uses ex-post inflation.26 We then run a Jordà projection, which for a generic
outcome such as Yt reads
                                                     Y    m
                                             Yt+h = Jh    t    + Y       Y
                                                                 h Xt +  t, h                                         (22)

separately for horizons h = 1 . . . T , up to T = 48 months, where                    m    is the Romer-Romer series
                                                                                      t
and    Y
       t      is a regression error term. To control for the potential endogeneity of                m   in practice, we
         ,h                                                                                          t
include in Xt the set of controls that Ramey (2016) uses in her specification for figure 2, panel B:
lags of industrial production, unemployment, the consumer price index and a commodity price
                                             Y using a Newey and West (1987) correction for the
index. We compute the standard deviation of Jh
                    Y . For ease of interpretation, we normalize the impulse responses of output,
autocorrelation in  t ,h
consumption and investment to be in percentage points of output in the period before the shock.
We finally aggregate the impulse responses                 Y
                                                          Jh       and their standard deviations to the quarterly
level, and normalize them so that the impact fall in the nominal interest rate is equal to 25 bps.
This delivers the empirical impulse response matrix J that we use in our estimation.
      The dark dashed lines in figure 3 display our impulse responses, with lighter dashed lines
indicating confidence intervals. Since actual inflation does not respond much on impact, the real
interest rate, which is not targeted, falls by about as much as the nominal interest rate. As antici-
  25 That is, given estimated parameters , if we simulate enough data from the model with aggregate shocks described

in section 6, and run a Jordà projection on the innovations    m   in the model-generated data, then we recover J  .
                                                               t
  26 Specifically, we use nominal GDP for Yt , nominal PCE for Ct , and nominal investment for It , all deflated by the
GDP deflator in order to preserve accounting identities. We also use the log of hours of all persons in nonfarm business
sector for Nt , the log of the PCE deflator for Pt , the log of average hourly earnings of private production employees for
Wt , the level of the Federal Funds rate for it , and the difference between that rate and one-month-ahead PCE inflation
for ex-post rt . For series that are only available at the quarterly frequency, we interpolate to monthly frequency before
running the regression.



                                                            21
                                                     Figure 3: Impulse response to a monetary policy shock vs. model fit


                                            Output                            Consumption                           Investment                            Hours (% of s.s.)
                         0.3                                   0.15                                  0.15                                   0.3
Percent of s.s. output




                         0.2                                    0.1                                   0.1                                   0.2

                                                                                                     0.05
                         0.1                                   0.05                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                        0
                          0                                       0                                                                           0
                                                                                                    -0.05
                               0   2   4     6   8 10 12 14           0   2   4    6   8 10 12 14           0   2   4    6    8 10 12 14          0   2     4    6   8 10 12 14


                                           Price level                        Nominal wage                      Nominal interest rate                     Real interest rate
                         0.3                                    0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2

                         0.2                                   0.15
                                                                                                        0                                     0
Percent




                                                                0.1
                         0.1
                                                               0.05
                                                                                                     -0.2                                  -0.2
                          0                                       0
                                                              -0.05
                               0   2   4    6 8 10 12 14              0   2   4    6 8 10 12 14             0   2   4    6 8 10 12 14             0   2     4    6 8 10 12 14
                                           Quarters                               Quarters                              Quarters                                Quarters
                                                                          Data         90% Confidence Interval               HA Model
Note. This figure shows our estimated set of impulse responses to an identified Romer and Romer (2004) monetary pol-
icy shock (dashed black lines, with dashed gray confidence intervals). The solid green lines are the impulse responses
implied by our estimated inattentive heterogeneous-agent model.


pated, output, consumption, investment and hours follow the "macro hump" pattern that is also
documented in numerous alternative studies, with peak magnitudes that are also typical of those
found in other work, although here they occur after a somewhat longer delay. Prices and wages
take time to respond, do not rise at all initially, and the magnitude of their eventual increase is
small.27


4.3                            Computational methodology

Our estimation procedure to match empirical impulse responses is very close to the one pop-
ularized by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005): we simulate the model to first order in
aggregate shocks, and find parameters that minimize the distance between the model's impulse
responses and their empirical counterparts in the sense of equation (21). This requires simulating
the model many times, one for each guess of the parameter vector . There are two features of our
model that make this computation challenging. First, we have heterogeneous agents rather than a
representative agent. Second, we have inattention--specifically, sticky expectations--rather than
full-information rational expectations.
                   27 For
         comparison, on average across the US estimates from the suite of models in Coenen et al. (2012), the peak
output response to a 25bp shock to monetary policy is around 0.125%, while the cumulative inflation response after 4
years is about 0.2%. But our impulse responses are more delayed than theirs, since for them, the peak output effect is
at 4 quarters and inflation starts to rise earlier.



                                                                                                22
    Our methodology for simulating the model can be separated into two parts. The first part deals
with the simulation of a version of our model without sticky expectations, and draws on the tools
developed in Auclert et al. (2019). The second handles sticky expectations, and can be generalized
to other deviations from rational expectations. It is an important methodological contribution of
this paper.


Simulation without sticky expectations. To solve the full-information rational expectations model,
we use the method of Auclert et al. (2019), which solves for impulse responses as sequences fol-
lowing first-order, perfect-foresight (or "MIT") shocks.28 Applying this methodology, we break
down the model into "blocks", which take certain aggregate sequences as inputs and produce
other aggregate sequences as outputs. For instance, the Taylor rule block has sequences for infla-
tion  and the monetary shock            m   as inputs, and the nominal interest rate i as its output. We depict
all blocks in our model economy, and also provide a short summary of our method, in appendix
D.2.
    The key computational objects in this method are the Jacobians J of each block--the deriva-
tives of its outputs with respect to its inputs. For example, one of the Jacobians of our household
block is J C,Z , a matrix containing Ct / Zs , the model's iMPCs discussed in section 2. In Auclert
et al. (2019), we provide methods to efficiently obtain all model Jacobians and combine them to
obtain impulse responses. A major advantage of this approach for estimation is that most of this
work does not need to be repeated across parameter draws. In particular, aside from the inat-
tention parameter  , none of the parameters in  affect the Jacobians of the household block.
Therefore, in the rational expectations case  = 0, we can calculate these Jacobians a single time
and reuse them on every parameter draw. This achieves a very large speed gain.


Including sticky expectations.              We now introduce a method to deal with sticky expectations at
almost no extra computational cost.
    To understand this approach, it is useful first to consider a different problem: how to handle
different permanent types of households, such as our types g  G in (5). This is straightforward to
handle using our sequence-space approach: we first calculate the Jacobians for each group indi-
vidually using the methods in Auclert et al. (2019), then take their population-weighted average
to obtain the Jacobians for the HA household sector as a whole.29
    Our method to deal with sticky expectations proceeds similarly. At any point in time t, we
partition households into different groups: those that have learned about the date-0 shock at dif-
ferent times   t, and those that yet have to learn about it. We can then aggregate across this
form of heterogeneity in the same way as with permanent types g: the aggregate response of all
  28 This merges Reiter (2009)'s approach of solving for equilibrium as a first-order linear system in aggregates with the

MIT shock approach in Boppart, Krusell and Mitman (2018).
  29 By contrast, this would be much more costly with a state-space solution method. In the Reiter method, for instance,

the cost of the bottleneck Schur decomposition would grow with the state space by a factor of |G|3 , whereas the cost of
our method only scales with |G|. For the same reason, our sticky-expectations friction would be intractable in the state
space.


                                                           23
households is the weighted sum across household groups  , weighted by their frequency. Since
learning at date  has probability (1 -  )  and is orthogonal to idiosyncratic shocks, the aggregate
Jacobian relating output sequence o to input sequence i across all households is

                                                               
                                           J o ,i = ( 1 -  )      J o ,i ,                          (23)
                                                                =0


where J o,i, denotes the Jacobian for the group of households that learns about the shock to input
sequence i at date  .
      To compute J o,i , we use the following insight. If   s, the impulse response of a household
learning at date  about a date-s change in input i is the same as the impulse response of a house-
hold learning at date 0 about a date-(s -  ) change in i, shifted by  periods. Moreover, if  > s,
then  is irrelevant since all households are aware that the shock has passed. Appendix D.3 shows
                                                                                                ,i
that, combining this insight with equation (23), we obtain the following recursion relating Jto
                                                                                              ,s to
                                  ,i, FI      ,i,0
the full-information Jacobian Jto
                                ,s        Jto
                                            ,s :
                                      
                                            o ,i           o,i, FI
                                       Jt-1,s-1 + (1 -  )Jt,s             t > 0, s > 0
                                      
                                      
                                ,i
                            Jto
                              ,s     = Jto
                                         ,s
                                           ,i, FI
                                                                          s=0                       (24)
                                      
                                      (1 -  )J o,i,FI
                                      
                                                                          t = 0, s > 0
                                      
                                                  t,s

          ,i, FI                                                                                  ,i, FI
Given Jto
        ,s       , we can use (24) to build J o,i with a simple operation for each entry. But Jto
                                                                                                ,s
is exactly what the the methods from Auclert et al. (2019) allow us to calculate efficiently. In
short, starting with the full-information Jacobian, we can calculate a modified Jacobian with sticky
expectations at almost no additional cost. Appendix D.3 shows how to generalize this approach
to other deviations from rational expectations.
      Overall, then, our computational approach with sticky expectations is very similar to the ap-
proach without sticky expectations, with one additional step. Before beginning estimation, we
compute Jacobians J o,i,FI for the household block for all o, i, since this does not vary with any of
the parameters we seek to estimate. Then, during estimation, for each draw of a new  parameter
we apply (24) to obtain J o,i .


4.4     Model fit

The model-implied impulse responses at our estimated parameters are depicted in the solid green
line of Figure 3. Overall, the model produces a good fit to the impulse responses. In order to
compare this outcome to the fit of representative-agent models, in appendix D.4 we also estimate
the RA-habit model, using the same procedure on the same set of impulse responses. Figure D.3
shows that this estimated RA model produces a similar set of impulse responses. Hence, the
macro fit of our model is comparable to that achieved by typical medium-scale representative-
agent models currently used for monetary policy analysis. Given the challenge that we posed


                                                         24
in section 2, we view the achievement of such an equally good macro fit while simultaneously
matching micro jumps as a clear success.
      The right panel of Table 2 displays our parameter estimates. The Phillips curve parameters
suggest a significant degree of price and wage stickiness. The estimated Calvo parameter of price
stickiness is  p = 0.93, implying a 14-quarter average price duration, with the estimated Calvo
parameter for wage stickiness just a little lower. This is more price and wage stickiness than in
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007), but it follows directly
from our impulse responses: both prices and wages respond to the shock very slowly and with
small magnitude. Indeed, our estimated RA model with habits implies very similar levels of  p
and  w (see table D.1).
      Our estimated inattention parameters show a fairly large degree of inattention for households,
 = 0.935, implying an average duration of macro inattention of 15 quarters. This is required by
our estimation procedure to match the delayed response of consumption, which peaks at nearly
the two-year mark. (For a similar reason, the RA-habit model requires a habit parameter of
 = 0.85). This value may be compared to direct estimates from Coibion and Gorodnichenko
(2012, 2015) and Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar (2018) that speak to the quarterly rate of
persistence of expectations for inflation and the output gap. For example, Coibion and Gorod-
nichenko (2012) estimate a quarterly degree of information rigidity for inflation around 0.8 for
consumers and 0.86 for professional forecasters. These are below our estimate of  --but note that,
as discussed in section 2.3, these estimates provide a lower bound for the value of  relevant for
our model, since they miss the fraction of agents that adjust their expectations, but do not act on
these adjusted expectations.


4.5     The importance of inattention

With our estimated model in hand, we can determine the extent to which household inattention
is needed to match the impulse responses. In section 2, we argued that inattention was needed to
generate hump-shaped consumption responses to persistent income shocks. But our investment
adjustment cost specification implies that our model already features a general equilibrium source
of humps in income, via investment. One might conjecture that this income hump-shape would
translate directly into a consumption hump-shape, so that inattention is not needed after all.
      This conjecture is incorrect, as we illustrate using two separate exercises. First, holding all
parameters at their estimated values, we switch off inattention in the model, setting  = 0. The
dashed light-blue line of figure 4 displays the resulting impulse responses of output and con-
sumption, with the solid line displaying our baseline impulse responses for comparison. The
consumption response has a counterfactual peak on impact. The reason is that, even though the
response of investment is delayed, perfectly attentive households have enough liquidity to bring
forward spending in anticipation of future changes in real interest rates and income.
      Second, we reestimate the model to match the same empirical impulse responses, but this time
constrain inattention to be switched off at  = 0. The resulting impulse response is displayed


                                                  25
                                         Figure 4: Impulse responses with and without inattention


                                              Output                                       Consumption
                               0.3                 Full model                    0.3
                                                 No inattention
      Percent of s.s. output




                                               No inatt. (re-estim.)
                               0.2                                               0.2


                               0.1                                               0.1


                                0                                                 0


                                     0   5             10              15              0   5             10   15
                                             Quarter                                           Quarter


Note. This figure shows the general equilibrium paths of output and consumption in our estimated HA model with
different assumptions on inattention. The solid green uses our baseline estimates of household inattention. The dashed
blue line is the impulse response when the inattention parameter is set to  = 0, holding all other parameters fixed at
their estimated value in table 2. The dotted dark blue line reestimates the model parameters without inattention.


in the dotted dark blue line of figure 4. In this estimated model, there is barely a response of
investment at all, and consumption again displays a counterfactual peak on impact. Here, the
estimation procedure struggles to reconcile the large anticipatory consumption response in the
model with the small impact responses of consumption, output, and hours in the data, and finds
the best fit when investment is almost infinitely frictional.
      To sum up, in section 2 we introduced inattention as a natural route to generating hump-
shapes in consumption in a model with high MPCs. In this section, we confirmed that inattention
is both necessary and sufficient to generate humps in our model.


5       Monetary policy transmission
Armed with our estimated model that matches both micro jumps and macro humps, we now
examine the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.


5.1               Investment and the transmission mechanism

Our first main finding is that investment plays a central role in the transmission mechanism of
monetary policy. To see this most cleanly, in figure 5 we shut off the investment response by
setting the investment adjustment cost parameter to  =  while assuming that monetary policy




                                                                            26
                                         Figure 5: Role of investment in the transmission mechanism


                                              Output                                         Consumption


                               0.1
     Percent of s.s. output




                                                                            0.05

                              0.05



                                0                                             0



                                     0   5       10        15                      0     5        10       15
                                             Quarter                                        Quarter
                                                HA          HA + no I        RA         RA + no I


Note. This figure shows general equilibrium output and consumption in our estimated HA model (green) and an
estimated representative-agent model with habits (red) in response to the same shocked real interest rate path, given
different assumptions on the investment adjustment cost parameter . The solid lines are the baseline models, the
dashed lines correspond to  = .


continues to implement the same shocked path for the real interest rate.30 This reduces the peak
output response by 69%, and the cumulative output response over 20 quarters by 84%.
    These declines are far larger than investment's direct share of the output response, which at
peak is slightly less than 40% in our baseline results. This is because shutting off investment
dramatically weakens the effect of monetary policy on consumption as well: in figure 5, without in-
vestment the peak consumption response falls by 49%, and the cumulative consumption response
over 20 quarters by 72%. This reflects a powerful investment-consumption feedback that is unique
to models with high MPCs: as investment rises, the additional output demand leads to a rise in
labor income--much of which is spent on consumption by high-MPC households, leading to even
more output demand.
    In short, investment is indirectly responsible for much of the consumption response to mone-
tary policy. The exact shape of this indirect effect is influenced by the structure of our model. First,
since inattentive households do not immediately realize that their labor incomes will rise--but
spend the income once it arrives in their liquid accounts--the full effect of the consumption-
investment feedback is backloaded, with sizable effects in figure 5 well after the t = 6 peak in
output. Second, although elastic investment leads to a smaller capital price response to monetary
policy, the relevance for consumption is limited because capital is held in the illiquid account.
  30 Since monetary policy ultimately works through the real interest rate, this makes our counterfactual easier to in-
terpret. An alternative is to hold constant the perturbation to the intercept of the Taylor rule, but since the Taylor rule
endogenously changes the real interest rate in response to macro outcomes, the results--although similar--are harder
to interpret in terms of monetary transmission.


                                                                    27
Neither of these features, however, is needed for the effect itself: in appendix A, we show that
investment-consumption complementarity plays a qualitatively very similar role in a simplified
HANK model without either inattention or illiquidity.31
      On the other hand, this mechanism is not present in a representative-agent model. The red
lines in figure 5 show the same impulse responses for our estimated RA model with habits. Shut-
ting off investment does lead to a decline in the output impulse--by 38%, both at peak and cumu-
latively over 20 quarters--but this is solely due to the direct role of investment in output demand.
Indeed, in this model there is no change in the consumption impulse at all, since it is pinned down
by the path of real interest rates and intertemporal substitution via the Euler equation.
      Indeed, a true heterogeneous-agent model turns out to be essential for the effects in figure
5. Even in a two-agent economy with habits--calibrated with a 20% share of hand-to-mouth
households to match the same quarterly MPC, and estimated to match the same impulse re-
sponses--consumption is barely affected when investment is shut off (see appendix E.1). This
is because a two-agent model, even if it has the same average MPC, cannot match the intertemporal
MPCs shown in Figure 2. It therefore misses important intertemporal feedbacks from investment
to consumption.
      The centrality of investment to the monetary transmission mechanism has important practical
implications. For instance, if investment is less elastic than usual--say, if there is an overhang of
previously accumulated capital as in Rognlie, Shleifer and Simsek (2018)--any given change in
interest rates will be much less effective, and policymakers may need to be more aggressive.
      Given the importance of investment, one might wonder whether a richer model of investment,
beyond the standard investment adjustment cost specification, would give different results. For
transmission through investment to consumption, however, the essential part of the model is the
household side, with its high iMPCs. This is where we have concentrated most of the complexity
of the model. Conditional on the investment response to monetary policy, which we match to
the data, our amplification mechanism should be equally powerful, no matter what underlying
forces are driving investment. In particular, it should persist with a more complex model of in-
vestment--for instance, a model with firm heterogeneity as in Ottonello and Winberry (2018), or a
model where monetary policy affects investment via an interest coverage channel as in Greenwald
(2019)--as long as that model, too, is estimated to match the same magnitude and hump-shape of
the aggregate investment response.


5.2     Consumption in the transmission mechanism

So far, we have seen that investment is an important source of the consumption response to mon-
etary policy. To further understand the determinants of consumption, we now decompose the
aggregate consumption response into direct and indirect components, similar to the decomposi-
tion in Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018). Since aggregate consumption can be written as a function
  31 Our model would feature an additional source of amplification if we introduced unequal income incidence, making

income risk countercyclical (see Bilbiie, Känzig and Surico 2019).


                                                        28
                                                   Figure 6: Decomposition of consumption


                                   Consumption, without inattention                                          Consumption, with inattention
                         0.2                                    total                             0.2
                                                               direct
                                                              indirect
      % of s.s. output




                                                                               % of s.s. output
                         0.1                                                                      0.1




                          0                                                                         0


                               0          5       10          15                                        0         5       10        15
                                              Quarter                                                                 Quarter


Note. These figures decompose the consumption response of our estimated HA model, with and without inattention,
into direct and indirect effects as in Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018), see (25).


               a , Z } of liquid rates, illiquid rates, and aggregate after-tax labor incomes, we can
Ct = Ct {rs , rs    s
decompose the aggregate consumption response into three terms, a direct and two indirect ones,

                                                             Ct               Ct a        Ct
                                                 dCt =    r         drs +       a
                                                                              r s
                                                                                  drs + 
                                                                                           Zs
                                                                                              dZs                                            (25)
                                                         s      s        s              s

                                                             direct                               indirect

The direct term captures the direct effect of lower liquid real interest rates on consumption, through
income and substitution effects. The indirect terms capture the effects of the return on the illiquid
account and greater labor incomes.
                                                                                            a, Z }
    Figure 6 shows the breakdown into direct and indirect effects, when the paths of {rs , rs   s
are those observed in response to the monetary shock in figure 3. The right panel does this for
our inattentive HA model. Strikingly, almost the entire consumption response is accounted for
by indirect effects. The direct effect is almost absent--a finding reminiscent of, but even more
extreme than, Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018).
    To understand the near-absence of the direct effect, we switch off inattention in the left panel
                                                                    a , Z }. The direct effect is alive
of figure 6, still feeding in the same equilibrium paths for {rs , rs    s
and well in this plot, accounting for a large share of the consumption response in the first few
quarters. In fact, in large part it is the direct effect that causes the full-attention impulse response
of consumption to be downward-sloping.
    This shows that inattention not only generates a hump-shaped consumption response overall
(see also figure 4), but does so by dampening the direct effect in figure 6, as well as by shifting
the indirect consumption response into future periods. The reason for this is that the direct effect


                                                                         29
mainly reflects intertemporal substitution--an activity that relies on changes in future expected
interest rates and is therefore heavily dampened in a model with inattention.
      This dampening is necessary for the model to be consistent with the data. Otherwise, the com-
bination of direct and indirect effects on impact will be far too large. To understand why this is
inevitable in any model consistent with micro consumption data, in appendix E.2 we perform a
simple experiment: we suppose that households' aggregate before-tax labor income is given by
(1 - )Ytdata , where Ytdata is the empirical impulse response of output to the monetary shock, and
then feed in this labor income shock--and no other shocks--to the full-attention household sector.
We find that the resulting consumption impulse is large, so that there is no room for intertempo-
ral substitution to add to consumption in the first few quarters. We conclude that some friction
must be dampening the overall consumption response on impact. In our model, this friction is
inattention.


5.3       Fiscal policy in the transmission mechanism

We have uncovered investment as an important "indirect effect" of monetary policy on consump-
tion. The prior HANK literature (e.g. Kaplan, Moll and Violante 2018) has also stressed indirect
effects, but with greater emphasis on fiscal policy.
      Is fiscal policy an important channel of monetary transmission in our model? Interestingly,
no. This is due to two features that make the model a better quantitative fit for fiscal policy. First,
rather than having only short-term debt, we allow for long-term debt and calibrate its duration to
the average in the US time series, five years. This limits the effect of monetary policy shocks on
the government budget, since only a small fraction of debt needs to be rolled over each quarter at
a new interest rate.32 Second, in our baseline we assume that the government follows a fiscal rule
that gradually adjusts debt back to a steady-state target, rather than requiring a balanced budget
each quarter.33
      To gauge the quantitative importance of fiscal policy, in figure 7 we explore sensitivity to sev-
eral different specifications. In the left panel, we assume alternative fiscal rules governing the
adjustment of taxes or spending to changes in the government budget. The solid green, red, and
blue lines maintain our baseline assumption that the adjustment takes place over the long term,
but in addition to our baseline rule (20) where adjustment occurs through the tax rate  , they
alternatively vary government spending G or a lump-sum transfer T instead.34 These show al-
most identical impulse responses. If, however, we instead assume that the adjustment happens
on impact because the government must follow a balanced-budget rule, then government spend-
  32 To our knowledge, this is the first quantitative HANK model to feature long-term debt. For prior contributions to
the HANK literature with long-term debt, see Auclert (2019) and Nuño and Thomas (2019).
  33 A balanced-budget rule is, for instance, the baseline specification in both McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016)

and Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018). Our empirically calibrated fiscal rule is closer to one of the alternative specifi-
cations in Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018), which assumes that fiscal shocks are absorbed by debt and very slowly
repaid.
                                                  ss
  34 To be consistent, we define    qss Bt-1 - B w N as the total size of the fiscal adjustment induced by our rule (20)
                                  t          Y ss    t t
and set Gt - G ss = t and Tt = t to arrive at the G and T rules respectively.


                                                           30
                                      Figure 7: The role of fiscal policy for monetary transmission


                               Output, long-term bonds                                   Output, short-term bonds
                    0.4                                                      0.4
                                                   rule
                                                bal. budget
                                                  G rule
                    0.2                        G bal. budget                 0.2
Percent of s.s.




                                              lump-sum rule
                                           lump-sum bal. budget
                      0                                                        0



                  -0.2                                                     -0.2
                          0      10        20           30                         0      10        20        30
                                        Quarter                                                  Quarter


Note. This figure shows the effects of the shocked real interest rate path under alternative fiscal rules. The colors
correspond to different ways a given primary deficit is reduced: " rule" corresponds to a rule for labor tax rates; "G
rule" means government spending adjusts; "lump-sum rule" means lump-sum transfers adjust.


ing adjustment has the largest impact because it directly feeds into aggregate output demand,
followed by lump-sum transfers and finally the tax rate. This is same ranking as in Kaplan, Moll
and Violante (2018).
                  The right panel shows that the effects from the balanced-budget rule are much larger if we
counterfactually set  = 0--i.e. we assume that all debt is short-term--since then the monetary
shock immediately affects the cost of rolling over the entire debt. Under the baseline rule with
gradual debt adjustment, however, it still makes minimal difference whether the government ad-
justs  , G, or T , nor does it matter much whether the debt itself is short- or long-term.
                  In short, fiscal policy can play a major role if we assume both short-term debt and a balanced-
budget rule--with a peak output effect that is twice as large as our baseline when the tax rate 
is used to balance the budget, and even larger effects with other instruments like G and T . But
with more quantitatively realistic assumptions, the role of fiscal policy in monetary transmission
diminishes dramatically, to the point where the instrument used for fiscal adjustment makes little
difference.


5.4                 What gets monetary transmission started?

The prior literature, as well as our discussion of consumption in section 5.2, has focused on partial
equilibrium decompositions. These decompositions tell us the proximate influences on an outcome
like consumption: what fraction of the aggregate consumption response to a monetary shock is
driven directly by households' response to interest rates, or indirectly through households' re-
sponse to labor income or dividends.


                                                                   31
         Figure 8: General equilibrium decomposition: which effect gets monetary transmission started?


                                                      Output                                               Consumption


                               0.1
     Percent of s.s. output




                                                                                    0.05

                              0.05


                                                                                      0
                                0


                                     0           5       10       15                       0           5        10       15
                                                     Quarter                                                Quarter
                                         Total         Intertemporal substitution              User cost       Income effects


Note. This figure shows a general equilibrium decomposition of output and consumption into one of three effects of r.


    Although useful, these decompositions say nothing about how monetary policy caused vari-
ables like labor income to move in the first place. This is more difficult, since it is an inherently
general equilibrium question. It is essential, however, if we want a complete picture of monetary
transmission. For instance, even if households' direct response to interest rates explains only a
small partial equilibrium share of consumption, it is possible that this response triggers general
equilibrium forces that drive a much larger share of consumption through indirect effects. Alter-
natively, the indirect effects might come from some other source. With only a partial equilibrium
decomposition, there is no way to know.
    We therefore introduce a general equilibrium decomposition. The idea is that a shock to the real
interest rate path {rt } influences equilibrium separately by entering into various equations. We
can take some subset of these equations and ask what happens if {rt } is only perturbed in them,
solving for general equilibrium. Splitting the set of equations where rt enters into disjoint subsets,
and repeating this process for each subset, by linearity the first-order outcomes will sum to the
actual general equilibrium, giving us a decomposition that reveals the importance of each role for
rt in starting the monetary transmission mechanism.
    Concretely, in this application we split the equations for the model in section 3 three ways.
                                             ,sub   sub
First, we assume that a real interest rate rt+ 1 = rt -  appears in the Euler equation (46), which
                                                                                 user appears in (14)
governs intertemporal substitution. Second, we assume that a real interest rate rt
and (15), which is where real interest rates influence the investment decision by changing the user
                                                  inc appears in all other equations, which govern
cost. Third, we assume that a real interest rate rt
asset pricing and income flows.35
  35 Since solving for general equilibrium only makes sense when the model is internally consistent,                  it is important that



                                                                            32
      In figure 8, we apply the perturbed real interest rate from our estimated monetary shock to
               sub }, {r user }, and {r inc } separately, and calculate general equilibrium output and
the paths of {rt         t              t
consumption for each, getting three paths that sum to the aggregate effect. By far the most impor-
                                                                                           user .
tant component of both output and consumption turns out to be the "user cost" effect from rt
This effect answers the question: "if the only change is that capital firms perceive a different real
interest rate path when making investment decisions, what happens in general equilibrium?" Re-
markably, most monetary transmission appears to work through this one role of the real interest
rate: about 65% of the output response, both at peak and cumulatively over 20 quarters. This clar-
ifies the dominant role of investment from section 5.1: the importance of investment ultimately
stems from the effect of interest rates on the user cost, rather than an endogenous response of
investment to some other force.
                                                                     sub is weak, becoming negative
      On the other hand, the intertemporal substitution effect from rt
after 10 quarters. This effect answers the question: "if the only change is that households perceive
a different real interest rate path when making intertemporal substitution decisions with their
Euler equation, what happens in general equilibrium?" Notably, however, this is stronger than
the direct effect in the right panel of figure 6, because it includes GE multiplier effects that amplify
the original intertemporal substitution effect, while excluding the negative income effect from
declining interest in the liquid account.
                                       inc is moderate but persistent. It reflects a negative contribution
      Finally, the income effect from rt
to consumption from declining liquid interest income, as well as the more backloaded positive
contribution from the illiquid account rising in value, and the even more backloaded positive
contribution from lower taxes--as well as GE multiplier effects amplifying these forces.


5.5     Asset prices in the transmission mechanism

It is well-known that accommodative monetary policy raises stock prices (see Bernanke and Kut-
tner 2005 among many others). Figure 9 shows that our model is fully consistent with this ob-
servation. This is noteworthy because, as discussed in Kaplan and Violante (2018), many leading
models in the literature do not even get the stock market response to go in the right direction.
      In our model, the stock market rises both due to less discounting as well as an increase in future
dividends. The left panel of figure 9 plots the overall response of stock prices to our accommoda-
tive monetary policy shock. The response is peaked on impact, consistent with the evidence in the
literature. The magnitude, however, is somewhat smaller than what has been found in the data by
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and the follow-up literature, reflecting the fact that our model does
not feature effects from monetary policy on risk premia (see Kekre and Lenel 2019 for a HANK
model that does).
      The right panel of figure 9 plots the consumption response in the model, as well as the share
the rt corresponding to any flow of funds be perturbed simultaneously for both the sender and recipient. We achieve
               inc for all such flows.
this by using rt




                                                        33
                 Figure 9: The stock market response to monetary policy and its effect on consumption


                           Stock market response                                               Consumption response
                                                                                    0.08                        Total
                 0.4
                                                                                                          To stock market
                                                                                    0.06




                                                                 % of s.s. output
       Percent




                 0.2                                                                0.04

                                                                                    0.02

                  0                                                                   0
                       0     5       10         15                                         0    5       10          15
                                 Quarter                                                            Quarter


Note. The left figure shows the stock price response to the monetary policy shock in the model (in %), as well as the
induced consumption response (in % of steady-state output).


of it that is explained by wealth effects from asset market returns.36 The blue line shows that
households respond to the stock market increase in our model, but only moderately and with a
delay. The overall magnitude of this effect lies between the marginal propensity to consume out
of stock market gains of 5 cents documented in di Maggio, Kermani and Majlesi (2018) and that
of 2.8 cents documented in the cross-section of locations by Chodorow-Reich, Nenov and Simsek
(2019). Moreover, the delayed response is consistent with that documented in the latter paper.


5.6     Monetary policy and inequality

Figure 10 spells out the implications of our model for the effects of accommodative monetary pol-
icy shocks on measures of consumption and wealth inequality. Overall consumption and wealth
inequality--as measured by the variance of the log--fall after accommodative monetary policy
shocks, consistent with some empirical evidence (e.g. Coibion, Gorodnichenko, Kueng and Silvia
2017). This is largely driven by the positive response of labor incomes to monetary easing.
      However, while overall wealth inequality falls, the wealth share of the top 5% household group
actually rises slightly. This is due to the fact that this group holds a disproportionate fraction of
the stock market, which increases in value.37 Hence, the distributional effects of monetary policy
implied by our model are subtle: rising labor incomes reduce inequality, but revaluation effects at
the top accentuate inequality.
  36 In the notation of section 5.2, this corresponds to    Ct a
                                                              a dr s .
                                                          s r s
  37 Note that the share of equity within illiquid portfolios is the same for all household groups.           Assuming that wealth-
ier households hold larger equity shares would accentuate our results for the top 5%.




                                                            34
                                     Figure 10: The distributional effects of monetary policy


                                 Consumption inequality (var log)                           Wealth inequality (var log)

                        0                                                        0



                                                                             -0.02
                    -0.02


                                                                             -0.04
                    -0.04


                            0           5         10        15                       0          5        10        15

                                Inequality in liquid wealth (var log)                    Top 5% wealth share (basis points)

                        0
                                                                               0.2



                    -0.1                                                         0



                                                                             -0.2
                    -0.2
                            0           5        10         15                       0          5       10         15
                                             Quarter                                                Quarter




6      Investment and the business cycle
Thus far we have kept our focus on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, uncovering
a channel by which the response of investment stimulates consumption. Comovement of invest-
ment and consumption, however, is hardly limited to monetary policy shocks. In fact, a long
literature following Barro and King (1984) has recognized that this comovement is at the heart of
business cycle fluctuations.
      This motivates us to investigate the investment-consumption comovement in our model in a
business cycle context. To do so, we expand the model to allow for seven shocks and estimate it
using Bayesian methods on historical business cycle data, as in Smets and Wouters (2007).38


6.1        Shocks

As we strive to stay as close to the previous literature as possible, almost all shocks are the same
as in Smets and Wouters (2007). Also, almost all shocks are simply shocks to parameters that were
assumed constant in the model description in section 3. In particular, we allow for 3 supply shocks
    38 A
       recent literature attempts to incorporate cross-sectional information to perform Bayesian estimation of
heterogeneous-agent models (see Chang, Chen and Schorfheide 2018 and Plagborg-Møller and Liu 2019). We do not
pursue this strategy here.


                                                                        35
(TFP shocks t , price markup shocks              p,t ,   wage markup shocks         w,t )   and 4 demand shocks. Two
of those demand shocks are exactly as in Smets and Wouters (2007) (monetary policy shocks                                   m
                                                                                                                            t ,
government spending shocks Gt ). The two others in Smets and Wouters (2007) are risk premium
shocks and investment-specific technology shocks. Risk premium shocks hit both investment and
consumption in the model. Since we would like to focus on endogenous rather than exogenous
comovement, we assume that there are two separate risk premium shocks, one for consumption
and one for investment. We model the one for consumption as a discount factor shock. That is, the
discount factor  g of group g between periods t and t + 1 is replaced by  g exp{                          C     where   C   is
                                                                                                          t }           t
a mean-zero shock process. This specification implies that the only place                       C   enters is households'
                                                                                                t
intertemporal optimality condition.
      We proceed similarly for firms. The risk premium shock for investment is assumed to enter
the optimality condition of mutual funds. In particular, we assume that mutual funds equalize the
expected return on stocks with risk-premium adjusted return on bonds, replacing (9) with

                                         Et p jt+1 + D jt+1                     I
                                                            = 1 + rt +          t
                                                 p jt

The shock      I   is a mean-zero shock process and is our "investment shock": by revaluing capital,
               t
it directly affects the incentive to invest. We opt for this shock, rather than an investment-specific
technology shock, because the literature shows that the latter has limited role in the business cycle
when disciplined by data on investment prices (Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti 2011).39


6.2     Estimation

We specify the full model, with its seven shocks, following Smets and Wouters (2007). In partic-
ular, we assume that all but the two markup shocks follow AR(1) processes around their deter-
ministic steady-state values (which are zero for              m C I
                                                              t , t , t ).   The two markup shocks are assumed
to follow ARMA(1,1) processes. We depart from Smets and Wouters (2007) by not assuming a
correlation between TFP and government spending shocks. Instead, all shocks are orthogonal.
      We estimate our model to match the evolution of seven data series from 1966 Q1 (the beginning
of the sample period in Smets and Wouters 2007) until 2018 Q4. The seven data series are real
output Yt , real consumption Ct , real investment It , real wages wt , hours Nt (all in logs and linearly
detrended), as well as inflation t and nominal interest rates it (both demeaned).40
      In order to maintain continuity within the paper and ensure that our results are not driven
by unexplored features of impulse responses, we adopt the following strategy for estimation. We
keep all parameters as in section 4--both the steady state and the parameters estimated from our
  39 An appealing implication of our investment shock specification is that it causes stock prices to be procyclical, as in

Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2014).
  40 Consistent with the data used in section 4.2, Y , C , I are nominal series normalized by the GDP deflator to preserve
                                                    t t t
accounting identities; the nominal interest rate is the quarterly average fed funds rate; inflation is the annualized
quarter-on-quarter change in the PCE deflator; employment is hours of all persons in the nonfarm business sector;
the real wage is average hourly earnings of private production employees deflated by the GDP deflator.


                                                             36
                                              Table 3: Priors and posteriors

                                                  Posterior                                                            Posterior
 Supply shock            Prior distribution   Mode     std. dev       Demand shock             Prior distribution   Mode    std. dev

                  s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     0.332    (0.016)                      m
                                                                                        s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     0.215   (0.010)
 TFP t                                                                Mon. policy   t
                  AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.952    (0.016)                          AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.171   (0.054)
                  s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     0.362    (0.026)                          s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     0.319   (0.015)
                                                                      G shock Gt
 w markup   w,t   AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.916    (0.031)                          AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.957   (0.015)
                  MA     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.863    (0.048)                  C
                                                                                        s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     3.369   (0.312)
                                                                      C shock   t
                  s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     0.248    (0.015)                          AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.871   (0.018)
 p markup   p,t   AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.495    (0.155)                  I
                                                                                        s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)     4.452   (1.026)
                                                                      I shock   t
                  MA     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.791    (0.030)                          AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)       0.793   (0.029)

Note. For an ARMA(1,1) process of the form xt+1 -  xt = t+1 -  t , "AR" refers to , "MA" refers to  . To be
comparable with Smets and Wouters (2007) we scale the markup shocks such that w,t , p,t appear with a coefficient of
1 in the Phillips curves (18) and (13).


monetary policy shocks. Instead, we estimate shock process parameters: all shocks' AR and MA
parameters, as well as their standard deviations. For these parameters, we use the same priors as
in Smets and Wouters (2007), shown in table 3.
      It goes without saying that our inattentive heterogenous-agent model is a complicated one to
estimate. We start with our insights from section 4.3 on how to efficiently simulate heterogeneous-
agent models with information frictions, which allow us to quickly compute impulse responses
to each shock. We then apply the approach from Auclert et al. (2019) to directly calculate the
log-likelihood from these impulses.41 We use this methodology to compute the posterior mode,
as well as its standard errors from a Laplace approximation around the posterior mode. Starting
from the prior means as initial guesses, the estimation takes around 120 seconds on a personal
laptop. The sixteen estimated parameters are also shown in table 3.
      For comparison, we also perform the exact same estimation, with the same shocks, in the
representative-agent model with habits introduced in section D.4. Priors and posteriors for that
model can be found in appendix F.1.


6.3      The role of investment for business cycles

We use the estimated RA and HA models to explore the drivers of business cycles. To do so,
we focus on forecast error variance decompositions of output and consumption. We construct
these by additively decomposing Vart-1 (Yt+h ) and Vart-1 (Ct+h ) at various horizons h  0 into
contributions from the seven orthogonal shocks.
      The decompositions for the RA model are shown in figure 11. The most important drivers of
output variation at business cycle horizons--6 to 32 quarters--in our RA model are supply shocks
(TFP and markup shocks), explaining over half the forecast error variance. Supply shocks also
  41 A
     forerunner of this approach in the sticky-information literature is Mankiw and Reis (2007), who also solve their
model in sequence space and calculate the log-likelihood directly from that representation.



                                                                 37
                         Figure 11: Forecast error variance decomposition for the RA model


                                   Output                                       Consumption
                 1                                                1

               0.8                                              0.8

               0.6                                              0.6

               0.4                                              0.4

               0.2                                              0.2

                 0                                                0
                     0       10      20      30      40               0    10       20        30       40
                          Horizon h (in quarters)                     Horizon h (in quarters)
                            I shock            C shock         G shock         Mon. policy shock
                         W markup shock       TFP shock     P markup shock



Note. This figure decomposes Vart-1 (Yt+h ) and Vart-1 (Ct+h ) into contributions of the seven shocks of the model.


matter for consumption, explaining a bit less than half the variation, with the rest being mostly
explained by discount factor shocks ("C shocks"). Investment shocks matter somewhat for output
(~15%), but do not explain consumption variation.
    The decompositions for the HA model in figure 12 are strikingly different, even though the
only change is in the model's household side. Investment shocks rise to prominence in the esti-
mated HA model. Specifically, at business cycle horizons, they explain about 65% of the output
variation and about 55% of the consumption variation. Discount factor shocks remain important
for consumption, but less so than in the RA model. Supply shocks become far less important.
    Why does the estimated HA model favor investment shocks so much more than the RA model?
As anticipated, the comovement between consumption and investment plays a crucial role. Figure
13 decomposes the forecast error covariance Covt (Yt+h , Ct+h ) between investment and consump-
tion at various horizons h  0.
    In our HA model, investment shocks drive most of the covariance--a striking consequence
of the model's investment-consumption complementarity when MPCs are high. By contrast, in-
vestment shocks explain almost none of the covariance of consumption and investment in the RA
model, in line with the Barro and King (1984) puzzle. Instead, supply shocks are needed.
    The reason for this contrast is clear from the impulse responses to an investment shock in
figure 14. In the HA model, consumption and investment move together and peak at similar
times, whereas in the RA model there is a tiny and (due to habit formation) highly backloaded
consumption response.42
    The idea that investment shocks can help explain the business cycle comovement between con-
sumption and investment in HA models is a robust insight of our paper. It also applies to other
  42 Figures F.1--F.7 in appendix F.2 display all other impulse responses in the RA and HA models.   Appendix F.3 shows
historical decompositions of output and consumption.


                                                          38
                         Figure 12: Forecast error variance decomposition for the HA model


                                   Output                                       Consumption
                 1                                                1

               0.8                                              0.8

               0.6                                              0.6

               0.4                                              0.4

               0.2                                              0.2

                 0                                                0
                     0       10      20      30      40               0    10       20        30     40
                          Horizon h (in quarters)                     Horizon h (in quarters)
                            I shock            C shock         G shock         Mon. policy shock
                         W markup shock       TFP shock     P markup shock


Note. This figure decomposes Vart-1 (Yt+h ) and Vart-1 (Ct+h ) into contributions of the seven shocks of the model.




       Figure 13: Decomposition of forecast error covariance between consumption and investment


                            Heterogeneous agents                          Representative agent

                                                                0.4


               0.5                                              0.2


                                                                  0
                 0
                             10      20      30      40                    10       20        30     40
                          Horizon h (in quarters)                     Horizon h (in quarters)
                            I shock            C shock         G shock         Mon. policy shock
                         W markup shock       TFP shock     P markup shock


Note. This figure decomposes Covt-1 (Yt+h , Ct+h ) into contributions of the seven shocks in the two models. Figure
normalized by sd(Yt ) · sd(Ct ).




                                                          39
                                       Figure 14: Impulse response to a 1-standard deviation investment shock


                                      Output                               Consumption                                  Investment
                         3
                                                                                                                                          HA
                                                                                                           1
                                                             1.5                                                                          RA
Percent of s.s. output




                         2
                                                                                                          0.5
                                                              1
                         1
                                                                                                           0
                                                             0.5
                         0
                                                                                                        -0.5
                                                              0
                             0   5       10    15                  0   5        10       15                     0   5       10       15
                                     Quarter                                Quarter                                     Quarter



Note. Impulse responses are to a one-time negative shock to risk premia                   I
                                                                                          t,   using the estimated standard deviation and
persistence.


versions of the RA model that already attribute a large share of output fluctuations to investment
shocks (see e.g. Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti 2010). Typically, even these models do not
find much role for investment shocks in moving consumption, at least without long lags. Pre-
sumably, this would be different in a heterogeneous-agent version of these models, for the same
reason as here.


7                            Conclusion
Our paper brings the current vintage of heterogeneous-agent New Keynesian models in line with
the often sluggish behavior of macroeconomic aggregates. We do this by introducing sticky ex-
pectations and showing that the combination of heterogeneity and informational rigidity can be
implemented very efficiently. Our model implies a very different view of the transmission mech-
anism of monetary policy and of the sources of business cycles--one in which investment plays a
central role.




                                                                           40
References
Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Lindé, "Firm-Specific
  Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle," Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2011,
  14 (2), 225­247.

Alvarez, Fernando, Luigi Guiso, and Francesco Lippi, "Durable Consumption and Asset Man-
  agement with Transaction and Observation Costs," American Economic Review, May 2012, 102
  (5), 2272­2300.

Alves, Felipe, Greg Kaplan, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante, "A Further Look at the
  Propagation of Monetary Policy Shocks in HANK," Manuscript, 2019.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Zhen Huo, "Myopia and Anchoring," Working Paper 24545, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, April 2018.

Auclert, Adrien, "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel," American Economic Review,
  June 2019, 109 (6), 2333­2367.

   and Matthew Rognlie, "A Note on Multipliers in NK Models with GHH Preferences,"
  Manuscript, August 2017.

  and    , "Inequality and Aggregate Demand," Working Paper 24280, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, February 2018.

  , Bence Bardóczy, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub, "Using the Sequence-Space Jacobian
  to Solve and Estimate Heterogeneous-Agent Models," Working Paper 26123, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, July 2019.

  , Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub, "The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross," Working Paper
  25020, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2018.

Barro, Robert J. and Robert G. King, "Time-Separable Preferences and Intertemporal-Substitution
  Models of Business Cycles," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1984, 99 (4), 817­839.

Bayer, Christian, Benjamin Born, and Ralph Luetticke, "Shocks and Frictions in US Business
  Cycles with Heterogeneous Agents," Manuscript, September 2019.

  , Ralph Luetticke, Lien Pham-Dao, and Volker Tjaden, "Precautionary Savings, Illiquid Assets,
  and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to Household Income Risk," Econometrica, 2019, 87
  (1), 255­290.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Kenneth N. Kuttner, "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Fed-
  eral Reserve Policy?," Journal of Finance, June 2005, 60 (3), 1221­1257.



                                                 41
Bianchi, Francesco and Leonardo Melosi, "Escaping the Great Recession," American Economic
  Review, April 2017, 107 (4), 1030­1058.

Bilbiie, Florin O., "Limited Asset Markets Participation, Monetary Policy and (inverted) Aggre-
  gate Demand Logic," Journal of Economic Theory, May 2008, 140 (1), 162­196.

  , "Monetary Policy and Heterogeneity: An Analytical Framework," Manuscript, August 2019.

  , Diego Känzig, and Paolo Surico, "Capital, Income Inequality, and Consumption: the Missing
  Link," November 2019.

Boppart, Timo, Per Krusell, and Kurt Mitman, "Exploiting MIT Shocks in Heterogeneous-Agent
  Economies: The Impulse Response as a Numerical Derivative," Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control, April 2018, 89, 68­92.

Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John Sabel-
  haus, and Richard A. Windle, "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2010 to 2013: Evidence
  from the Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 2014, 100 (4).

Carroll, Christopher, Edmund Crawley, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N White,
  "Sticky Expectations and Consumption Dynamics," Manuscript, July 2018.

Challe, Edouard, Julien Matheron, Xavier Ragot, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez, "Precautionary
  Saving and Aggregate Demand," Quantitative Economics, July 2017, 8 (2), 435­478.

Chang, Minsu, Xiaohong Chen, and Frank Schorfheide, "Heterogeneity and Aggregate Fluctu-
  ations," Manuscript, October 2018.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Plamen T. Nenov, and Alp Simsek, "Stock Market Wealth and the
  Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Approach," Working Paper 25959, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, June 2019.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, "Nominal Rigidities and the
  Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political Economy, February 2005, 113
  (1), 1­45.

  , Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno, "Risk Shocks," American Economic Review, January
  2014, 104 (1), 27­65.

Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, and Paolo Surico, "Monetary Policy when Households have
  Debt: New Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism," The Review of Economic Studies, 2019,
  forthcoming.

Coenen, Günter, Christopher J Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael Kumhof,
  René Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper Lindé, Annabelle Mourougane, Dirk Muir, Susanna


                                               42
  Mursula, Carlos de Resende, John Roberts, Werner Roeger, Stephen Snudden, Mathias Tra-
  bandt, and Jan in't Veld, "Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2012, 3 (4), 22­68.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, "What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Informa-
  tion Rigidities?," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (1), 116­159.

      and   , "Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation Process: A Simple Framework
  and New Facts," American Economic Review, August 2015, 105 (8), 2644­2678.

  ,     , and Saten Kumar, "How Do Firms Form Their Expectations? New Survey Evidence,"
  American Economic Review, September 2018, 108 (9), 2671­2713.

  ,     , Lorenz Kueng, and John Silvia, "Innocent Bystanders? Monetary Policy and Inequality,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, June 2017, 88, 70­89.

Davig, Troy and Eric M. Leeper, "Monetary­Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal Stimulus," Eu-
  ropean Economic Review, February 2011, 55 (2), 211­227.

di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Kaveh Majlesi, "Stock Market Returns and Consump-
  tion," Working Paper 24262, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2018.

Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin, "Optimal Monetary Policy
  with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts," Journal of Monetary Economics, October 2000, 46 (2),
  281­313.

Fagereng, Andreas, Martin B. Holm, and Gisle J. Natvik, "MPC Heterogeneity and Household
  Balance Sheets," Manuscript, October 2018.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
  Markets," American Economic Review, November 2019, 109 (11), 3887­3928.

Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan Rubio-
  Ramírez, "Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity," American Economic Review, Novem-
  ber 2015, 105 (11), 3352­84.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., "Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for Monetary-Policy
  Models," American Economic Review, June 2000, 90 (3), 367­390.

Furlanetto, Francesco and Martin Seneca, "Investment Shocks and Consumption," European Eco-
  nomic Review, 2014, 66, 111­126.

Gabaix, Xavier, "A Behavioral New Keynesian Model," Mimeo, May 2016.

      and David Laibson, "The 6D Bias and the Equity-Premium Puzzle," NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual, January 2001, 16, 257­312.

                                                  43
García-Schmidt, Mariana and Michael Woodford, "Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Para-
  dox of Perfect-Foresight Analysis," American Economic Review, January 2019, 109 (1), 86­120.

Gornemann, Nils, Keith Kuester, and Makoto Nakajima, "Doves for the Rich, Hawks for the
  Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy," Manuscript, April 2016.

Greenwald, Daniel L, "Firm Debt Covenants and the Macroeconomy: The Interest Coverage
  Channel," Manuscript, July 2019.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson, "Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words?
  The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements," International Journal
  of Central Banking, 2005.

Hagedorn, Marcus, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman, "The Fiscal Multiplier," Working Paper
  25571, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2019.

  ,     , and   , "Monetary Policy in Incomplete Markets Models: Theory and Evidence," Work in
  progress, 2019.

Havranek, Tomas, Marek Rusnak, and Anna Sokolova, "Habit Formation in Consumption: A
  Meta-Analysis," European Economic Review, June 2017, 95, 142­167.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Optimal Tax Progressivity:
  An Analytical Framework," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1693­1754.

Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, "Household Expenditure and
  the Income Tax Rebates of 2001," American Economic Review, December 2006, 96 (5), 1589­1610.

Jordà, Òscar, "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections," The American
  Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 161­182.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, "Investment Shocks and
  Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, March 2010, 57 (2), 132­145.

  ,     , and   , "Investment Shocks and the Relative Price of Investment," Review of Economic Dy-
  namics, 2011.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante, "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stim-
  ulus Payments," Econometrica, July 2014, 82 (4), 1199­1239.

      and   , "Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Shocks," Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, August 2018, 32 (3), 167­194.

  , Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Monetary Policy According to HANK," American
  Economic Review, March 2018, 108 (3), 697­743.

Kekre, Rohan and Moritz Lenel, "Monetary Policy, Redistribution, and Risk Premia," 2019.

                                                  44
Kimball, Miles S., "The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model," Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking, November 1995, 27 (4), 1241­1277.

Klenow, Peter J. and Jonathan L. Willis, "Real Rigidities and Nominal Price Changes," Economica,
  July 2016, 83 (331), 443­472.

Leeper, Eric M., "Equilibria Under `Active' and `Passive' Monetary and Fiscal Policies," Journal of
  Monetary Economics, February 1991, 27 (1), 129­147.

  ckowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt, "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention,"
Ma´
  American Economic Review, June 2009, 99 (3), 769­803.

  and     , "Business Cycle Dynamics under Rational Inattention," The Review of Economic Studies,
  October 2015, 82 (4), 1502­1532.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis, "Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
  Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2002, 117
  (4), 1295­1328.

  and     , "Sticky Information in General Equilibrium," Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion, May 2007, 5 (2-3), 603­613.

McKay, Alisdair and Ricardo Reis, "The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle,"
  Econometrica, January 2016, 84 (1), 141­194.

  , Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, "The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited," American
  Economic Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 3133­3158.

Misra, Kanishka and Paolo Surico, "Consumption, Income Changes, and Heterogeneity: Evi-
  dence from Two Fiscal Stimulus Programs," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October
  2014, 6 (4), 84­106.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, "High Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
  Neutrality," Manuscript, Columbia University, December 2013.

Negro, Marco Del, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters, "On the Fit of New
  Keynesian Models," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, April 2007, 25 (2), 123­143.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, "A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity
  and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica, May 1987, 55 (3), 703­708.

Nuño, Galo and Carlos Thomas, "Optimal Monetary Policy with Heterogeneous Agents,"
  Manuscript, December 2019.

Ottonello, Pablo and Thomas Winberry, "Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment Channel
  of Monetary Policy," Working Paper 24221, National Bureau of Economic Research, January
  2018.

                                                 45
Plagborg-Møller, Mikkel and Laura Liu, "Full-Information Estimation of Heterogeneous Agent
  Models Using Macro and Micro Data," Manuscript, June 2019.

Ramey, Valerie A., "Chapter 2 - Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation," in John B. Taylor
  and Harald Uhlig, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, Elsevier, January 2016, pp. 71­162.

Reiter, Michael, "Solving Heterogeneous-Agent Models by Projection and Perturbation," Journal
  of Economic Dynamics and Control, March 2009, 33 (3), 649­665.

Rognlie, Matthew, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek, "Investment Hangover and the Great Re-
  cession," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2018, 10 (2), 113­53.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
  Implications," American Economic Review, September 2004, 94 (4), 1055­1084.

Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford, "An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for
  the Evaluation of Monetary Policy," NBER, January 1997, pp. 297­361.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, "Closing Small Open Economy Models," Journal of
  International Economics, October 2003, 61 (1), 163­185.

   and    , "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model,"
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, January 2005, 20, 383­425.

Sims, Christopher A., "Implications of Rational Inattention," Journal of Monetary Economics, April
  2003, 50 (3), 665­690.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
  Approach," American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 586­606.

Werning, Iván, "Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand," Working Paper 21448, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, August 2015.

Wong, Arlene, "Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption and Population Aging,"
  Manuscript, January 2018.

Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton Uni-
  versity Press, August 2003.

Zorn, Peter, "Investment under Rational Inattention: Evidence from US Sectoral Data," February
  2018.




                                                 46
         Online Appendix for "Micro Jumps, Macro Humps:
                       Monetary Policy and Business Cycles
                             in an Estimated HANK Model"

A     Investment in a canonical HANK model
In this section, we write down a canonical HANK model with investment.43 We then show that,
in such a model, investment acts a strong amplifier of monetary policy shocks. This confirms that
our findings regarding the role of investment are due to the presence of heterogenous agents with
high average MPCs, rather than some other feature of our model in the main text.
    The model here is a sticky-wage, flexible-price HANK model with capital adjustment costs,
as in Auclert and Rognlie (2018) and Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2018). In Auclert and Rognlie
(2017), we explain why this is a more natural starting point for a HANK model than the opposite
assumption of flexible wages and sticky prices.44 The model in the main text adds features that
are necessary to obtain a good micro and macro fit: household inattention, sticky prices, govern-
ment spending and debt, and indexation of both prices and wages; and it replaces capital with
investment adjustment costs. But the core complementarity between investment and MPCs that
we highlight here is robust to the addition of these additional features.


A.1    Model setup

Individual-level productivity states s follow a Markov process with transition matrix . Unions
make all households work an equal number of hours Nt . There is no taxation, so take-home pay
for a household in state s at time t is wt Nt e (s), where e (s) is idiosyncratic productivity. House-
holds can trade in one asset, a liquid deposit issued by financial intermediaries. The household
problem is therefore

                               Vt ( , s)     =      max u (c) + Et Vt+1            ,s
                                                     c, a

                                           s.t.     c+      = 1 + rt       + wt Nt e (s)
                                                       0

Nominal wages are set by unions, subject to Calvo wage rigidity. The optimization problem of
unions implies a standard Phillips curve for wages45 , which can be written to first order (see
  43 The model and main results in this appendix previously appeared in a June 2018 SED presentation, "Forward Guid-

ance is More Powerful Than You Think," where we pointed out that the MPC-investment interaction, in the absence
of other frictions like informational rigidities, could aggravate the forward guidance puzzle. Here we make the same
point about amplification for standard AR(1) monetary policy shocks.
  44 This also avoids the (counterfactual) very high countercyclicality of profits in a flexible-wage, sticky-price model.
  45 This is included only for completeness: given the exogenous monetary policy for the real interest rate r and the
                                                                                                                   t
lack of any other nominal rigidity, the slope of this Phillips curve is irrelevant for real equilibrium outcomes.


                                                            47
Auclert, Rognlie and Straub 2018) as

                       w                                 -1
                       t = w         Nt v ( Nt ) -                              w
                                                              u (cit ) di + Et [t +1 ]


   A financial intermediary issues liquid deposits to households and invests them in firm shares.
At the beginning of the period, the value of its outstanding deposits must be equal to the liquida-
tion value of firm shares, i.e.
                                      1 + r t L t - 1 = ( p t + Dt ) v t - 1

At the end of the period, the value of newly-purchased shares must be equal to the value of newly
issued deposits and reserves, i.e.
                                                    pt vt = Lt

We also allow the financial intermediary to invest in nominal reserves that pay a promised return
of it and are in zero net supply. The financial intermediary maximizes the expected return to de-
positors Et [rt+1 ]. The optimal portfolio choice of the financial intermediary results in the pricing
equations
                                     E t [ p t + 1 + Dt + 1 ]                 P
                   Et 1 + r t +1 =                            = (1 + i t ) Et t +1  1 + r t
                                                 pt                            Pt
where we have defined rt as the ex-ante real interest rate.
   A representative final goods firm produces with technology

                                                     1- 
                                              Yt = Kt Nt

Prices are flexible, and firms have no monopoly power, so the real wage wt and the rental rate of
capital are respectively equal to

                                                         -
                                       w t =  (1 -  ) K t Nt
                                         K       -1 1- 
                                        rt =   Kt  Nt

A capital firm owns the capital stock Kt and rents it to the representative final good producer. It
faces quadratic adjustment costs to capital. In period t, it enters the period with capital stock Kt ,
invests It to obtain a capital next period of Kt+1 = (1 - ) Kt + It , and pays the adjustment cost,
resulting in a dividend of
                                       K            K t +1 - K t 2
                                Dt = r t Kt - It -                 Kt
                                                   2     Kt
where  indexes the size of adjustment costs. The firm has a unit share outstanding, vt = 1.
   The capital firm chooses investment to maximize the sum of its dividend and its end-of period
                                            pt
share price, Dt + pt . Defining Qt =       K t +1   as the responsiveness of the share price to the capi-
tal chosen by the firm, simple algebra shows that, given the asset pricing equations above, this




                                                       48
optimization problem involves the standard equations from Q theory:

                                              It     1
                                                 -  = ( Q t - 1)                                               (26)
                                              Kt     

and
                                                                              2
                               1         K      It+1              It+1                K t +2
                      Qt =          Et r t +1 -        -                 -        +          Q t +1
                             1 + rt             K t +1   2        K t +1              K t +1

Finally, monetary policy sets the nominal interest rate it in order to achieve a target for the ex-ante
real interest rate rt .
    In an equilibrium of this model, households, unions, financial intermediaries, final goods firms
and capital firms optimize, and markets clear, so that:

                                                            2
                                            K t +1 - K t
                          Ct + It +                             Kt = Yt
                                      2          Kt
                                                                Lt = pt      (= Qt Kt+1 )

A.2    Investment as an amplifier of monetary policy

We now demonstrate that investment acts as a amplifier of monetary policy in this model. This
force is unique to the presence of heterogeneous agents (HA), in the sense that the amplification
we highlight is entirely absent with a representative agent (RA).
    To show this, we study the effects of an AR(1) monetary policy shock rt = r +                         t   under
                                                                                                      0
several different sets of assumptions. First, we compare the HA model described above to an
RA model that is identical except that the household sector is replaced by a representative agent
whose consumption is governed by the Euler equation:

                                          u (Ct ) =  (1 + rt ) u (Ct+1 )                                       (27)

Second, we compare a model with "no investment", where the capital adjustment cost in (26) is
infinite ( = ) and investment therefore cannot respond to a monetary shock, to a model where
it is finite ( = 0 ) and the investment response has empirically reasonable magnitude.


Calibration. As in the main text, we assume an elasticity of intertemporal substitution of  = 1
and target a steady-state r = 5%, for both the HA and RA models. We depart, however, by
choosing zero depreciation  = 0%. This makes our point especially stark, since then the HA and
RA output responses are exactly identical under the "no investment" case where capital adjust-
ment costs are infinite. (In subsection A.5, we show that this equivalence carries over numerically,
though not analytically, to the  = 5.3% case from the main text.)
    In the HA model, we use the same Markov process for e(s) as in the main text, but rescale
log e(s) so that the standard deviation of log income is the same as in the main text, despite the
absence of permanent type heterogeneity here. Also as in the main text, we target steady-state

                                                           49
liquidity holdings L such that the income-weighted average quarterly MPC matches the value in
figure 2, of 0.194. Since steady-state liquidity equals capital in our simplified model, this implies
                                           K                                             K
a very low capital-output ratio of     = .304 in annualized terms. We set  = (r + ) Y
                                           Y                                               for both
models, and calibrate the discount factor  H A for the HA households to be consistent with L. The
discount rate  RA for the RA households is, by necessity for a steady state, 1/(1 + r ).
    We calibrate the persistence of the monetary shock to be  = 0.9--close to the persistence
of the section 4 monetary shock via inertia in the Taylor rule--so that it lasts an average of 10
quarters. We calibrate the size 0 of the shock such that the date-0 consumption response in the
RA model is 1%. We calibrate the capital adjustment cost with investment  = 0 so that the ratio
of the investment to consumption response in the RA model is comparable to the ratio of the peak
empirical impulses in section 4.2, at about 2/3.46


Main result. Figure A.1 presents our main result. The left part of the graph shows the response
in the RA model, the right part shows the response in the HA model. The top row shows the
calibration with no investment ( = ), the bottom row the calibration with investment ( = 0 ).
In the RA model, turning on investment has no effect on the consumption response to a monetary
policy shock. This follows from the Euler equation in (27): in equilibrium, the path of consumption
is entirely dictated by monetary policy {rt }.
     Similarly, when investment is turned off, the addition of heterogeneous agents makes no dif-
ference to the impulse response to a monetary shock. This result is an instance of Werning (2015)'s
neutrality result under log utility, and we prove it formally in section A.4. Intuitively, the general
equilibrium effects of monetary policy shocks in this model affect asset prices and labor earnings
in proportion to output in every period. (Log utility is needed for the former and Cobb-Douglas
production for the latter.) Therefore, agents just scale their decisions, relative to the steady state,
     YtRA
by     RA ,
     Yss
              where YtRA is the representative-agent allocation at date t, and the representative-agent
allocation obtains in the aggregate.
     By contrast, when investment is turned on, the effects on consumption are more than double the
case without investment. The effects of investment are also a little larger than in the representative
agent model, reflecting the fact that output and hence the marginal product of capital is higher at
every point. This complementarity is the main result of this section: it is the simultaneous presence
of heterogeneous agents and investment that generates an amplification that is absent if only one
of the two is present. Since MPCs are much higher in the HA model, households consume out of
labor income from the investment boom, creating a large multiplier on the investment response to
monetary policy.
     Interestingly, this mechanism leads to continued amplification even after capital firms start
to draw down their investment: for instance, the consumption response at t = 10 in the HA-
investment model is more than double the others, despite the investment response being slightly
   46 We handle equilibrium selection by assuming that, in all models we consider, the economy returns to its initial

steady state in the long-run. This is sufficient to uniquely pin down equilibrium for these cases, and can be implemented
(for instance) by monetary policy reverting to a Taylor rule at some far-out date t.


                                                           50
                                      Figure A.1: Complementarity between investment and high MPCs


                                   RA, no investment: Benchmark NK                                 HA, no investment: Werning (2015)

                          2                                                         2
Percent of s.s. output




                         1.5                                                       1.5


                          1                                                         1


                         0.5                                                       0.5


                          0                                                         0

                               0      5           10          15          20             0                5       10          15       20

                                    RA, investment: Euler equation                                   HA, investment: Amplification

                          2                                                         2
Percent of s.s. output




                         1.5                                                       1.5


                          1                                                         1


                         0.5                                                       0.5


                          0                                                         0

                               0      5           10          15          20             0                5       10          15       20
                                              Quarter                                                         Quarter

                                                                     Consumption             Investment




                                                                           51
                                           Figure A.2: Investment flexibility and amplification


                                      Consumption at t = 0                                 Investment at t = 0
                      3                                                    3

                     2.5                                                  2.5

                      2                                                    2
    % of ss output




                     1.5                                                  1.5

                      1                                                    1

                     0.5                                                  0.5

                      0                                                    0
                           0    0.5          1         1.5       2              0    0.5         1          1.5       2
                               RA investment response at t = 0                      RA investment response at t = 0

                                                                     RA    HA




negative at that point. This is thanks to intertemporal demand spillovers, which result from the
high iMPCs in the HA model.


Varying investment flexibility and MPCs. To illustrate this interaction further, in figure A.2 we
vary the capital adjustment cost  and study the effect on the date-0 responses of consumption C0
and investment I0 . We quantify adjustment costs on the horizontal axis with the date-0 response
of investment I0 in the RA model (declining in ); the gray dashed line at 2/3 corresponds to our
main calibration. Although the consumption response in the RA model is unaffected by invest-
ment flexibility, in the HA model the pattern is monotonic: more flexible investment implies a
larger consumption response.
   In figure A.3, we vary the level of labor income risk between 50% to 150% of its value in the
HA model, while leaving all other aspects of the steady-state calibration, including total liquidity
L, unchanged. This matters for our mechanism through the effect on iMPCs (see Auclert, Rognlie
and Straub 2018), which here we summarize by plotting the average income-weighted MPC on
the horizontal axis, with the gray dashed line at .194 corresponding to our main calibration. In
the low-risk, low-MPC calibrations, amplification is small, since the household sector is closer
to a representative agent; in high-risk, high-MPC calibrations, amplification becomes much larger.
The high-MPC calibrations even have a slightly larger investment response, reflecting the elevated
marginal product of capital from high consumption demand.
   Together, figures A.2 and A.3 show the robustness of our mechanism: the interaction between
investment and MPCs leads to amplification, which becomes stronger when we raise either in-
vestment flexibility or MPCs.




                                                                     52
                                                        Figure A.3: MPCs and amplification


                                         Consumption at t = 0                                              Investment at t = 0

                       3.5
                                                                                      1

                        3
      % of ss output




                                                                                     0.9
                       2.5

                        2                                                            0.8


                       1.5
                                                                                     0.7
                        1
                             0.15      0.2       0.25       0.3          0.35              0.15      0.2          0.25           0.3   0.35
                               Mean income-weighted HA MPC (quarterly)                       Mean income-weighted HA MPC (quarterly)

                                                                                RA    HA




A.3               Understanding the mechanism: capital gains vs labor income

Thus far, we have emphasized transmission via labor income: when investment responds to mon-
etary policy, the higher output demand leads to increased labor income, which raises consumption
and output further via high MPCs.
   There is another potentially important channel, however, through which the investment sector
influences consumption: the return r0 on assets between dates -1 and 0. In this model, r0 =
( p0 + D0 )/ p-1 - 1, which includes the surprise revaluation effect on p0 = Q0 K0 from the monetary
shock. This effect shrinks when investment is made more flexible, since more capital investment
leads to lower future rental rates on capital, offsetting the increase in valuation from lower real
interest rates. A smaller return at date 0 makes households poorer, causing them to spend less.
     To what extent does this limit amplification in the HA model? In figure A.4 we follow Auclert
(2019) and Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018) and decompose the first-order household consump-
tion response into three sources, which together sum to the aggregate. First, there is the "direct"
effect of changing ex-ante real interest rates rt = rt+1 , which is unaffected by the general equilib-
rium investment response. Second, there is the "indirect" effect from higher labor income, which
is the channel we have emphasized so far. Third, there is another "indirect" effect, from unex-
pected capital gains resulting in a higher date-0 return r0 . We perform this decomposition both
for the no-investment model  =  and the model with investment  = 0 .
     The direct effect is the same in both models, but relatively muted. Instead, most of the increase
in consumption is a response to rising labor income in general equilibrium. This response is much,
much larger--by a factor of three--in the model with investment.
     As expected, although capital gains contribute positively to consumption in both models, they
play less of a role in the model with investment. Their influence is small enough in both cases,
however, that this difference is barely visible in figure A.4.


                                                                                53
                                            Figure A.4: Decomposing the consumption response


                                         No investment                                                            With investment

                      2                                total                                      2
                                                       direct
                                                       indirect: labor income
                     1.5                               indirect: cap gains                       1.5
% of ss output




                      1                                                                           1


                     0.5                                                                         0.5


                      0                                                                           0

                           0       5              10               15           20                     0     5              10            15       20
                                           Quarter                                                                   Quarter




                                  Figure A.5: Decomposition and capital gains by investment flexibility


                               Decomposing HA consumption at t = 0                                          Change in capital price at t = 0
                       3                                                                           1

                     2.5
                                                                                                 0.8

                       2
    % of ss output




                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                      % change




                                                       total
                     1.5                               direct
                                                       indirect: labor income                    0.4
                       1                               indirect: cap gains
                                                                                                 0.2
                     0.5

                       0                                                                           0
                           0      0.5         1              1.5          2                            0    0.5         1           1.5        2
                                 RA investment response at t = 0                                           RA investment response at t = 0




                                                                                 54
   Why are capital gains so unimportant in comparison to labor income? First, there is an impor-
tant distributional difference: capital gains are earned by asset-holders, and MPCs are much lower
for the asset-rich than for income-earners. For instance, in our calibration, the asset-weighted av-
erage quarterly MPC is 0.094, compared to the income-weighted quarterly MPC of 0.194 to which
we calibrate. Second, although the decline in rental rates and corresponding rise in real wages
causes redistribution from asset owners to income earners, the overall change in income is not
zero-sum: indeed, this redistribution is swamped by the rise in aggregate income, most of which
goes to labor.
   Figure A.5 provides additional detail. The left panel decomposes the date-0 consumption re-
sponse for the HA model, as a function of investment flexibility, that previously appeared in ag-
gregate terms in figure A.2. We see that as investment flexibility rises, the indirect labor income
effect steadily grows, while the indirect capital gains effect shrinks but with far smaller magnitude.
   The right panel shows the impulse to date-0 return r0 itself. The capital gains effect on con-
sumption at t = 0 equals this, times the asset-weighted average MPC of 0.094. Although the
change in r0 is in relative terms quite dramatic--from a 1.0% to 0.6% increase as we go from the
no-investment calibration to our main calibration--this becomes insignificant when multiplied by
0.094 to obtain the effect in the left panel.


Size and liquidity of the capital stock. Since all capital is liquid in this simple model, matching
the average MPC from the main text implied a very low capital-output ratio, .304 in annual terms.
The calibration in the main text instead has a value that is consistent with the macro data, 2.23.
   Importantly, however, this larger capital stock in the main text is entirely held within the illiq-
uid account. Although the larger stock suggests a larger role for capital gains, the illiquidity
sharply limits this role: households receive the annuity value of their illiquid accounts into their
liquid accounts as a flow, and this flow does not immediately change when the illiquid account
gains value. As a result--as figure 5 makes clear--investment makes a strong positive contribu-
tion to output, despite its negative effect on the value of the illiquid account.
   Our finding of a small contribution from capital gains is likely to be very robust to our cali-
bration choice. If more capital is held in liquid accounts, then capital-holders will have low liquid
MPCs. If, instead, more capital is held in illiquid accounts, capital prices' influence on consump-
tion will be limited, since high liquid MPCs will then no longer be directly relevant. Furthermore,
holding fixed the magnitude of the investment response, the effect of investment on total capital
gains does not grow with the capital stock: if the stock is larger, the price moves proportionately
less. Hence, even if a much larger capital stock was held in equally high-MPC liquid accounts,
a realistic investment response would not exert any more downward pressure on consumption
through the capital gains channel than in figure A.4.


Comparison to other papers. In ongoing and parallel work, Alves, Kaplan, Moll and Violante
(2019) argue the opposite: that capital adjustment costs do not matter for aggregate consumption,


                                                  55
since the capital gains and labor income effects offset. However, in their framework, another
friction shapes capital accumulation: an illiquid account that cannot hold bonds, only capital and
monopolists' equity. The properties of this friction may play an important role in their contrasting
result.47
    Bilbiie, Känzig and Surico (2019) argue that investment plays an important role in amplifica-
tion primarily in conjunction with unequal cyclical incidence of labor income. By contrast, in both
the main text and this section, we intentionally abstract away from unequal incidence--which is
known in the literature to matter for amplification--to show that a combination of high MPCs and
investment, on its own, is enough to deliver major amplification.


A.4    Neutrality proof with inelastic investment ( = )

Here we prove a neutrality result for the model with a fixed capital stock and no investment,
explaining why the top left and right panels of figure underlying figure A.1 are identical. This is
an instance of Werning (2015)'s finding for an EIS of 1.
    First we need a lemma.

Lemma 1. In perfect foresight equilibria of the RA model with  = 1 and no investment ( =  and
                                  RA
 = 0), Dt = Yt and pt =               Y.
                                1-  RA t

Proof. Since  = , capital is always at its steady-state level K ss and investment is always 0, so
                           Yt ss
the dividend at t is Dt =  K ss K = Yt , as desired. The asset price is

                                                    1
                                           pt =          (Yt+1 + pt+1 )
                                                  1 + rt

Iterating forward, we can write48

                                                       s -1
                                                                     1
                                         pt =     1 + rt+u                   Yt+s                                 (28)
                                                s =1   u =0


Note that iterating forward the Euler equation with  = 1, we also have

                                                              s -1
                                                                         1
                                      Ct = (  RA )-s           1 + rt+u        Ct+s
                                                              u =0

                                                                                                           RA
which, using Yt = Ct , we can substitute into (28) to get pt = s =1 ( 
                                                                       RA )-s Y =
                                                                               t                               Y,
                                                                                                         1-  RA t
                                                                                                                    as
desired.
  47 They  also perform a different experiment: they compare the model with no adjustment costs to the model with
adjustment costs, whereas we compare the model with adjustment costs to the model with infinite adjustment costs
(and more generally among different levels of the adjustment cost). We do not perform the first comparison, since the
standard New Keynesian model explodes without adjustment costs in response to a real interest rate shock.
  48 This assumes that monetary policy {r } does not permanently deviate so far from r ss > 0 that the product does not
                                          t
converge to zero as s  .



                                                              56
Proposition 1. Given any monetary policy {rt }, a perfect foresight equilibrium allocation {Yt , Ct , Nt , Dt , wt , pt }
in the representative-agent model with  = 1 and no investment ( =  and  = 0) is also an equilibrium
allocation in the heterogeneous-agent model with  = 1 and no investment.
    In particular, monetary policy shocks will have the same effects on output.

Proof. Consider the HA model. Starting from the ergodic steady-state distribution at t = 0, and
at first assuming real interest rates remain at r ss , let css
                                                            t (                                        -1 , s
                                                                                                                t)    and           ss (
                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                         -1 , s )         denote the date-t
policies of agents as a function of liquidity at                                           and the history
                                                                     = (s0 , . . . , st ) of idiosyncratic
                                                                                      -1                                   st
shocks from date 0 to date t. (This sequential form of the problem will be more convenient for the
proof.)
   Optimal behavior is characterized for all t by

                                                                  -1                                                                                       -1
                                   css
                                    t           -1 , s
                                                         t
                                                                             (1 + r ss ) Et          css
                                                                                                      t +1
                                                                                                                     ss
                                                                                                                     t      -1 , s
                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                           , s t +1             |st                 (29)

                                                                                                              t -1
             css
              t       -1 , s
                               t
                                    +       ss
                                            t          -1 , s
                                                                  t
                                                                           = (1 + r ss )   ss
                                                                                           t -1      -1 , s               + wss N ss e (st )                                        (30)
                                            ss                    t
                                            t          -1 , s               0                                                                                                       (31)

where the Euler equation and the borrowing constraint hold with complementary slackness.
    Now take an arbitrary monetary policy path {rt } and corresponding RA equilibrium sequences
{Yt , Ct , Nt , Dt , wt , pt }, and consider optimal household behavior subject to these equilibrium se-
quences . Denote policies by ct ( -1 , st ) and t ( -1 , st ). Optimal behavior is characterized by

                                                                      -1                                                                           -1
                                                              t                                                                          t +1
                                         ct        -1 , s                      1 + r t +1 Et                  c t +1            -1 , s                    |st                       (32)

                                     t                                 t                                          t -1
                     ct    -1 , s         +        t         -1 , s          =    1 + rt      t -1       -1 , s              + wt Nt e (st )                                        (33)
                                                                       t
                                                   t         -1 , s           0                                                                                                     (34)

We now guess and verify that if css
                                 t (
                                                                                    t        ss      t
                                                                             -1 , s ) and t ( -1 , s ) satisfy (29)-(31),                             then ct (        =  -1 , s
                                                                                                                                                                                   t)
Yt ss           t                                            Yt ss
Y ss ct ( -1 , s )   and       t ( -1
                                =           , st )           Y ss t (
                                                                                  t
                                                                            -1 , s ) satisfy (32)-(34). We will do so by                              explicitly showing
the two sets of equations are equivalent.
    This is trivially true for (34) and (31). For (32), plug in the candidate policy to obtain

                          -1                                                                           -1
              Ct                                             -1                             Ct+1                                                   t +1
                                                                                                                                                                -
                               css
                                t           -1 , s
                                                   t
                                                                        1 + r t +1                            Et           css
                                                                                                                            t +1          -1 , s                    |st
              C ss                                                                          C ss

                                                    -1                1
Here, dividing both sides by the RA Euler equation Ct  = (1 + rt )Ct-
                                                                    +1 , applying perfect fore-
sight rt = rt+1 , and dividing by C ss gives us (29).
    Similarly, for (33), plug in the candidate policy to obtain for the t > 0 case

               Yt ss                        t          Yt         ss        t                     Yt      ss                       t -1
                   c               -1 , s        +                t ( -1 , s )    = 1 + rt                                -1 , s            + wt Nt e (st )
               Y ss t                                  Y ss                                       Y ss    t -1




                                                                                      57
                                                         Yt ss ss                                                        Yt
Here, noting that wt Nt = (1 - )Yt =                     Y ss w N ,        we see that the equation is just (30) with    Y ss
multiplying every term.
    For t = 0, we have instead

                       Y0 ss              t       Y0     ss
                           c     -1 , s       +          0 ( -1 , s )   = 1 + r0         -1   + w0 N0 e (st )
                       Y ss 0                     Y ss
                                                                             Y0
which seems problematic since there is no longer a                           Y ss   multiplying the first term on the right.
However, applying lemma 1,

                                                    RA
                            p0 + D0                     Y + Y0
                                                  1-  RA 0                               Y0                Y0
                   1 + r0 =         =                                      = (  RA )-1        = (1 + r ss ) ss
                               pss                      RA
                                                            Y ss                         Y ss              Y
                                                     1-  RA

                                                                  Y0                              Yt ss          t)
                                                                                                                  t
so we again have equation (30) multiplied by                      Y ss .   We conclude that ct (
                                                                                               = Y      -1 , s
                                                                                                   ss c t ( -1 , s )
                          Yt ss
and t ( -1 , st ) = Y                     t
                           ss t ( -1 , s ) are an optimal plan for each household faced with RA equilibrium

sequences {Yt , Ct , Nt , Dt , wt , pt , rt }.
                                                                                     Yt
    Since each household's consumption is scaled up by the same factor Y              ss , aggregate consump-

tion is also scaled up by that factor. Hence consumption Ct = Yt is the same as its RA equi-
librium value, and goods market clearing holds. Asset market clearing follows from Walras'
law, and all other equilibrium conditions are the same as in the RA model. We conclude that
{Yt , Ct , Nt , Dt , wt , pt , rt } is also an equilibrium for the HA model.

A.5    Robustness to positive depreciation

In figure A.6, we recalculate figure A.1 in a model that is calibrated in exactly the same way, except
that depreciation is set at its value  = .054 (annualized) from the main text, rather than at zero.
The "no investment" case still features  = , in which case Kt = K ss and It = K ss in all periods.
    Although the analytical proof of proposition 1 no longer goes through when  > 0, we see
numerically in the top panel of figure A.6 that the RA and HA models still deliver nearly identical
results when  = . Similarly, in the bottom right panel, the interaction of the HA model with
positive investment delivers substantial amplification. This is slightly smaller than in figure A.1
because a shock to rt has less proportional effect on the user cost rt + , and therefore the incentive
to invest, when  is positive. (Although  is recalibrated to match the same investment response at
t = 0 in the RA model, the cumulative investment response adding subsequent periods is smaller.)




                                                                  58
               Figure A.6: Complementarity between investment and high MPCs: positive depreciation  > 0


                                   RA, no investment: Benchmark NK                                 HA, no investment: Werning (2015)

                          2                                                         2
Percent of s.s. output




                         1.5                                                       1.5


                          1                                                         1


                         0.5                                                       0.5


                          0                                                         0

                               0      5           10          15          20             0                5       10          15       20

                                    RA, investment: Euler equation                                   HA, investment: Amplification

                          2                                                         2
Percent of s.s. output




                         1.5                                                       1.5


                          1                                                         1


                         0.5                                                       0.5


                          0                                                         0

                               0      5           10          15          20             0                5       10          15       20
                                              Quarter                                                         Quarter

                                                                     Consumption             Investment




                                                                           59
B     Appendix to section 2
B.1    RA model with additive internal habits

In partial equilibrium, given a process for income and interest rates {yt , rt } and initial assets a-1 ,
a representative agent with external additive habit formation solves the following problem:

                                    max E         t u ( c t -  c t -1 )
                                            c t + a t = y t + (1 + r t -1 ) a t -1

where 0   < 1. The associated Euler equation is:

    u (ct - ct-1 ) - Et u (ct+1 - ct ) =  (1 + rt ) Et u (ct+1 - ct ) - u (ct+2 - ct+1 )
                                                                                        (35)


Linearized solution.       Linearizing (35) around a steady state with constant consumption c and
 -1   = (1 + r ), we obtain

                                                                           1     drt
- dct-1 + 1 +  + 2 dct - 1 +  + 2 Et [dct+1 ] + Et [dct+2 ] = - (1 - ) (1 - ) c
                                                                                1+r
                                                                             (36)
where 1
        = - uu ( c)c
               (c)
                     is the inverse curvature of u. We can rewrite (36) as

                                      Et [ P ( L) (1 - L) dct ] = - drt                             (37)

             1                  c
where            (1 - ) (1 - ) 1+ r , and

                                                                           1
                                                   b ( X - ) X -           
                                    P (X) 
                                                               X2

has two roots, one greater and one smaller than 1. The linear solution to the habits problem
therefore jointly solves the Euler equation and the linearized version of the budget constraint,


                        Et [dct+1 - dct ] =  (dct - dct-1 ) +  Et          ( )k drt+k               (38)
                                                                          k 0


                                                   1
                                    dct = dyt +      dat-1 - dat + adrt-1                           (39)
                                                   

Intertemporal marginal propensities to consume. If Et [drt ] = 0 for all t, then we can solve (38)
to obtain
                                                        1 -  t +1
                                          E0 [dct ] =             dc0                               (40)
                                                          1-



                                                        60
Integrating (39) and plugging in (40) , we then find

                                          
                                 1
                                1-        t         1 -  t +1       dc0 = dy0
                                         t =0


Hence, the expected path of consumption after an initial increase in income is:

                                E0 [dct ]                 1 -  t +1
                                          = (1 - ) (1 - )                                                 (41)
                                 dy0                        1-

which is plotted on the red line of figure 2, for an illustrative calibration with  = 0.95 and  = 0.6.
The initial MPC is depressed relative to (1 - )--that of the representative-agent model--by a
factor (1 - ), reflecting the desire of the agent with additive habits to limit the initial increase
in his habit stock.


B.2   HA model with additive internal habits

The heterogeneous-agent habit problem can be formulated as follows:

                      V ( , c- , s) = max u (c - c- ) + E V                        , c, s | s
                                          c,
                                         c+        = (1 + r ) + ye (s)
                                               0

The first-order conditions for c and    are

                                = u (c - c- ) + E Vc                  , c, s | s                          (42)

                                        + µ = E V               , c, s | s                                (43)

where µ  0 is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint                      0. Moreover, the envelope condi-
tions for and c- imply
                                        V ( , c - , s ) =  (1 + r )                                       (44)

                                   Vc- ( , c- , s) = -u (c - c- )                                         (45)

We calibrate the model to  = 0.6, r = 0.05, u = log, and the same annual  = 0.8422 as that found
in calibrating our no-habit HA model to match a first-year MPC of 0.55. We solve the model using
standard methods, on a grid for ( , c- ).




                                                      61
C      Appendix to section 3
C.1     Euler equation for inattentive households

The optimal policy functions c g,t ( , a, a-k , s, k ) and       g,t (    , a, a-k , s, k ) for the household problem
(5), when the household is not constrained at the liquid asset lower bound                                    g,t (   , a, a-k , s, k )  0,
satisfy the intertemporal Euler equation

  u (c g,t ( , a, a-k , s, k )) =  g Et-k (1 + rt+1 )  u (c g,t+1 (      g,t (    , a, a - k , s, k ), a , a - k , s , k + 1)

                                                 +(1 -  )u (c g,t+1 (            g,t (   , a, a-k , s, k ), a , a , s , 0)) |s        (46)

which follows immediately from combining the first-order condition and envelope condition for
(5). When the household is constrained, (46) is an inequality .


C.2     Extended financial intermediary problem and monetary policy implementation

Here we extend the model of the financial intermediary in section 3.2 to allow it to allow nominal
reserves Mt at the central bank, that pay a pre-determined interest rate of it . Since all assets are
real, the flow-of-funds constraint (7) in date-t nominal units is modified to

       a
(1 + r t ) Pt At-1 + 1 + rt Pt Lt-1 = (1 + qt ) Pt Bt-1 +                 p jt + D jt Pt v jt-1 dj -  Pt Lt-1 + (1 + it-1 ) Mt-1
                                                                                                                                      (47)
and portfolio-investment constraint (8) now reads

                                   Pt   p jt v jt dj + Pt qt Bt + Mt = Pt At + Pt Lt                                                  (48)

The financial intermediary's problem is now to choose v jt , Bt , Lt and Mt so as to maximize the
                                             a
expected return on illiquid liabilities, Et rt +1 , subject to (48) and (47). Since (47) implies that

                                                                                                      Mt
               a
                             (1 + qt+1 ) Bt +     p jt+1 + D jt+1 v jt dj + (1 + it )                Pt+1   - 1 + r t +1 +  L t
    Et [ 1 + r t +1 ] = Et                                                               Mt
                                                        p jt v jt dj + qt Bt +           Pt   - Lt

the first order conditions lead to equalization of all expected returns

                      1 +  q t +1      p jt+1 + D jt+1                  Pt
                Et                = Et                 = (1 + i t ) Et      = 1 + r t +1 + 
                         qt                   p jt                     Pt+1

which are equations (9) and (10) in the main text, where we also define these to all be equal to the
ex-ante real interest rate 1 + rt .
     The central bank implements monetary policy by setting the nominal interest rate on reserves
it , using open-market operations. We consider the limit where it does so using a net supply of
reserves that is at all times equal to Mt = 0.


                                                         62
C.3   Intermediate goods firm price-setting

We first derive final demand. Individual consumers minimize                              Pjt Yjt dj subject to (11), which
results in the first order condition
                                                                                    p
                                                                            Yjt     p
                                       Pjt            Yjt         1-        Yt
                                           = Gp               =
                                       Pt             Yt                    p

hence, intermediate goods firms face the static demand curve

                                                 Yjt              Pjt
                                                     = Yp
                                                 Yt               Pt

where we have defined Y p as
                                                                                p
                                           Y p ( x )  1 - p log x               p



Define the static profit function of an intermediate goods firm with current price p, when the price
index is P, real marginal costs are s and aggregate demand is Y as

                                                             p        p
                                    D ( p; P, Y , s )          - s Yp   Y
                                                             P        P

and note that the derivative of D with respect to own price p is

                                D          1       s   1                p               p
                                  =          +       -            p               Yp      Y                          (49)
                                p          P       p P                  P               P

where   p   ( x ) is the elasticity of demand,

                                                   Y p (x) x        p
                                      p   (x)  -             =                                                       (50)
                                                    Y p (x)    1 - p log x

We next work out the optimal reset price for a firm. Upon receiving an opportunity to reset its
price, a firm chooses Pt to maximize the sum of its dividend and its stock price,

                                           D ( Pt ; Pt , Yt , st ) + pt ( Pt )

where by the no-arbitrage condition in (9) and the price indexation formula (12), we have

                              1                         Pt                                           Pt
             pt ( Pt ) =           Et  p     D Pt           ; Pt+1 , Yt+1 , st+1        + pt+1 Pt
                            1 + rt                     Pt-1                                         Pt-1

                                      + 1 -  p max  ( D ( p; Pt+1 , Yt+1 , st+1 ) + pt+1 ( p))
                                                        p




                                                            63
                          + k -1
Hence, defining Mt,t+k  t
                        s=t
                                                       1
                                                      1+r s ,   Pt also solves

                                                                                              Pt+k-1
                          Pt = arg max Et
                                             x
                                                               k
                                                               p Mt , t + k D            x
                                                                                               Pt-1
                                                                                                     ; Pt+k , Yt+k , st+k
                                                             k 0


Taking the first-order condition and using (49), we find that Pt solves

                                                         Pt Pt+k-1                   Pt Pt+k-1                                Pt Pt+k-1                     Pt Pt+k-1
    Et          k
                p · Mt,t+k · Yt+k · Y p
                                                        Pt-1 Pt+k                   Pt-1 Pt+k
                                                                                               +                     p
                                                                                                                             Pt-1 Pt+k
                                                                                                                                              st+k -
                                                                                                                                                           Pt-1 Pt+k
          k 0

                                                           Pt Pt+k-1
    = Et             k
                     p · Mt,t+k · Yt+k · f p                         ,s
                                                          Pt-1 Pt+k t+k
                                                                                                                                                                        (51)
               k 0
    =0

where we have defined the function f p ( x, s) as

                                                 f p ( x, s)  Y p ( x ) x +                   p   ( x ) (s - x )

To derive a first-order approximation to the solution to (51), observe that

        fp
               = Y p (x) x +             p   ( x ) (s - x ) + Y p ( x ) 1 +                           p   ( x ) (s - x ) -         p   (x)
       x
                                     p   (x)                                                                             p (x) x       s-x
               = Y p (x) -                   x+                 p   ( x ) (s - x ) + 1 +                   p   (x)                           -   p   (x)
                                         x                                                                                p (x)         x
                                                   1     p                                            s-x
               = Y p (x)       p   (x)                 +   -1                       p   (x)                      -2
                                                 p (x)   p                                             x

                                                                          p (x)x         p
where we have made use of the fact that                                   p (x)
                                                                                   =     p
                                                                                              p       ( x ) from (50). Hence, around the steady
                                                 p -1
state where x ss = 1 and sss =                    p
                                                        , we have

                 f p ss ss                               1          p                                       1 - p
                    (x , s ) = 1 ·            p   ·           -           +1-2            =           p                      -1    = 1 - p -     p
                x                                         p           p                                          p


and similarly,
                                                   f p ss ss
                                                      ( x , s ) = Y p ( x ss ) ( x ss ) =                             p
                                                  s
                                                            ss Y ss =                                                               1 k ss
Totally differentiating (51) around the steady state where Mt ,t + k t + k                                                         1+r Y ,   we next find

                                                                                                  k
                                                                                    p                           f p ss ss                 Pt Pt+k-1
  Et           k                              ss ss
               p d ( Mt,t+k · Yt+k ) · f p ( x , s ) +                             1+r
                                                                                                      · Y ss
                                                                                                               x
                                                                                                                   (x , s ) d
                                                                                                                                         Pt-1 Pt+k
         k 0                                                              k 0
                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                       p                      f p ss ss
                                                                                   +                  1+r
                                                                                                                     Y ss
                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                 ( x , s ) dst+k = 0
                                                                                        k 0




                                                                                   64
and since f p ( x ss , sss ) = 0, this gives

                                                         k                                                                     k
                                               p                   Pt Pt+k-1                                            p
                 p   + p - 1 Et               1+r
                                                             d
                                                                  Pt-1 Pt+k
                                                                                              =    p Et                1+r
                                                                                                                                   dst+k       (52)
                                      k 0                                                                  k 0


                                                                                  Pt
Now write p        
           t  log Pt , pt  log Pt , and t  log                                   Pt-1       . Since we are linearizing around a zero
inflation steady state, we have

                               Pt Pt+k-1                            Pt Pt+k-1
                          d                       = d log                                     = pt - p t -1 +  t + k
                              Pt-1 Pt+k                            Pt-1 Pt+k

hence
                                                     k                                                                             k
                                              p                                                                           p
             p   + p - 1 Et                  1+r
                                                         ( pt    - p t -1 +  t + k ) =              p Et                 1+r
                                                                                                                                       dst+k
                                     k 0                                                                      k 0


which can be rewritten as
                                                                                        k
                                               p                             p                                       p
             pt - p t -1 =            1-
                                              1+r
                                                         Et                 1+r
                                                                                            · t+k +
                                                                                                              p   + p - 1
                                                                                                                             dst+k
                                                                 k 0


or recursively as

                                               p                                 p                      p
                     pt - p t -1 =    1-                     t +                             dst   +       Et [ p t +1 - p t ]                 (53)
                                              1+r                       p   + p - 1                    1+r

Moreover, the price index satisfies

                              Pt-1 t-1                   Pt-1 t-1                                  Pt             Pt
                         p                      ·Y                           + 1 - p                  ·Y                 =1                    (54)
                                 Pt                         Pt                                     Pt             Pt

Differentiating (54) around the zero inflation steady state, we obtain

                                            p (  t -1 -  t ) + 1 -  p ( p t - pt ) = 0


or
                                              t =  p  t -1 + 1 -  p ( p t - p t -1 )

Combining with (53) and rearranging delivers

                                                   p                         p                                 p
         t -  p  t -1 = 1 -  p               1-                                             dst + t       +       Et  t +1 -  p  t
                                                  1+r                  p + p - 1                              1+r




                                                                        65
which can be rearranged as

                                             p                
                   1            1 -  p 1 - 1+  r                                  p
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                    1+r
            t =      1
                         t -1 +           1
                                                                                           dst +         1
                                                                                                              Et [  t +1 ]
                1 + 1+r            p 1 + 1+r                           p   + p - 1                 1+   1+r

or alternatively as

                                                      p
                                   1 - p        1-   1+r                p                           1     k
                     t -  t -1 =
                                             p                   p   + p - 1
                                                                                      Et           1+r
                                                                                                              dst
                                                                                           k 0


which is the expression used in the main text, equation (13).


C.4   Capital firms

The capital firm comes in with planned investment It and capital stock Kt , conducts this invest-
ment and pays dividend of

                               K                      K                                      It
                              Dt (Kt , It-1 , It ) = rt Kt - It 1 + S
                                                                                           It-1

leaving it with Kt+1 = (1 - ) Kt + It for next period. It also chooses It+1 for next period in order
to maximize its stock price of

              K                          1         K                            K
             pt (Kt+1 , It, It+1 ) =          E t Dt +1 ( Kt+1 , It , It+1 ) + pt+1 ( Kt+2 , It+1 , It+2 )
                                       1 + rt

The problem can therefore be written as

                    K                                K
            max Et Dt +1 ( Kt+1 , It , It+1 ) + max pt+1 ( It+1 + (1 -  ) Kt+1 , It+1 , It+2 )
             It+1                                      It+2


The first order condition for It+1 is

                                             It+1        It+1              It+1
                             Et 1 + S                +        S                        = Qt + QtI                            (55)
                                               It          It                It

                              I as, respectively,
where we have defined Qt and Qt

                                                                       K
                                                                      pt +1
                                               Q t  Et
                                                                      K t +2
                                                                       K
                                                                      pt
                                                I                        +1
                                               Qt     Et
                                                                      It+1




                                                              66
The envelope conditions for capital and previous investment are

                                    K                                        K
                                                                            pt
                                pt               1         K                   +1
                                          =           Et r t +1 + ( 1 -  )
                                K t +1         1 + rt                       K t +2
                                                 1         K
                                          =           Et r t +1 + (1 -  ) Q t
                                               1 + rt

hence
                                      K
                                     pt +1                   1
                     Q t = Et                  = Et                  r K + (1 -  ) Q t +1
                                     K t +2               1 + r t +1 t +2

which is equation (15) in the main text.
   The envelope condition for previous investment is

                                    K                                    2
                                   pt     1                   It+1                 It+1
                                      =        Et                            S
                                   It   1 + rt                  It                   It

hence
                                                                          2
                                  I                1              It+2                It+2
                                 Qt = Et                                      S
                                                1 + r t +1        It+1                It+1

plugging this expression back in (55) implies

                                                                                                    2
                    It+1         It+1         It+1                              1            It+2           It+2
            1+S            +          S                = Q t + Et                                       S
                      It           It           It                           1 + r t +1      It+1           It+1

which is equation (14) in the main text. (15) and (14) jointly characterize investment dynamics.


C.5     Unions

Demand for labor services from union j is given by:

                                                 Njt                Wjt
                                                     = Yw                                                          (56)
                                                 Nt                 Wt

where Yw is Kimball demand,
                                                                                  w
                                          Yw ( x )  (1 - w log x ) w

The maximization problem of union j at time t is then


                           E      k  w
                                     k
                                                     {u (cit+k ) - v (nit+k )} dDit+k
                                k 0


taking as given (56), the wage indexation rule, and households budget constraints. Since each
union is infinitesimal, it only takes into account its marginal effect on every household's con-



                                                             67
sumption and labor supply. Note that the total real earnings of household i are

                                                                   1
                                                                  0
                                                                     Wjt nijt dj
                                  zit = (1 - t )eit
                                                                      Pt
                                                                   1              Wjt
                                                                  0
                                                                     Wjt Yw       Wt     dj
                                       = (1 - t )eit                                          Nt
                                                                            Pt

The envelope theorem implies that we can evaluate indirect utility as if all income from the union
                                         cit        zit
wage change is consumed. Hence           Wjt   =    Wjt ,    where

                          zit                       Nt              Wjt   Wjt      Wjt
                                 = (1 - t )eit               Yw         +     Yw
                          Wjt                       Pt              Wt    Wt       Wt
                                                    Nt             Wjt         Wjt
                                 = (1 - t )eit         Yw               1- w
                                                    Pt             Wt           Wt

where     w   ( x )  - xY
                        Yw ( x )
                          w (x)
                                 . On the other hand, household i's total hours worked are

                                                         1          Wjt
                                           nit               Yw              Nt dj
                                                     0              Wt

so that

                                    nit                      Wjt       Nt
                                            = Yw
                                    Wjt                      Wt        Wt
                                                             Wjt                 Wjt      Nt
                                            = -                       Yw
                                                             Wt                  Wt       Wjt

hence, denoting by
                                       Us           {u (cis ) - v (nis )} dDis

as average utility in period s, we have that the marginal change in aggregate utility induced by a
change in a wage w is

  Us                     w                                    1                    w                             w    1
          = Ns Yw                  (1 - s ) u (cis ) eis             1-      w                  + v (nis )   w            dDis
  w                      Ws                                   Ps                   Ws                            Ws   w
                   MUs        MVs   MUs               w                     w
          =            +          -             w                   Yw                  Ns
                    Ps         w     Ps               Ws                    Ws

where we have defined MUs  (1 - s ) u (cis ) eis dDis and MVs  v (nis ) dDis .
  The union resets the wage knowing that, if it chooses wage w today, then its wage at any future
                                          Pt+k-1
time before it can reindex will be w       Pt-1 .   The reset wage then solves

                                                                                        Pt+k-1
                                Wt = arg max E            k  w
                                                             k
                                                               Ut+k                w
                                                                                         Pt-1
                                                         k 0



                                                              68
whose first order condition is

                                          Wt Pt+k-1
     Et        k  w
                  k
                    Nt+k Yw
                                          Wt+k Pt-1
             k 0
                                   Wt Pt+k-1              Wt Pt+k-1 MUt+k Wt+k                        Wt Pt+k-1
              ·       1-      w                                                +                w                     MVt+k       =0
                                   Wt+k Pt-1              Wt+k Pt-1   Pt+k                            Wt+k Pt-1

We can rewrite this condition as

                                                       MUt+k Wt+k           Wt Pt+k-1
                               E     k  w
                                        k
                                          Nt+k
                                                         Pt+k
                                                                  fw                  ,s
                                                                            Wt+k Pt-1 w,t+k
                                                                                                            =0
                                    k 0


with f w defined symmetrically to f p in section C.3, and the inverse wage markup is defined as

                                          MVt                  v (nit ) di               v ( Nt )
                              s w,t      MUt Wt
                                                  =                               =
                                          Pt
                                                      (1 - t ) wt eit u (cit ) di   (1 - t ) wt u (Ct )

       satisfying u (C  ) 
with Ct                      eit u (cit ) di, as in Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2018).
                       t
   The derivation follows the same steps as in section C.3. Linearizing around the steady state,
                      w -1
where sw =              w
                             , we obtain

                                                                Wt Pt+k-1
                                                                              
                                                            d   Wt+k Pt-1
                  (   w   + w - 1) Et   (  w )k                 Wt Pt+k-1
                                                                              =      w Et      (  w )k d (sw,t+k )
                                               k 0              Wt+k Pt-1                     k 0

rearranging, and defining t = log Wt , this is also


     (   w   + w - 1) Et            (  w )k (t - pt-1 - (t+k - pt+k-1 ))                    =       w Et    (  w )k d (sw,t+k )
                                   k 0                                                                     k 0

or

                                                                                 w
                  
                  t - pt-1 = (1 -  w ) t - pt-1 +                                       dsw
                                                                                          t
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                +  w Et [wt +1 - p t ]            (57)
                                                                          w   + w - 1

Moreover, the wage index satisfies

                                      Wt-1                Wt-1                          Wt             Wt
                                  w         t -1 Y w            t -1      + (1 -  w )      Yw
                                       Wt                  Wt                           Wt             Wt

which, in linear form, reads

                                                 
                                    (1 -  w ) (  t - p t -1 ) =  t - p t -1 -  w (  t -1 - p t -2 )




                                                                     69
Then, plugging in (57)

             
(1 -  w ) (  t - p t -1 ) =  t - p t -1 -  w (  t -1 - p t -2 )
                                                                                w                                    
                         = (1 -  w ) (1 -  w ) t - pt-1 +                               dsw,t     +  w (1 -  w ) Et [t +1 - p t ]
                                                                       w + w - 1
                                                                                w
                         = (1 -  w ) (1 -  w ) t - pt-1 +                               dsw,t
                                                               + w - 1 w
                                +  w Et [t+1 - pt -  w (t - pt-1 )]

                                     2 = 
and using 1 - (1 -  w ) (1 -  w ) +  w    w (1 +  ), we obtain


                   1                                              (1 -  w ) (1 -  w )                      w
   t - p t -1 =      (  t -1 - p t -2 ) +    Et [  t +1 - p t ] +                                                 dsw,t
                  1+                      1+                            1+                            w + w - 1

                                                                   Wt
In present value form, defining w,t  t - t-1 = log                Wt-1       , this reads


                             (1 -  w ) (1 -  w )             w                                    w   -1
             w,t -  t -1 =
                                   w                w   + w - 1
                                                                  Et      k         s w,t + k -
                                                                                                      w
                                                                         k


which is expression (18) in the main text.


C.6   Walras's law

Aggregate across all households,

                                Ct + Lt = (1 + rt-1 -  ) Lt-1 + Zt + dt
                                                  a
                                     A t = (1 + r t ) A t -1 - d t

where dt are aggregate distributions from liquid to illiquid account. Consolidating, and using the
definition of Zt , we find

                                                         a
                    Ct + Lt + At = 1 + rt-1 Lt-1 + (1 + rt ) At-1 + (1 - t ) wt Nt

Using the government budget constraint (19), we next have

                                                                   a
        Ct + Gt + Lt + At + (1 + qt ) Bt-1 = 1 + rt-1 Lt-1 + (1 + rt ) At-1 + wt Nt + qt Bt

Finally, using the incoming flow of funds constraint for the financial intermediary (7),

                       Ct + Gt + Lt + At = ( pt + Dt ) vt-1 -  Lt-1 + wt Nt + qt Bt




                                                        70
then using the outgoing flow of funds constraint (8),

                           Ct + Gt + pt vt = ( pt + Dt ) vt-1 -  Lt-1 + wt Nt

using market clearing condition for shares vt = 1,

                                        Ct + Gt +  Lt-1 = wt Nt + Dt

and finally, using the expression for dividends in (16), we obtain

                                                              It
                                Ct + Gt + It + It S                +  Lt-1 = Yt
                                                          It-1

which is the goods market clearing condition.


D     Appendix to section 4
D.1    Calibration of the fiscal rule

Our calibration of the fiscal rule parameter  in (20) is informed by existing estimates from the
fiscal rule literature, following Leeper (1991)'s seminal paper. We calibrate rather than estimate
this parameter, because our model outcomes are insensitive to the value of  within a wide range,
as we show below.
    There exists a wide range of estimates for , all of which tend to imply that the fiscal adjust-
ment to shocks is delayed. Two representative examples from the literature are Davig and Leeper
(2011) and Auclert and Rognlie (2018).
    Davig and Leeper (2011) regress the ratio of federal receipts net of federal transfers to GDP
                            qss Bt-1
on the debt-to-GDP ratio       Yt .    Their estimate corresponds to an annualized value of  = 0.28.
However, this is only an estimate for the active fiscal regime, which they estimate to be in place
for half of their 1949:Q1 to 2008:Q4 sample (the estimate for the passive fiscal regime is  = -0.1
annually). Moreover, their numbers do not directly correspond to our specification in (20), which
divides the face value of debt qss Bt-1 by steady-state rather than current GDP.
    Auclert and Rognlie (2018)'s specification is closer to ours, since their regressor is the face value
                                       qss Bt-1
of debt divided by potential GDP,          pot .   Combining their estimates for government spending and
                                        Yt
deficits, we obtain  = -0.015 + 0.0288  0.015 at an annual level. The implied estimates for 
from Fernández-Villaverde, Guerrón-Quintana, Kuester and Rubio-Ramírez (2015) and Bianchi
and Melosi (2017) lie somewhere between  = 0.015 and  = 0.3.
    Altogether, we take  = 0.015 and  = 0.30 to be extreme points from the literature, and
therefore pick  = 0.1 as our baseline calibration value.




                                                         71
                       Figure D.1: Impulse responses of output and consumption for various calibrated values of 


                                                    Output                                        Consumption

                                                                                                              = 0.015 p.a.
                                0.1                                               0.1                         = 0.1 p.a.
      Percent of s.s. output




                                                                                                              = 0.3 p.a


                               0.05                                              0.05



                                 0                                                 0

                                      0        5       10        15                     0     5        10         15
                                                   Quarter                                         Quarter


Note. This figure shows the impulse responses of output and consumption for different calibrated values of . Our
central model estimates are for  = 0.1 (solid green line). We then hold all other parameters fixed and recompute
impulse responses for our extreme values of  = 0.015 and  = 0.3.


Robustness to alternative calibrations of .                              Figure D.1 illustrates that our model outcomes are
very insensitive to the value of , given the existing range from the literature. Starting from our
central estimates with our calibrated value of  = 0.1, we recompute impulse responses for the
extreme values of  = 0.015 and  = 0.3 discussed above. We find that the impulse responses are
almost identical, irrespective of .


Estimating .                              The results above suggest that there is little information in our impulse responses
that can help identify . However, in a further robustness exercise, we add nominal federal gov-
ernment current tax receipts divided by nominal GDP to our list of observables, estimate the im-
pulse response of tax revenue to a monetary policy shock, and use this together with the other im-
pulse responses in the main text to produce an estimate of . This exercise yields  = 0.13 ± 0.18.
The point estimate suggests that our calibrated value of  is reasonable. The confidence bands
are very wide, however, because with long-term debt, the fiscal impact of a monetary shock is in
practice not large enough to provide sufficient identifying variation.


D.2                   Model DAG and sequence-space Jacobian solution method

Figure D.2 displays the blocks for our model as a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
    As discussed in Auclert et al. (2019), DAGs are useful devices to summarize how the model
is computed and obtain impulse responses by chaining Jacobians. Endogenous sequences that
are not the output of any block are at the left of the DAG, labeled "unknowns". Stacking these
sequences in a vector U, and stacking any exogenous sequences in Z, we can evaluate each


                                                                          72
                                                      r

                                                                   m



                                          s                                                    i              Fisher eq.
                              prod.               NKPC- p                   Taylor                          residual ( H1 )
                                                                                                     
               r , w, Y
                                                            N                                           
                                                                                                        w
                                                                                         
                                 D                                  I
  unknowns r, w, Y                                                                   w                  w     real wage
                                              N                                             NKPC-w
     shock m                                                                                                residual ( H2 )
                                                            
                          r                                                          C
                                                                   r a ,r
                                          q                         Z                         C, L           goods mkt.
                              finance              fiscal                    HA                             clearing ( H3 )
                                          w
                                                                                G
                                                      Y




                              Figure D.2: Directed Acyclic Graph of the model


block in suitable order along the DAG to obtain every other endogenous sequence, including
several--labeled H1 , H2 , and H3 in the figure--that must be zero in equilibrium, and which we
call "targets". Overall, then, the DAG represents a mapping


                                                    H ( U, Z ) = 0                                                       (58)

   As Figure D.2 shows, we set up our model so that the unknowns are Ut  (rt , wt , Yt ), the
sequences of real interest rates, wages, and output. Corresponding to these are our three targets:
first, the Fisher equation residual under perfect foresight,

                                                                              Pt+1
                                          H1t = 1 + rt - (1 + it )
                                                                               Pt

which in equilibrium, when H1t = 0, corresponds to equation (10). Second, the real wage residual,

                                                           wt              w
                                        H2t = log                       - (t - t )
                                                          w t -1

which in equilibrium, when H2t = 0, imposes consistency between the definition of the real wage


                                                             73
       Wt                    w = log      Wt                                                   Pt
wt =   Pt ,   wage inflation t           Wt-1    , and price inflation t = log                Pt-1   . Finally, we have the
goods market clearing residual

                                                                   It
                                H3t = Ct + Gt + It + It S                      +  Lt-1 - Yt
                                                                  It-1

which in equilibrium ensures goods market clearing at all times.
   Our procedure solves equation (58) for U to first order around the steady state, as follows. Each
block in the DAG is characterized to first order by the Jacobian matrices J o,i for input sequences i
and output sequences o. We combine these J using the chain rule to obtain the Jacobians HU and
HZ of (58). This then provides a linear map from exogenous shocks to unknowns,

                                                         1
                                                dU = -H-
                                                       U HZ dZ


Finally, we obtain all other sequences to first order given dU and dZ, by applying J 's along the
DAG an extra time.


D.3    Details on solution method with informational rigidities

Deriving the recursion for sticky expectations.             As discussed in section 4.3, if   s, the impulse
response of a household learning at date  about a date-s change in input i is the same as the
impulse response of a household who learns at date 0 about a date-(s -  ) change in i, shifted by
 periods. Both are the impulse response to a news shock about the value of i, (s -  ) periods in
the future. This can be written as

                                         ,i ,        ,i ,  - 1        o,i,0
                                     Jto
                                       ,s      = Jto
                                                   -1,s-1 = · · · = Jt- ,s-                                            (59)

                                             ,i ,        ,i , s
If  > s, on the other hand, then we have Jto
                                           ,s      = Jto
                                                       ,s for all t: we assume that the household is
aware at date s of all inputs i to its problem at date s, so if not prior to s,  is irrelevant.
   These two observations allow us to simplify (23) for a given s, writing

                                                                        s -1
                                         ,i s o ,i , s
                                     Jto
                                       ,s =  J t,s + (1 -  )               Jto,s,i,                                    (60)
                                                                         =0

Applying (59) to each term of (60) except where  = 0, we can write for any t, s > 0

                                                          s -2
                          ,i          ,i , s - 1                  ,i ,                o,i,0
                      Jto
                        ,s   =  s Jto
                                    -1,s-1 + (1 -  )        +1 Jto- 1,s-1 + (1 -  ) Jt,s
                                                         =0
                                       ,i                  ,i,0
                            =      Jto
                                     -1,s-1   + (1 -  )Jto
                                                         ,s                                                            (61)

where the second step consolidates the first two terms in the previous line using (60).
                                          ,i   o,i,0
   For s = 0, (60) simplifies to just Jto
                                        ,0 = Jt,0 . For t = 0 and s > 0, there is no response unless




                                                         74
                         0 . Combining all results, we obtain
 = 0, so J0,s = (1 -  )J0, s
                                          
                                            J o ,i + (1 -  )Jto
                                                              ,s
                                                                ,i,0
                                                                          t > 0, s > 0
                                           t-1,s-1
                                          
                                     ,i
                                 Jto
                                   ,s =    Jto
                                             ,s
                                               ,i,0
                                                                          s=0
                                          
                                          (1 -  )J o,i,0
                                          
                                                                          t = 0, s > 0
                                          
                                                     t,s

            ,i,0
    But Jto
          ,s , the Jacobian for households that learn at date  = 0 about shocks, is also, by defini-
                                        ,i, FI
tion, the full-information Jacobian Jto
                                      ,s       , so (24) follows.


Implementation for other behavioral or informational frictions. Here, to illustrate the method's
generality, we use an analogous approach to derive the transformation of the full-information Ja-
cobian associated with some other frictions.


    Cognitive discounting.    Under Gabaix (2016)'s "cognitive discounting" friction, at the micro
                                                                                         ¯ k relative
level agents' expectations of disturbances k periods in the future shrink by a factor of m
                                ¯  [0, 1] is a parameter capturing cognitive discounting.
to rational expectations, where m
    If at date 0 there is a news shock about some change to input i at date s, agents subject to
cognitive discounting perceive this instead as a series of news shocks: they learn about a fraction
m                                        ¯ s -1 - m
 ¯ s of the change at date 0, a fraction m        ¯ s of the change at date 1, and so on, up until they
                                   ¯ when the change actually happens at date s.
learn about the final fraction 1 - m
    Using the same notation, the analog of (60) here is then

                ,i         ,i,0                   ,i,1                     ,i,2                 ,i , s
            Jto    ¯ s Jto
              ,s = m     ,s + ( m        ¯ s )Jto
                                ¯ s -1 - m                      ¯ s-1 )Jto
                                                       ¯ s -2 - m
                                                ,s + ( m                                 ¯ )Jto
                                                                         ,s . . . + (1 - m    ,s            (62)

Applying (59) to each term of (62) except the first, we can write for any t, s > 0

     ,i           ,i,0                   ,i,0                         ,i,1                     ,i , s - 1
 Jto
   ,s     ¯ s Jto
        = m                     ¯ s )Jto
                       ¯ s -1 - m
                ,s + ( m                                   ¯ s-1 )Jto
                                                  ¯ s -2 - m
                                       -1,s-1 + ( m                                     ¯ )Jto
                                                                    -1,s-1 . . . + (1 - m    -1,s-1
                   ,i,0 o,i,0                ,i,0                         ,i,1                       ,i , s - 1
          ¯ s (Jto
        = m                        ¯ s-1 Jto
                 ,s - Jt-1,s-1 ) + m                           ¯ s-1 )Jto
                                                      ¯ s -2 - m
                                           -1,s-1 + ( m                                       ¯ )Jto
                                                                        -2,s-2 + . . . + (1 - m    -1,s-1
                   ,i,0 o,i,0        o ,i
          ¯ s (Jto
        = m      ,s - Jt-1,s-1 ) + Jt-1,s-1                                                                 (63)

                                       ,i   o,i,0                           o ,i , 
For s = 0, (62) simplifies to just Jto
                                     ,0 = Jt,0 , and for t = 0 and s > 0, Jt,s      = 0 for all  > 0,
          o ,i   s  o,i,0                                     o,i, FI o,i,0
so that J0,s = m¯ J0,s . Combining all results and writing Jt,0 = Jt,0 for the full-information
Jacobian, we have the recursion
                                  
                                              ,i, FI       ,i, FI     o ,i
                                  
                                   ¯ s (Jto
                                   m         ,s      - Jto
                                                         -1,s-1 ) + Jt-1,s-1   t > 0, s > 0
                                  
                            ,i
                        Jto
                          ,s     = Jto ,i, FI
                                      ,s                                       s=0                          (64)
                                  
                                   ¯ s J o,i,FI
                                  
                                  m                                            t = 0, s > 0
                                  
                                            t,s

                                                      ,i, FI                       ,i
which can transform the full-information Jacobian Jto
                                                    ,s       into the Jacobian Jto
                                                                                 ,s with cognitive



                                                           75
discounting with only a single evaluation for each Jacobian entry.


    Noisy information about shocks.                                    N (0, 2 ) that causes ex-
                                                     Following a date-0 shock
pected future inputs i to change, suppose that at each date t  0, all agents receive independent
private signals + t about the shock, where t  N (0,      2 ). Agents receive no other information

about the shock.49 Then, applying standard Bayesian updating, the average belief about at date
j is
                                     E¯ j = ( j + 1)                                         (65)
                                             + ( j + 1)
                                                                     aj

where   1/2 and   1/2 are the precisions of the shock and signal, respectively. This is

because by date j, each agent has combined the prior on with j + 1 noisy signals + 0 , . . . , + j .
    On average, then, agents receive a news shock about of a0 at date 0, ( a1 - a0 ) at date 1, and
so on. They receive proportional news shocks about the changes in inputs i, until they learn fully
about the change in input i at date s once date s actually arrives.
    The analog of (60) is then

                                                                      s -1
                                     ,i                   o ,i , s
                                 Jto
                                   ,s = ( 1 - a s -1 ) J t,s +         (a - a-1 )Jto,s,i,                             (66)
                                                                       =0

where we take a-1 = 0. Applying (59) to this to reduce all superscripts  to 0, and also using
    ,i ,                                   ,i, FI       ,i,0
Jto
  ,s      = 0 for t < s,  , along with Jto
                                         ,0       = Jto
                                                      ,0 , we get
                                
                                                   o,i, FI       -1                  o,i, FI
                           ,i
                                 (1 - a
                                           s-1 ) Jt-s,0      + s
                                                                =0 ( a  - a  -1 ) J t -  ,s -    ts
                       Jto
                         ,s =                                                                                         (67)
                                t                          o,i, FI
                                      =0 ( a  - a  -1 ) J t -  ,s -                              t<s

Since the a do not decay exponentially, it is impossible to simplify this further into a recursive
form as in the prior examples. Still, directly applying (67) to calculate J o,i from J o,i,FI , when both
are T × T matrices, only takes O ( T 3 ) operations, the same as matrix multiplication and inver-
sion--which are already done many times as part of the Auclert, Bardóczy, Rognlie and Straub
(2019) solution method. Even here, therefore, the additional computational burden from convert-
ing the full-information Jacobian to the frictional Jacobian is slight.50
  49 In  particular, agents do not extract information about the shock from changes in variables like i, once they are
actually observed. If agents did, then without noise from additional individual-level shocks, they would be able to back
out perfectly. Though we conjecture that our methods should still apply in a model augmented with such additional
shocks--with somewhat greater complexity due to the endogeneity of the observed variables--this is beyond the scope
of the current paper.
   50 Since the sums in (67) are convolutions of the sequence { a - a                                    o,i, FI matrix, it
                                                                        -1 } with the diagonals of the J
is possible to use the Fast Fourier Transform to speed up computation to O ( T 2 log T ), but since it is already not a
bottleneck, in practice this seems unnecessary.




                                                                76
D.4                                Estimated RA-habit model

Here we estimate the RA-habit model, using the procedure described in section 4.3 on the set of
impulse responses described in section 4.2. Table D.1 displays the estimated parameters, figure
D.3 shows the fit compared to that of our estimated HA model.

                                                                  Table D.1: Estimated parameters for RA model.

                                                         Parameter                                                                     Value     std. dev.

                                                                                     Household habit parameter                         0.878      (0.012)
                                                                             Investment adjustment cost parameter                      14.851     (4.016)
                                                              p                           Calvo price stickiness                       0.880      (0.042)
                                                              w                           Calvo wage stickiness                        0.946      (0.025)
                                                              m                            Taylor rule inertia                         0.904      (0.008)
                                                              m                      Std. dev. of monetary shock                       0.057      (0.005)




                                       Figure D.3: Impulse response to a monetary policy shock vs. model fit of HA and RA


                                            Output                               Consumption                                  Investment                                   Hours (% of s.s.)
                         0.3                                      0.15                                      0.15                                             0.3
Percent of s.s. output




                         0.2                                       0.1                                       0.1                                             0.2

                                                                                                            0.05
                         0.1                                      0.05                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                 0
                          0                                          0                                                                                        0
                                                                                                          -0.05
                               0   2   4     6   8 10 12 14              0   2   4    6     8 10 12 14               0    2   4    6     8 10 12 14                0   2     4    6   8 10 12 14


                                           Price level                           Nominal wage                            Nominal interest rate                             Real interest rate
                         0.3                                       0.2                                       0.2                                             0.2

                         0.2                                      0.15
                                                                                                                 0                                            0
Percent




                                                                   0.1
                         0.1
                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                            -0.2                                        -0.2
                          0                                          0
                                                              -0.05
                               0   2   4    6 8 10 12 14                 0   2   4    6 8 10 12 14                   0    2   4    6 8 10 12 14                    0   2     4    6 8 10 12 14
                                           Quarters                                  Quarters                                     Quarters                                       Quarters
                                                              Data            90% Confidence Interval                    HA Model               RA+habit model
Note. This figure shows our estimated set of impulse responses to an identified Romer and Romer (2004) monetary
policy shock (dashed black, with gray confidence intervals). The solid lines are the impulse responses implied by our
estimated inattentive heterogeneous-agent model (green) and a representative-agent model (red).




                                                                                                       77
E       Appendix to section 5
E.1              Investment counterfactual in TA-habit

Here we set up a two-agent version of our RA-habit model. The model is identical to the RA-habit
model described in the main text, except that it features a share µ of hand-to-mouth households
who consume their net-of tax income, CtHTM = Zt . We choose µ = 0.20 in line with the average
MPC in figure 2. Table E.1 shows the estimated parameter values. Figure E.1 repeats the invest-
ment counterfactual of section 5, but using the estimated TA model as baseline.

                                                        Table E.1: Estimated parameters for TA model.

                                                Parameter                                               Value        std. dev.

                                                                  Household habit parameter             0.884        (0.012)
                                                             Investment adjustment cost parameter       13.150       (3.385)
                                                    p               Calvo price stickiness              0.898        (0.031)
                                                    w               Calvo wage stickiness               0.931        (0.024)
                                                    m                 Taylor rule inertia               0.902        (0.008)
                                                    m            Std. dev. of monetary shock            0.057        (0.005)



                                               Figure E.1: Role of investment with estimated TA habit model


                                                        Output                                                       Consumption


                                0.1
      Percent of s.s. output




                                                                                             0.05

                               0.05



                                 0                                                             0



                                      0         5       10            15                            0            5        10       15
                                                    Quarter                                                           Quarter
                                          HA         HA + no I             RA               RA + no I                TA       TA + no I


Note. This figure shows the general equilibrium paths of output and consumption in: our estimated HA model (green),
an RA model with habits (red), and a TA model with habits (blue). Dashed lines correspond to an investment adjust-
ment cost parameter  = .


E.2              iMPCs and the path of income

In figure E.2 we perform a simple experiment, which is independent of our supply-side calibra-
tion and depends only on the pattern of intertemporal MPCs. In this experiment, we suppose

                                                                                 78
    Figure E.2: Consumption implied by iMPCs and the output response to the monetary policy shock


                                                            Consumption
                                          0.1


                      % of s.s. output
                                         0.05

                                                                    HA
                                                            C implied by iMPCs
                                                                  C data
                                           0

                                                0   2   4    6     8      10     12    14

Note. This figure shows the estimated model (green) and data (gray dashed) responses to the monetary policy, as
well as the implied consumption response (blue) if agents were only to receive the income stream (1 - )Ytdata where
Ytdata is the empirical impulse response to the monetary policy shock. This consumption response only depends on
intertemporal MPCs.


that households' aggregate before-tax labor income is given by (1 - )Ytdata , where Ytdata is the
empirical impulse response of output to the monetary shock, and then feed in this labor income
shock--and no other shocks--to the full-attention household sector.
    The blue line shows the resulting consumption impulse, which is already quite large, both rel-
ative to the estimated model consumption response (green) as well as the empirical consumption
response (gray, dashed). There is no room for intertemporal substitution to add to consumption
in the first few quarters: the entire impulse is explained by the consumption response to labor
income alone. Some friction, therefore, must be dampening the overall consumption response,
especially on impact. In our model, this friction is inattention.




                                                             79
F                            Appendix to section 6
F.1                           Estimated Habit-RA model

                                                      Table F.1: Priors and posteriors for the representative-agent model

                                                                                              Posterior                                                                               Posterior
    Supply shock                                          Prior distribution           Mode        std. dev          Demand shock                      Prior distribution       Mode          std. dev

                                              s.d.        Invgamma(0.1, 2)             0.330       (0.016)                                m
                                                                                                                                                s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)         0.215         (0.010)
    TFP t                                                                                                            Mon. policy          t
                                              AR          Beta(0.5, 0.2)               0.970       (0.015)                                      AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)           0.139         (0.051)
                                              s.d.        Invgamma(0.1, 2)             0.415       (0.028)                                      s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)         0.313         (0.015)
                                                                                                                     G shock Gt
    w markup                          w,t     AR          Beta(0.5, 0.2)               0.690       (0.132)                                      AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)           0.884         (0.031)
                                              MA          Beta(0.5, 0.2)               0.647       (0.155)                        C
                                                                                                                                                s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)         4.253         (1.067)
                                                                                                                     C shock      t
                                              s.d.        Invgamma(0.1, 2)             0.246       (0.016)                                      AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)           0.759         (0.040)
     p markup                         p,t     AR          Beta(0.5, 0.2)               0.266       (0.129)                        I
                                                                                                                                                s.d.   Invgamma(0.1, 2)         31.746        (7.832)
                                                                                                                     I shock      t
                                              MA          Beta(0.5, 0.2)               0.393       (0.095)                                      AR     Beta(0.5, 0.2)           0.528         (0.044)

Note. For an ARMA(1,1) process of the form xt+1 -  xt = t+1 -  t , "AR" refers to , "MA" refers to  . To be
comparable with Smets and Wouters (2007) we scale the markup shocks such that w,t , p,t appear with a coefficient of
1 in the Phillips curves (18) and (13).


F.2                           Impulse response functions for HA and RA

                                                                 Figure F.1: Impulse responses to 1-sd investment shock


                                             Output                                    Consumption                                        Investment                        Hours (% of s.s.)
                              1
    Percent of s.s. output




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                           0                                           0.5
                              0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                       -0.5                                             0
                             -1                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                        -1                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                                     -0.5
                             -2
                                                                       -1.5                                                                                       -3
                                                                                                                       -1
                             -3
                                  0   5      10      15     20    25           0   5      10      15      20    25           0        5    10    15    20   25          0   5    10      15     20      25


                                            Inflation                                   Real wage                                Nominal interest rate
                                                                        0.2
                              0                                                                                         0
                                                                           0
                                                                                                                     -0.1
Percent




                   -0.1                                                -0.2

                                                                       -0.4                                          -0.2
                   -0.2
                                                                       -0.6
                                  0   5      10 15          20    25           0   5     10 15            20    25           0        5    10 15       20   25
                                            Quarters                                    Quarters                                          Quarters
                                                                                                       HA Model                  RA Model


Note. This is a positive shock to risk premia                                            I
                                                                                         t.




                                                                                                               80
                                                               Figure F.2: Impulse responses to 1-sd consumption shock


                                                   Output                               Consumption                                     Investment                          Hours (% of s.s.)
                                   0.5
        Percent of s.s. output




                                                                                                                       0.3                                       0.5
                                                                           0
                                    0                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                        -0.5                                                                                   -0.5
                                 -0.5
                                                                                                                       0.1                                       -1
                                                                          -1
                                   -1
                                                                                                                        0                                      -1.5
                                         0   5     10   15    20   25           0   5      10   15     20       25           0      5     10   15    20   25           0    5   10    15   20   25


                                                  Inflation                               Real wage                               Nominal interest rate
                            0.04
                            0.02                                                                                        0
                                                                          0.1
                               0                                                                                  -0.02
Percent




                           -0.02                                           0
                           -0.04                                                                                  -0.04
                           -0.06                                        -0.1                                      -0.06
                           -0.08
                                                                        -0.2                                      -0.08
                                         0   5    10 15       20   25           0   5      10 15       20       25      0           5     10 15      20   25
                                                 Quarters                                 Quarters                                       Quarters
                                                                                                     HA Model                    RA Model




                                                         Figure F.3: Impulse responses to 1-sd government spending shock


                                                  Output                                Consumption                                     Investment                         Hours (% of s.s.)
                                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                       0
Percent of s.s. output




                                  0.4
                                                                         0.1                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                 -0.05
                                  0.2
                                                                           0                                      -0.1                                          0.2
                                   0
                                                                        -0.1                                     -0.15                                            0
                            -0.2                                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                                                                  -0.2
                                        0    5    10    15    20   25          0    5     10    15    20    25              0      5     10    15    20   25          0    5    10   15    20   25


                                                 Inflation                               Real wage                               Nominal interest rate

                                 0.03                                   0.05
                                                                                                                     0.03
                                 0.02                                      0
      Percent




                                                                                                                     0.02
                                 0.01                                                                                0.01
                                                                    -0.05
                                   0                                                                                   0
                                        0    5    10 15       20   25          0    5     10 15       20    25              0      5     10 15       20   25
                                                 Quarters                                Quarters                                       Quarters
                                                                                                     HA Model                   RA Model




                                                                                                           81
                                                              Figure F.4: Impulse responses to 1-sd monetary policy shock


                                                   Output                               Consumption                                      Investment                          Hours (% of s.s.)
                                   0.2
                                                                                                                        0.1
        Percent of s.s. output




                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                            0
                                    0                                                                                                                              0
                                                                        -0.1                                             0
                                 -0.2                                                                                                                           -0.2
                                                                        -0.2                                          -0.1                                      -0.4
                                 -0.4
                                                                        -0.3                                                                                    -0.6
                                 -0.6                                                                                 -0.2
                                         0   5     10   15    20   25           0   5      10    15     20       25           0      5     10   15    20   25           0    5   10    15   20   25


                                                  Inflation                               Real wage                                Nominal interest rate
                                    0                                       0                                           0.2
                           -0.02                                                                                       0.15
Percent




                                                                        -0.05
                                                                                                                        0.1
                           -0.04                                                                                       0.05
                                                                        -0.1
                                                                                                                         0
                           -0.06
                                         0   5    10 15       20   25           0   5      10 15        20       25           0      5     10 15      20   25
                                                 Quarters                                 Quarters                                        Quarters
                                                                                                      HA Model                    RA Model


Note. This is a positive shock to nominal rates                                            m
                                                                                           t .



                                                               Figure F.5: Impulse responses to 1-sd wage markup shock


                                                  Output                                Consumption                                      Investment                         Hours (% of s.s.)
                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                        0
Percent of s.s. output




                                   0                                       0                                                                                       0

                                                                        -0.2                                      -0.2                                          -0.5
                            -0.5
                                                                        -0.4
                                                                                                                  -0.4                                           -1
                                 -1                                     -0.6
                                                                        -0.8                                      -0.6                                          -1.5
                                        0    5    10    15    20   25          0    5     10     15    20    25              0      5     10    15    20   25          0    5    10   15    20   25


                                                 Inflation                               Real wage                                Nominal interest rate

                                 0.08                                    0.6                                          0.08
                                 0.06                                    0.4                                          0.06
      Percent




                                 0.04                                    0.2                                          0.04
                                 0.02                                                                                 0.02
                                                                           0
                                   0                                                                                    0
                                                                        -0.2
                                        0    5    10 15       20   25          0    5     10 15        20    25              0      5     10 15       20   25
                                                 Quarters                                Quarters                                        Quarters
                                                                                                      HA Model                   RA Model




                                                                                                            82
                                                                  Figure F.6: Impulse responses to 1-sd productivity shock


                                                  Output                                 Consumption                                     Investment                          Hours (% of s.s.)
                                    1                                      0.6                                          0.4
        Percent of s.s. output




                                  0.8                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                           0.4                                          0.3
                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                  0.4                                      0.2                                          0.2
                                  0.2                                                                                   0.1                                     -0.5
                                                                            0
                                    0
                                 -0.2                                    -0.2                                            0                                        -1
                                        0   5     10   15    20     25           0   5      10   15     20       25           0      5     10   15    20   25           0    5   10    15   20   25


                                                 Inflation                                 Real wage                               Nominal interest rate
                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                         0
                                    0
                                                                           0.3
                           -0.02                                                                                  -0.02
Percent




                                                                           0.2
                           -0.04                                                                                  -0.04
                                                                           0.1
                           -0.06
                                                                            0                                     -0.06
                           -0.08
                                        0   5    10 15       20     25           0   5      10 15       20       25           0      5     10 15      20   25
                                                Quarters                                   Quarters                                       Quarters
                                                                                                      HA Model                    RA Model




                                                              Figure F.7: Impulse responses to 1-sd price markup shock


                                                 Output                                  Consumption                                     Investment                         Hours (% of s.s.)
                                                                          0.6                                          0.2                                         1
Percent of s.s. output




                                 0.5                                      0.4                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                          0.2                                           0
                                   0                                                                                                                               0
                                                                            0                                     -0.1
                                                                         -0.2                                     -0.2                                          -0.5
                            -0.5
                                       0    5    10    15    20     25          0    5     10    15    20    25              0      5     10    15    20   25          0    5    10   15    20   25


                                                Inflation                                 Real wage                               Nominal interest rate
                                 0.4
                                 0.3                                      0.4                                          0.1

                                 0.2                                      0.2
                                                                                                                      0.05
Percent




                                 0.1                                        0
                                                                         -0.2                                           0
                                   0
                            -0.1                                         -0.4                                    -0.05
                                                                         -0.6
                                       0    5    10 15       20     25          0    5     10 15       20    25              0      5     10 15       20   25
                                                Quarters                                  Quarters                                       Quarters
                                                                                                      HA Model                   RA Model




                                                                                                            83
F.3               Historical shock decompositions of output and consumption

                                             Figure F.8: Shock decompositions for output


                               Heterogeneous agents                                          Representative agent



                  10                                                      10
Output, %




                   0                                                       0


                 -10                                                     -10


                 -20
                       1970   1980    1990      2000    2010                    1970       1980      1990    2000   2010

                                 Data (detrended)          I shock              C shock              G shock
                                 Mon. policy shock      W markup shock         TFP shock          P markup shock


Note. This figure decomposes the observed (linearly detrended real) output path Yt into components driven by the
seven shocks in the RA and HA models.


                                       Figure F.9: Shock decompositions for consumption


                               Heterogeneous agents                                          Representative agent
                  20


                                                                          10
Consumption, %




                   0
                                                                           0



                                                                         -10
                 -20

                       1970   1980    1990      2000    2010                    1970       1980      1990    2000   2010

                                 Data (detrended)          I shock              C shock              G shock
                                 Mon. policy shock      W markup shock         TFP shock          P markup shock


Note. This figure decomposes the observed (linearly detrended real) consumption path Ct into components driven by
the seven shocks in the RA and HA models.




                                                                 84
